Mr. Thdresson (Sweden): I have the honour to
speak today on behalf of the Nordic countries, namely,
Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and my own
country, Sweden.

At the outset, we would like to thank you,
Mr. President, and the Angolan presidency of the
Council for this month for organizing today's debate on
an important subject. We would also like to thank this
morning's briefers - the Executive Director of UN-
Women, the Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission,
the Permanent Observer of the African Union and
the Executive Director of the South Sudan Women's
Empowerment Network - for their valuable insights,
but also for their efforts in working to advance the
agenda for women and peace and security.

We live in turbulent times in which conflicts
around the world are on the rise, leading to appalling
death tolls and the forcing of millions of people to
leave their homes. Often, those conflicts take place in
countries that have already experienced armed conflict,
or in regions that have been war-torn for decades,
thus illustrating the difficulty of permanently ending
conflicts and sustaining peace.

Through the agenda on women and peace and
security, we have the possibility of doing things
differently and of increasing the likelihood of achieving
sustainable peace. The recommendations of the global
study on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
entitled Preventing Conflict, Transforming Justice,
Securing the Peace, along with resolution 2242
(2015), have given us the momentum we need to move
away from an ad-hoc, add-on approach and to start
including women on an equal footing with men at all
stages of conflict prevention, conflict resolution and
peacebuilding. That must be a top priority for all of us.
Any international actor working for peace and security
who wants to be relevant and effective in the twenty-
first century has to embrace the agenda for women and
peace and security in a coherent and effective manner.

Preventing conflicts is the most lifesaving
and cost-efficient way to foster peace and avoid
suffering. It therefore merits much more attention
than it currently receives, not least in Africa. The
role of women in all of those efforts and the need for
women's equal representation and active involvement
in all governmental, non-governmental and community
forums cannot be overstated. I would like to highlight
three particularly important aspects relating to the issue.

First, we need to focus on representation. It is
essential that we enhance women's influence and
meaningful participation at all levels and stages of
peace processes. Peacebuilding must be inclusive. Only
through women's active participation in peace processes,
such as those in Mali, South Sudan and Somalia, can
we ensure that the needs and interests of society are
being truly reflected and addressed. The global study
highlights the indisputable evidence that shows the
positive links between women's active participation in
peace processes and the likelihood ofpeace agreements
being signed, implemented and sustained.

Secondly, we need to focus on women mediators.
The resolution of conflicts requires skilled, impartial
and respected mediators who can encourage settlements
that reflect the needs of the entire population. While
women's participation increases the likelihood of
success, peace mediators are all too often exclusively
men, and we must therefore increase the number
and proportion of women mediators. That is a strong
priority for the Nordic countries and has resulted,
among other things, in the establishment of networks
of women peace mediators at the national, regional and
international levels.

Thirdly, we need to show leadership. Promoting
women's participation in conflict resolution and
prevention is about promoting change. In order to
do that, we must be brave and persistent and show
committed, proactive leadership. Enhancing gender
equality and women's contribution to peace and
security will require us to address a wide array of
issues, including the shortage of resources and the
uneven distribution of those resources, which are
often at the core of inequality. In order to achieve real
change, political commitment must be accompanied by
sustainable financing. We must allocate resources and
have the right expertise. That issue is one of leadership,
and we must do more to integrate that aspect into all of
the strategic analysis, planning and operational work of
the United Nations.

In conclusion, conflict analysis must include gender
aspects that reflect and address the specific needs of
women and men, girls and boys. We cannot ignore the
various roles that women play, nor the insights that
women bring to the table. Sustainable development,
peace and security can never be achieved if half of the
population is excluded. In order to take our common
commitment seriously, we need to make sure that
women's voices are being heard and that our decisions
are influenced by the needs and realities of women
who live in countries enduring conflict and emerging
from it.

