Mr. Seek (Senegal) (spoke in French): Madam
President, the Senegalese delegation is pleased to see
you presiding in person over today's Security Council
open debate on the role of women in preventing and
resolving conflicts in Africa, an extremely important
subject that continues to be a priority for the Council
in its primary mission, the prevention and resolution
of conflicts. The variety and depth of the briefings
we have heard this morning is testament to the topic's
relevance, and I would like to thank all the briefers for
the practical light they have shed on our discussions:
the Executive Director of UN-Women; Mr. Taye-Brook
Zerihoun, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs; Ambassador Macharia Kamau, Permanent
Representative of Kenya and Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission; Ambassador Tete Antonio, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations;
and Ms. Paleki Ayang, Executive Director of the South
Sudan Women's Empowerment Network.

Senegal associates itself with the statement to be
delivered later on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.

Senegal believes firmly that if the maintenance
of international peace and security is to be effective,
we cannot ignore the contribution of half the world's
population - namely, women - particularly since it
is they who are the principal victims of every kind of
violence, including sexual and sexist violence. This
often forces them to flee their homes or countries - as
Ms. Ayang hasjust witnessed-when they are not simply
being used as a way to modify an ethnic component.

Fifteen years after the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), and in the spirit of resolution 2171
(2014), today's debate gives us an opportunity to go
even further in taking a comprehensive approach to
preventing conflict and maintaining peace through
the integration of human rights, particularly women's
rights, with gender equality. By doing so, the Council
can make a better contribution to the establishment of
inclusive peace processes that take into consideration
women's equal, full and meaningful participation, as
well as their improved representation in prevention and
mediation efforts, in accordance with resolution 1325
(2000) and its successors.

Africa, the continent most affected by conflicts,
has a major role to play in that dynamic. We have
established several political and institutional
mechanisms, including, on women's rights, the Maputo
Protocol to the African Charter on Human and Peoples'
Rights, and the Solemn Declaration on Gender Equality
in Africa, which commits African Union member
States to promoting women's full participation and
representation in peace processes. The appointment by
the President of the African Union Commission of a
Special Envoy on Women, Peace and Security is part of
that same effort. In West Africa, through their adoption
of the Dakar Declaration on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2015), the countries of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) aim to
strengthen the role of women, particularly in mediation,
the promotion of a culture of peace and in the creation
of early warning systems.

It is in that spirit that Senegal has been recruiting
women into its security and armed forces since 2007,
after becoming the first African country to achieve
full parity in all national and local elective offices.
The gender-based sectoral strategy adopted by our
defence and security forces will, we hope, enable us
to institutionalize gender balance in our armed forces'
interventions, with more and more women already
participating in our peacekeeping missions. Such
provisions help to strengthen the role of African women
in preventing and resolving conflicts, combating
violence and working for development through
innovative mechanisms aimed at achieving more
peaceful societies.

However, many problems remain. A review of the
overall security situation in West Africa, for instance,
brings up new challenges that efforts to prevent and
resolve conflict must take into more systematic and
systemic consideration. We must therefore increase
our investment in early warning systems and national
rapid-response mechanisms if we are to ensure the full
participation of women and civil-society organizations
in peace processes. That is particularly important
for strategies aimed at preventing radicalization and
violent extremism and, consequently, terrorism. It will
also be necessary in parallel to ramp up the promotion
of education and a culture of peace in all Member States
and increase awareness of the content of resolution
1325 (2000), including by translating it into the main
languages of the African continent. Furthermore,
the mobilization of substantial resources is vital to
the success of national plans aimed at ensuring the
implementation of the resolution, so as to strengthen
the means available to them to fight terrorism. Along
those same lines, annual national budgets should
provide for activities as part of national action plans,
which would strengthen the political commitment of
States to the resolution.

Globally speaking, efforts aimed at ensuring the
effective participation of women in the settlement of
conflicts must be deployed in synergetic action among
the Security Council and the other members of the
United Nations, including the various entities that are
active on the ground. To that end, the new Informal
Expert Group of the Security Council on women and
peace and security created by resolution 2242 (2015),
as well as the Ad hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa, must work in
perfect coordination so as to contribute to a better
assessment of lessons learned and an effective sharing
of best practices in terms of the incorporation of the
women and peace and security aspect into conflict-
prevention policies in Africa.

By way of conclusion, the Senegalese delegation
would like to suggest that the various relevant proposals
shared by the briefers and delegations this morning
be collected and assessed and, to the extent possible,
implemented. Senegal sees in this a key contribution to
the achievement of peaceful and inclusive societies, as
provided for in one of the 17 Goals of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development.

