Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate the Angolan presidency
for convening this open debate and for the concept
paper (S/2016/219, annex) it has circulated. I would also
like to express our gratitude to the Under-Secretary-
General and Executive Director of the UN-Women,
the Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, the
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the United
Nations and the Executive Director of the South Sudan
Women's Empowerment Network for their respective
enlightening briefings and statements.

I wish to start my statement today by highlighting
the fact that today this organ of the United Nations
is presided over by a women at a time when we are
addressing the important issue of the role of women in
conflict prevention and resolution in Africa. Morever,
the focus of this debate could not be more timely at
a time when, despite some favourable events, peace
and security on the African continent continue to be
seriously threatened by the existence ofserious conflicts
that are devastating various of countries of the region.
The African continent has a number of armed conflicts,
and that is where the greatest number of peacekeeping
operations are deployed. It is also the poorest continent
in economic terms, but it is extremely rich in natural
resources. Throughout history, Africa has suffered
many conflicts and wars between Governments,
ethnic groups and rebel groups, and now because of
the presence of terrorist organizations that have used
violence as a weapon of war in order to control the
population through fear.

Men and women continue to suffer without
distinction the most serious violations of human rights.
However, it is women and children who suffer from that
extreme violence in a singular and disproportionate
manner. In that context, women are subjected to cruel
and inhuman treatment, causing them great suffering.
Gender-based violence, sexual exploitation, genital
mutilation, forced marriages and pregnancies and
child marriage are just some of the situations that girls
and women face daily. In that regard, the high level
of impunity enjoyed by the perpetrators of the worst
crimes against humanity is a matter of great concern. I
emphasize the importance that Uruguay attaches to the
women and peace and security agenda. We continue to
play an active role with regard to the rights of women and
girls and have, on a number of occasions, reiterated the
imperative of women's participation in the prevention
and resolution of armed conflicts.

The Council has repeatedly recognized the important
role of women in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts and in peacebuilding. In numerous resolutions,
it has called for increasing their participation and
equitable, full and authentic representation in conflict
prevention and mediation activities. Since the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), the international community
has made commitments with regard to the women and
peace and security agenda and has made significant
progress in that regard. Accordingly, resolution 1325
(2000) is of particular importance owing to the fact
that, for the first time in history, the specific effects
that war has on women were recognized and that the
inclusion of women in peace talks ensures that peace
will be sustainable over time. Uruguay therefore firmly
believes that women must be at the centre of efforts
aimed at resolving conflicts.

Similarly, the that resolution recognized the right of
women to participate actively in peacebuilding and the
prevention of violent conflicts, including in the areas
of decision-making and peacekeeping missions, and, at
the same time, stressed the specific needs involved in
the protection of women and girls in armed conflict.
The global study on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), requested by the Secretary-General prior
to the high-level review undertaken by the Council on
the implementation of the resolution, has demonstrated
the favourable influence that women exercise in
negotiation processes, thus improving the chances of
reaching an agreement.

Uruguay welcomes the information provided in
the concept paper (S/2016/219, annex), which details
the various mechanisms, policies and structures
developed in Africa aimed at creating an environment
to enable women to play a more significant role in
peace and security. As the concept paper points out,
however, several obstacles continue to hinder the full
incorporation of those efforts within more formal
endeavours to prevent conflicts and achieve more
sustainable peace.

The number of women in special political missions
on the ground, especially in leadership positions,
remains very limited, and the need for the greater
participation of women persists, particularly in all
mechanisms related to peace processes and post-
conflict reconstruction. The primary responsibility
for involving women in those processes falls upon the
shoulders of the African States themselves. It is at the
national level that they must put in place good practices
and promote greater participation of women at all levels,
because that helps increase operational efficiency and
reduce conflicts. Experience on the continent shows us
numerous cases of women who have courageously been
able to boost recovery in their communities.

Uruguay appreciates the key role of civil society,
and especially that of local women's groups that assist
victims in various aspects of recovery, from health
services to psychological services, social and economic
rehabilitation and access to justice. Yet in many cases
women remain excluded from the political, social
and economic spheres. In other regrettable situations,
women are the victims of sexual or gender-based
violence, or their fundamental rights are violated. But
women must not be seen as victims only, when they are
part of the solution, important actors with the potential
to influence the resolution of conflicts, agents of change
and ultimately peacemakers.

We note with particularly deep concern the violence
against specific groups ofpeople and the violation ofthe
rights of women and girls stemming from terrorism and
violent extremism in Africa. Armed groups operating
within Africa seek the subjugation of women and the
suppression of human rights as a method of control
and subjugation. For our part, we understand that an
effective strategy to combat terrorism and violent
extremism must promote participation, leadership and
the empowerment of women in order to address the
factors that trigger violence by those armed groups.

Uruguay shares the idea that it is moreover
necessary for the Organization to appoint more women
to high-levels of decision-making, particularly in
positions such as those ofPermanent Envoys and Special
Representatives, mediators and negotiators. Despite the
trend of an increased role of women in all processes,
including the appointment of women as mediators and
envoys, we believe that we are far from reaching the
desirable goal.
The participation of women continues to be
inadequate in peace negotiations in Africa and in other
regions of the world. It is uncontestable that women
are the most credible spokespeople for expressing the
needs of local communities. They inspire the greatest
degree of trust in situations that require the collection
of information and testimony from the victims of sexual
and gender-based violence. Women have much to say
on issues, such as those involving victims, reparations
and the conditions needed to ensure that conflict
does not reoccur. Women also bring new approaches
to negotiations, making constructive contributions to
ensure lasting peace. In that regard, they endow the
peace process with greater sensitivity with regard to
issues that are related to family, education, gender issues
and equity, and are called on to play a determining role
in verifying and implementing agreements.

Moreover, the contribution of women in the peace
talks is essential to building inclusive and peaceful
societies based on equality and respect for human
rights. Similarly, they play a significant role in post-
conflict situations, acting as a key foundation for the
social, political and economic reconstruction of local
communities. We encourage the participation of African
women in national electoral processes. We have seen a
number of successes in that regard in Liberia, Malawi
and the current leadership of the African Union itself.

Uruguay also believes that the presence of female
personnel in peacekeeping operations is necessary.
My country has been at the forefront with regard to
incorporating women in the armed forces and the
national police and within Uruguayan contingents of
peacekeeping missions. In doing so, we maintain a
percentage above the average for the number of women
troops deployed in peacekeeping missions. Currently,
9 per cent of the troops deployed in such missions are
made up of women. Always there as volunteers, women
have played a prominent role and chalked up high
numbers in terms of re-enlistment, which demonstrates
their commitment to peace.

Given Uruguay's experience in Africa, including
participation in such missions as the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, we can testify to the effective
role played by the women members of our contingents.
In that regard, it has been observed that women's
effective participation in peacekeeping operations
is of particular importance, as their response differs
from that of men. Similarly, women play a key role in
confidence-building in local communities, especially
among women who have suffered violence. They serve
as a model for behaviour for other women and contribute
to bringing about an increased sense of security among
the people.

Currently, despite the aforementioned efforts, we
must acknowledge the existing gaps with respect to
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). Women
lead only 19 per cent of the United Nations field
missions; they account for only 3 per cent of military
peacekeeping personnel and 10 per cent of police
peacekeeping personnel. As such, Uruguay is concerned
about the opportunities and capabilities that are going
to waste because greater efforts have not been made to
include women in conflict-resolution processes. It has
been proven that increasing the percentage of women
in the police component of peacekeeping missions has
a positive effect on the population, as it reduces the
misuse of force or the inappropriate use of weapons
and authoritarian behaviour in relations with civilians.
Ultimately, the greater participation of women in all
aspects of the peace process is indispensable in efforts
to establish the foundation for sustainable peace in the
African continent.

Another key issue that we would like to highlight
is the matter of financing for the appropriate
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda. We cannot achieve greater results or positively
impact the lives ofwomen and girls ifwe do not commit
to providing the required financial support. In that
regard, Uruguay wishes to highlight the commitment
that we must undertake to earmarking greater funding
for empowerment and gender-equality programmes.

Finally, we note last year's adoption of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1). We welcome the inclusion
of its Goal 5 on gender equality, which we believe to
be essential in the light of existing gender inequality,
in particular in Africa. We believe that the issue of
gender equality does not exclusively concern women;
rather it is a struggle that affects us all, men and
women. In that context, Uruguay supports the full
implementation of Goal 5 in order to put an end to all
forms of discrimination against women and girls, and
ensure the full and effective participation of women,
with equal opportunities for leadership at all levels of
decision-making.

In conclusion, I would like to pay tribute and
convey our appreciation to all those women who work
every day - often at the risk of their lives - to promote
peace and security in Africa and all over the globe.
