Mr. Vrailas: I speak on behalf of the European
Union (EU) and its member States. The candidate
countries Turkey, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; the
European Free Trade Association country Iceland,
member of the European Economic Area; as well as
Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align
themselves with this statement.

Today's open debate on the topic "Women and
peace and security: the role of women in conflict
prevention and resolution in Africa" is a timely and
welcome one, not least because 2016 marks the African
Year of Human Rights with Special Focus on the Rights
of Women. The concept paper (S/2016/219, annex)
prepared in order to facilitate todays's debate provides
an excellent foundation for reflection and action.

The degree to which women are excluded from
playing their full role in conflict prevention and
resolution across the globe is illuminated by several
sobering statistics. One is that, in the period between
1992 and 2011, women made up less than 4 per cent
of the signatories to peace agreements and 10 per cent
of the negotiators at peace tables. Nor can women's
involvement be seen as a mere nicety. The findings of
the global study on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), entitled Preventing Conflict, Transforming
Justice, Securing the Peace, show that when women
are included in peace processes, the probability of a
lasting peace settlement increases significantly. We
wholeheartedly support the goals of resolution 1325
(2000) and the Council's subsequent resolutions on
women and peace and security, including resolution
2242 (2015), which reinforce awareness about the
agenda for women and peace and security and call for
the dedication of greater resources by the international
community for that agenda's implementation
and monitoring.

The EU welcomes the efforts under way in Africa
to strengthen the role of women in the prevention and
resolution of conflict, both in the political and policy
contexts and on the ground. We also welcome the
progress being made under the African Gender, Peace
and Security Programme, with financial support from
several EU member States. We commend the fact that
the African Union Commission has created the position
of Special Envoy on Women, Peace and Security,
and we appreciate Ms. Diop's advocacy work. We
look forward to the further development of initiatives
aimed at implementing the African Peace and Security
Architecture, in which gender mainstreaming is
identified as a goal.

At the United Nations level, it is also important
to support the development of the Peacebuilding
Commission's gender strategy, including engagement on
the issues of gender equality and women's participation,
and the country and civil-society consultations that are
being pursued in that regard.

We commend the African Union's firm zero-
tolerance stance with regard to the accusations of
sexual exploitation and abuse in conflict situations,
including by forces deployed to protect populations.
We must intensify the international community's
efforts to address sexual and gender-based violence
in conflict and to tackle its root causes, as well as the
impunity that so often follows such violence and the
provision of support to survivors. Increasing women's
political participation and leadership, including in the
fields of justice and security, conflict prevention and
peacebuilding, is a key facet of such efforts.

Countering violent extremism is a growing
preoccupation and priority that must be treated as
an integral part of conflict prevention and resolution
strategies. Extremism is the lifeblood of numerous
conflicts, and it disproportionately affects women and
girls. Women and girls can, however, also be part of
the problem when they serve as foreign fighters or
recruiters, but they are nevertheless an indispensable
part of the solution. With that in mind, the human rights
of women and girls must be respected and safeguarded.
The importance of ensuring women's participation
and leadership in countering terrorism and violent
extremism was underscored in resolution 2242 (2015).

The Secretary-General's subsequent Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism incorporates
significant elements in that regard. States, regional
and international organizations and the United Nations
system must all work towards that shared goal. For its
part, between now and 2020, the European Union will
allocate more than €100 million to gender equality
and the empowerment of women and girls, including
in Africa. That is one element of the EU's broader
efforts to intensify its engagement on countering
violent extremism.

In conclusion, the EU looks forward to working
with African partners and others in the international
community to realize the imperative of involving
women as peacemakers and conflict preventers. That
is important not only for its own sake but also as a vital
element in maximizing the nexus between peace and
security, human rights and development.

