Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank you, Madam Minister, for organizing this debate
and, above all, for presiding over our discussion.
Fifteen years ago or more, when the agenda item
on women and peace and security reached the Security
Council, the main purpose was to improve prevention
mechanisms in the Security Council and civil society,
which were, at the time and even now, considered,
and rightly so, to be about preventing the outbreak of
conflicts and not simply about ensuring that women and
children were dealt with in an adequate manner. Fifteen
years later, the work of the Security Council is focused
mainly on military aspects, but that is not why, in my
view, we can say that we have come a long way. Over
the years, we have made much progress in developing
a comprehensive, integrated agenda on woman and
peace and security. A significant indicator of the fact
that we are on the right path with that comprehensive
focus is the selection by the presidency of Angola of the
participants in today's debate. I am particularly pleased
to see the Peacebuilding Commission represented. I
am also very pleased to see the United Nations Entity
for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
and the African Union represented here as well, and
especially our dear friend Paleki Ayang, who gave us a
brilliant and moving presentation.

In any event, I will never tire of repeating that
the best way to prevent the outbreak of conflict is to
ensure the appropriate participation of women. When
women do not participate sufficiently in peacebuilding
processes, imperfect peace results, peace that is
vulnerable and, above all, an unfair peace, in which a
part of the population imposes its way of seeing things
on the other part of the population that did not participate
in the peacebuilding process. It need not always be
that way, however, and I wish to highlight the fact that
there are very good initiatives that are working. I will
mention three. First, the regional platform for women
in the Sahel, which is coordinated by UN-Women and
is doing remarkable work; secondly, in the efforts in
South Sudan, where the United Nations Mission in the
Republic of South Sudan is carrying out very important
support work in the area of prevention; and thirdly,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
which has a prevention mechanism that deserves our
full support.

Here in the world of the United Nations, I will not
go as far as to say that there has been a change in the
narrative with the adoption of resolution 2242 (2015),
but there has been an important change in the level of
awareness on the part of the various delegations. In
my View, resolution 2242 (2015) produced a "before"
and an "after". What is most important and relevant
in its content and the decisions therein is, in my view,
the establishment of the Informal Experts Group
on Women, Peace and Security, which will be the
real mechanism for monitoring and oversight in the
Security Council. In other words, the Experts Group
will ensure that the Council rigorously implements all
of the existing resolutions with regard to women and
peace and security. I think there are seven resolutions
in that regard. The Group meets on a monthly basis
and is co-chaired by the United Kingdom and Spain.
It deserves the Council's full support. Moreover, it
will continously advise those of us who are heads of
mission and are involved in informal consultations on
the need to include in our statements the issue of the
implementation of resolution 2242 (2015) on the agenda
on women and peace and security.

That brings us to a very timely topic that is of
interest to all delegations, which is the appointment of
the next Secretary-General. We all know that there is
an open debate with regard to the appropriate gender
of the next Secretary-General. Members are aware
of Spain's position, so I will not reiterate it. I would,
however, like to mention that, in my View, there are
two schools of thought on that issue. The first school
of thought supports the idea that the next Secretary-
General, ideally and all things being equal, should be a
woman. There are many portraits of men in the entrance
hall of the United Nations. Then there is another other
school of thought, which thinks it is rather irrelevant
whether it be a man or a woman. What is important
is that it be a person who is truly committed to the
agenda on women. In any event, I think that, in order
to bring about a significant change in the agenda on
women and peace and security, it is important that we
continue along the path that we started down some time
ago in a comprehensive manner and that we take a triple
perspective on the matter.

First, from a local point of view, I believe that
communities are truly important to the achievement
of individual progress with regard to the agenda on
women. Ms. Ayang can correct me. Secondly, I believe
an assessment of legislation at the national level is
fundamental and, to that end, we have a wonderful
toolbox for that purpose. Thirdly, we need to work at
the regional level. We have been doing so, but we need
to strengthen that level of implementation so that it can
be useful in promoting interaction between the whole
United Nations system and regional organizations.
I trust that, with that set of initiatives, we will, in a
short period, succeed in averting conflicts by having
improved prevention. For, unfortunately, conflicts
affect the weakest, in this case women and children.

