Mr. Akbaruddin (India): We appreciate Angola's
initiative in convening of today's debate on a subject of
widespread concern. We have also carefully noted the
issues raised in the concept paper before us (S/2016/219, annex) and by all the briefers today.

While we take note that advances have been
made in Africa through several laudable regional
and State-level initiatives in gender empowerment,
including in the context of the prevention and resolution
of conflict, there is no denying the considerable
challenges ahead. Despite the increased focus on the
women and peace and security agenda, along with the
normative framework that has evolved during the past
decade and a half, women and children continue to be
major victims. According to various United Nations
reports, women globally constitute less than 4 per cent
of signatories to peace agreements and less than 10 per
cent of negotiators at peace tables. Moreover, women
constitute only 3 per cent of the military and 10pc of
the police personnel who are deployed by the United
Nations in peace missions. These numbers reflect the
enormity of the challenges that we are confronted with.

The concept paper speaks of several short-term
and long-term measures that may be needed to improve
the condition of women in the context of what we are
discussing today. We agree that, in the shorter term,
there is a need to increase and institutionalize the
involvement of women in conflict prevention and
resolution. This requires not only normative advice
but capacity-building and institution-building at the
ground level. Therefore, to us the issue of women
and peace and security cannot be seen in isolation
from the wider societal context involving gender and
development issues.

Over the years, the international community
has been addressing the issues of gender equality,
empowerment and development, now in an increasingly
holistic manner. The Commission on the Status of
Women, which had a high-profile and successful
ministerial segment in its 60th anniversary year, just
a few days ago here in New York, and the work done
by the Committee on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women continue to make
significant progress in pushing the gender empowerment
agenda, which in itself has a transformative impact on
societies, leading to more sustainable development
and prosperity.

The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 70/ 1), which builds
upon the earlier Millennium Development Goals, also
highlights the importance of sustainable development
for ensuring peace and security. India has been an
active participant in the comprehensive deliberations on
women-related issues in various United Nations bodies.
India has also been among the major contributors to
UN-Women since its inception.

In the specific context of United Nations
peacekeeping, India has been the lead troop contributor,
with participation in 48 of the 69 peacekeeping
missions, out of which 22 are in Africa. While there has
been only a marginal increase overall in the number of
women peacekeepers, the first-ever female police unit
formed for the United Nations was provided by India
for deployment in Liberia. The unit has been widely
appreciated for its work and for setting a pioneering
example. India has also contributed female officers
as military observers and staff officers, in addition to
their deployment with medical units.

In another significant capacity-building initiative,
the New Delhi-based Centre for United Nations
Peacekeeping, in partnership with UN-Women, is now
conducting the third United Nations female military
officers course for 40 women military officers from
26 countries. India remains ready to contribute further
internationally both to the normative and the practical
aspects relating to women's empowerment, including in
matters of peace and security.

