Mr. Nibishaka (Rwanda): I thank you, Madam
President, and your delegation for organizing this
important debate on the role of women in conflict
prevention and resolution Africa and for the
comprehensive concept paper (S/2015/219, annex)
you circulated among Member States. The fact
that this is the second open debate on Africa during
Angola's presidency of the Security Council shows
your country's commitment to conflict prevention
and sustainable peace on our continent. I also thank
the Executive Director of UN-Women, Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo Ngcuka; the Assistant Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, Mr. Taye-Brook Zerihoun; the
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador
Macharia Kamu; as well as Ms. Paleki Ayang, for their
respective briefings earlier today.

As the 2015 global study on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) highlighted, and in line with
the recommendations of the just-concluded reviews
of peace operations, effective conflict prevention
requires a holistic approach that encompasses short-
term operational measures and longer-term structural
approaches. Such a holistic approach recognizes
the fact that women's participation in the design
and implementation of conflict and post-conflict
resolution and peacebuilding activities is critical to
the sustainability of peace and development in the
aftermath of a conflict.

Prior to the global study, during the past few years
there has been growing recognition by Governments,
international organizations and civil society
organizations of the importance of gender equality and
the empowerment of women in the continuing struggle
for equality, democracy and human rights, as well as
for poverty eradication and development - all of which
are structural measures that address the root causes
of conflict.

Today, in nearly every country and region of the
world, there has been progress on achieving gender
equality and women's empowerment, although that
progress has been uneven and the gains remain fragile
in Africa, including a growing number of cases of
violence against women and girls in armed conflict in
several African countries. However, as much as women
remain the subject of violence in armed conflict, in
the past decade many post-conflict societies in Africa
have embarked upon the difficult transition from armed
conflict towards resolution and peace building, and have
recognized that building lasting peace that sustains
post-war economic, political, and social development
requires the full participation of all citizens, including
women and girls.

Speaking from experience, today there are many
avenues through which women's inclusion in post-
conflict peacebuilding can bolster peacebuilding
initiatives, and thus contribute to a positive peace
outcome. For example, individual women, as well as
women's organizations, adopt a variety of strategies for
reducing fear and uncertainty following conflict and
for fostering an environment of trust and collaboration.
Furthermore, women who adopt positions of political
leadership could provide a direct alternative to
traditional political actors, adding to the post-conflict
impetus of change and addressing the injustices of the
past. They often use their gender identity and common
social experiences to bridge divides, providing an
example for other politicians to work across party
lines, a condition that is often lacking in most post-
conflict situations.

As the Council is aware, come April we will be
commemorating the twenty-second anniversary of the
1994 genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda, which left
women as the majority of our population in the direct
aftermath of the genocide. Despite their victimization
and in a spirit of endurance, the women of Rwanda
immediately got up and started rebuilding their country
by assuming non-traditional social and economic roles
as heads ofhousehold, community leaders and financial
providers, meeting the needs of their communities
and families.

Following this, there was a concerted effort in the
Government and among women's groups to address the
needs of Rwandan women and to engage them in the
all-important processes of national reconstruction and
reconciliation. Today, the Rwandan story in many ways
represents a process of collective social learning that
goes beyond our borders.

Besides going beyond the threshold of 30 per cent
of women in Government decision-making bodies, as
provided by the Constitution, and the overwhelming
majority of women in our Parliament, Rwanda's
security organs, in collaboration with other Government
agencies, local communities and civil society, have
launched initiatives to protect and respond to violence
that targets women and girls; an example is the
operational one-stop centres that offer a wide range
of free services for gender-based-violence victims run
by the national police. We have also set up nationwide
gender desks in the police and army and in the national
prosecution agency to offer gender-sensitive services
to victims.

Currently, Rwanda is the leading African troop-
and police-contributing country providing female
police and correctional officers to United Nations peace
support and peacekeeping operations; we have 220
female officers serving in various missions, particularly
in the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur, the United Nations Mission in South Sudan,
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
and the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti.
Those officers actively contribute to combating and
raising awareness about violence against women in the
communities they serve. We are stepping up efforts to
increase this number.

They also serve as advisers on gender-based
violence and share best practices between other officers
and local authorities. For these reasons, we support the
full implementation ofresolutions 1325 (2000) and 1960
(2010), which insist that all peacekeeping mandates
incorporate provisions that specifically identify steps
to address sexual violence. This should include the clear

identification of women protection advisers alongside
gender advisers and human rights protection units.
Despite improved practices in the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) 16 years after its adoption,
multilevel challenges persist and continue to hinder
women's participation and their protection and
enjoyment of security in their homes and countries,
including a deficit of opportunities for women to exercise
leadership and the continued underrepresentation of
women in conflict-prevention, conflict-resolution,
protection and peacebuilding processes.

Both the international community and Member
States need to deploy greater efforts in order to maintain
previous gains, with a view to reducing the inequalities
observed at various levels in the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).

Finally, we urge all post-conflict Member
States to do more in meeting these challenges. We
also look forward to the full implementation of the
recommendations of the independent review of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

