Mr. Zerihoun: I thank you, Madam, for this
opportunity to address this open debate on the role of
women in conflict prevention and mediation in Africa,
on behalf of the Department of Political Affairs.

The Secretary-General has made the advancement
of women a top priority since he assumed office and
has instructed the senior management of the Secretariat
to place the issue at the centre of what they do. This
system-wide focus signalled the beginning of an
important reorientation, informed by the basic fact that
women living with conflict have strategic knowledge
and networks that can contribute to its resolution.
Recent research has also established that women's
participation in peace talks facilitates not only the
conclusion of agreements and their implementation
but - crucially - also the sustainability of peace.

For the Department of Political Affairs (DPA),
promoting women's effective participation in conflict
mediation and addressing their specific needs in
peacemaking efforts has been a priority since the
Department undertook 15 women, peace and security
commitments in 2010. As many Council members are
aware, the Department monitors and reports annually to
the Security Council on progress made in implementing
these commitments.

As a result of senior leadership and institutional
buy-in, combined with a systematic effort to mainstream
these commitments in its work, the Department's
conflict prevention work has become increasingly
inclusive. Since 2012, all United Nations mediation
support teams have included women. United Nations
co-led mediation processes consult with women's
representatives on the delegations of negotiating
parties. These positive developments have improved
the inclusion of stronger gender-relevant provisions in
ceasefires and peace agreements.

To advance these efforts, the Department of Political
Affairs has developed a high-level mediation-skills
training. Half of the participants are women and
the training aims to enhance gender parity and the
future character and configuration of international
peacemaking. To build institutional capacity, the
Department conducts semi-annual training on gender/
women, peace and security. As a result, some 164 envoys
and senior mediation actors have taken part in the high-
level seminar series on gender and inclusive mediation.

The Department also continues to implement
its Joint Strategy with UN-Women on Gender and
Mediation. It helps build mediation capacity for envoys
and mediation teams by providing gender expertise and
training, while UN-Women strengthens the capacity
of regional, national and local women leaders and
peace coalitions, and supports access opportunities
for women in peace negotiations. We also document
relevant lessons learned and develop practical guidance
materials for mediators. The United Nations Guidance
on Effective Mediation and the Guidance for Mediators
on Addressing Conflict-related Sexual Violence in
Ceasefire and Peace Agreements are yielding concrete
results on the ground, where it matters the most.

We must, however, not forget that despite the
concerted efforts of international and regional
organizations, as well as of national Governments, to
eliminate discrimination and promote the empowerment
of women, unequal access and opportunities for women's
participation in political decision-making processes
persist worldwide. As highlighted by all three peace
and security reviews that were undertaken last year,
prioritizing prevention and inclusive political solutions
has never been more urgent. It is only by uniting our
efforts that we will be able to advance the principles
underpinning the Charter of the United Nations.

Peace processes afford unique opportunities for
promoting women's effective participation. The United
Nations therefore supports regional and subregional
organizations by promoting and strengthening regional
capacities for inclusive mediation to enable the more
effective participation of women at all levels of
peacemaking. This cooperation is built on the knowledge
that women's effective participation in transformative
decision-making processes will address underlying
inequalities and social divisions. It also addresses
the specific needs of women and helps to incorporate
a stronger gender perspective in reconstruction,
reconciliation and post-conflict peacebuilding.

During the past decade, we have sharpened our
preventive tools and achieved some progress. The good
offices of the Secretary-General, our regional offices
and our cooperation with regional organizations have
yielded positive results. Today, about 85 per cent of
United Nations mediation involves working closely
with regional and subregional organizations. To cite
but one example, the Department of Political Affairs
has been working very closely with the Southern
African Development Community (SADC) following
the signing of a framework for cooperation between
the two organizations in September 2010, focusing
on the need to strengthen partnership in prevention,
peacemaking and mediation. In close coordination with
UN-Women, DPA continues to complement SADC
efforts to advance the promotion of the women, peace
and security agenda in the region. Additional policy
initiatives include the development of a framework for
mainstreaming gender into SADC's peace and security
architecture and a strategy for combating sexual and
gender-based violence in conflict and post-conflict
situations. Regionally, we welcomed the appointment
by the African Union, in 2014, of its first Special Envoy
on Women, Peace and Security.
Our work on elections also underscores the
centrality of women's participation in decision-making
processes. The United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel actively enhances the role of women in
conflict prevention and political participation. In 2011,
the Office started training and building the mediation
and negotiation capacities of women and set up a
network of 32 women mediators. Those mediators have
moved on to build the capacity of other women in the
region, and have since contributed to national dialogue
processes in Mali and Guinea. The Office also helped
advance women's participation in electoral processes in
Benin, Cote d'Ivoire, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Nigeria
and Togo by supporting the adoption of legislation
on gender parity and quotas to help women assume
political office.

Noticeable efforts have also been made by the
African Union and other partners in the region to
ensure that gender is more systematically integrated in
electoral processes, including in election observation.
It is encouraging to note that currently the average rate
of women members of parliament in Africa is slightly
above the global average.

To promote women's political participation in
Central Africa, the United Nations Office for Central
Africa, in cooperation with its regional partner - the
Economic Community of Central African States - in
2014 organized a gender workshop on the role of women
in electoral processes in the region. That effort has
helped the Central Africa region to establish a platform
for the promotion of women's participation in politics.
Ahead of elections in Chad next month, the Office is
taking steps to facilitate a national political dialogue.
A workshop on the participation of women was
organized to feed into the broader dialogue with civil
society organizations.

The case for inclusive preventive diplomacy is
compelling. Experience has shown that, if we are
present, with early diplomatic initiatives and by
actively engaging civil society - notably women's
organizations - with the support of the international
community and the necessary resources, we stand
a better chance of helping prevent and resolve
conflicts and in making political stability and peace
more sustainable.

