Mr. Anshor (Indonesia): I thank the Under-
Secretary General and Executive Director of UN-
Women and the other briefers for for their constructive
insights on the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda in Africa.

Resolution 1325 (2000) has called for women's
participation in conflict management, conflict
resolution and sustainable peace. My delegation
underlines the 2015 global study of the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), which emphasizes that the
meaningful participation of women is crucial to the
effectiveness of all peace and security interventions.
My delegation is of the view that enhancing the
participation and meaningful involvement of women
in conflict prevention, conflict resolution and post-
conflict peacebuilding in Africa is an imperative that
the United Nations needs to continue to support.

My delegation sees the need to prioritize and
institutionalize women's leadership in peace and
security in the continent. This could be done through
the enhancement and promotion of women's leadership
in peace, security and sustainable development. The
strengthening of a platform for women across all
levels of African societies to exchange, share and
harmonize strategies for women's leadership and to
build coalitions in the promotion of peace and security
is therefore essential in the efforts to address women,
peace and security. Other steps that may be taken are
the strengthening of women's leadership capacities
and skills to engage in peace and security process
and negotiations, as well as the promotion of gender
mainstreaming in security sector institutions and
policies, all with the aim of establishing the meaningful
participation ofwomen in peace, security and mediation
in Africa.

At the United Nations, an important next step
that can support the momentum reached thus far is to
continue promoting an integrated approach to the women
and peace and security agenda across all areas of work
of the United Nations system. Avenues to strengthen
interaction and information flows across the entire
system should be pursued to eliminate the fragmentation
and silo approach that can hamper effective responses.
Implementation requires significant work on the part of
the broader United Nations system and Member States,
with civil society organizations at all levels.

My delegation considers that not only do gender
perspectives need to be mainstreamed in deliberating
peace and security matters before the Council, but that
a similar method and approach are also needed when
Member countries address the root causes of conflict in
other United Nations organs, such as the Economic and
Social Council and the Human Rights Council.

In the context of peacekeeping operations, my
delegation firmly believes that women peacekeepers
are far better equipped to protect women and girls
before, during and after conflicts and war. It is in this
understanding that Indonesia stands committed to
increasing the number of its women peacekeepers under
United Nations mandates aimed at providing protection
for women and girls, two of the most vulnerable victims
of conflict in the continent. Henceforth, Indonesia will
also register its full support for Council requests to
increase women peacekeepers in Africa and beyond.

A strong United Nations mandate aimed at
promoting the women and peace and security agenda
is made even more robust when supported by local and
regional organizations that are very well-suited to and
familiar with geographic and cultural characteristics.
We commend the African Union for having developed
the mechanisms, policies and structures necessary to
create an enabling environment for women to play a key
role in peace and security. These mechanisms include
the African Union five-year Gender, Peace and Security
Program 2015-2020 and the evolving African Peace and
Security Architecture.

Indonesia stands ready to engage and collaborate
with Africa within the context of peace and security.
Indonesia's commitment and readiness is well founded
in the leaders' declaration issued at the sixth Asia-
Africa Commemorative Summit, held in Bandung in
2015, which among other things reiterates the principle
and benefits of multilateralism in strengthening peace
and prosperity in Asia and Africa, as well as in further
contributing to the maintenance of international
peace and security through United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

Let me conclude by reiterating Indonesia's support
and steadfast commitment to the women and peace and
security agenda through the United Nations, as well as
through cross-regional cooperation and collaboration.
We will continue to be engaged in existing deliberations
and processes aimed at enhancing the international
framework to strengthen the protection of women in
conflict and the role of women in peace and security, as
well as to participate in every United Nations-mandated
peacekeeping operation involving women peacekeepers.

The meeting rose at 3.40pm.
