Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to welcome Ms. Maria Filomena Lobao Telo
Delgado and to thank Angola for having convened
this extremely important debate on women and peace
and security in Africa. I would also like to thank the
Assistant Secretary-General, the Executive Director
of UN-Women, the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Observer of the African Union and
the Executive Director of South Sudan Women's
Empowerment Network.

Over the past 15 years, the Security Council has
managed to build a legal framework for the programme
of action for women and peace and security through the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) and seven subsequent
resolutions. The Council accordingly established a
concrete political momentum thanks to which the
contribution of women to the prevention and resolution

of conflicts in Africa has significantly grown. That
momentum has also helped reinforce the contribution
of women through a number of mechanisms and legal
frameworks that have been adopted in Africa in order
to boost the participation of women in this area. As
examples, I may point to the Solemn Declaration on
Gender Equality in Africa and the appointment of an
African Union Special Envoy on Women, peace and
security. And in West Africa there have been numerous
positive experiences.

While innovative methods have been found, they
remain on the sidelines and have not been fully exploited
within official frameworks. The conclusions that were
adopted by the Commission on the Status ofWomen this
past Friday affirmed the need for the participation of
women in conflict prevention and resolution. They also
affirmed the importance of the implementation of the
Beijing Programme of Action and of achieving genuine,
comprehensive gender equality. Those frameworks and
mechanisms are very important, but to date they have
not ensured the required level of participation. On that
account, I would like to share the following remarks.

Mr. Gaspar Martins took the Chair.

First, Egypt supports the call of the Secretary-
General to strengthen the role of women in
peacekeeping activities, mediation and the prevention
of conflicts. That call was supported by the three
major reviews carried out recently in that area. We
have also seen tangible evidence of the importance
of the role of women in their countries, especially in
Liberia, Malawi and Central Africa, where women are
successfully governing.
Second, there are large gaps in terms of the
Council's resolutions and their follow-up. We therefore
need to adopt a methodology that will enable us to
bridge those gaps so as to ensure the comprehensive
implementation of those resolutions. We also need to
step up the role of the Informal Experts Group set up in
resolution 2242 (2015).

Third, several questions continue to be absent
from our debate, such as the suffering of women who
are living under foreign occupation. I point out also
the exaggeration of the link with human rights and
international humanitarian law, because it weakens the
means for providing available protection in times of
peace as well as in times of war. I reiterate that there
is the problem of politicizing some of the issues linked
to the two regimes of international law that I have
mentioned. There are also problems with regard to the
infringement of national sovereignty, and sometimes
we rely on information that is unofficial and lacking
precision. That distracts our attention from the issues
that concern us, to their detriment, in particular
the participation of women in conflict prevention
and resolution.

Fourth, problems and weaknesses persist with
regard to the appointment of women to senior level and
leadership posts in political missions.

Fifth, our programme of action completely
fails to take into account cultural particularities
in its implementation, which negatively affects
the participation of women in conflict prevention
and resolution.

Sixth, it is important that discussions continue
within the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, so that we can confront the challenges and
problems standing in the way of the full participation of
women in peacekeeping activities.

Seventh, Egypt is about to adopt a strategy on gender
equality, and we very much welcome the statement
made by Ambassador Macharia Kamau earlier, since
the strategy to be adopted by the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations can be an excellent starting
point for bolstering the participation of women in
conflict prevention and resolution, particularly in terms
of action at the regional level.

Egypt attaches great importance to issues affecting
the role of women in conflict prevention and resolution.
We are devoting major efforts at the national level to
improve the status and empowerment of women. We
have supported the substance of resolution 1325 (2000)
since its adoption. That resolution is an important
milestone with regard to the status of women and
their participation in the resolution of conflicts. Egypt
was one of the first countries to adhere to resolution
2242 (2015) this past October. The national council
responsible for the status of women in Egypt has
fine-tuned a national plan of action based on resolution
1325 (2000). Egypt thus became one of 17 African
countries to have a national plan of action of that kind.

Egypt has also organized a number of events
concerning this issue since the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) 15 years ago. We attribute great importance
to capacity-building. The regional centre in Cairo
responsible for specialized training in peacekeeping
in Africa has held seven training workshops and two
training workshops for trainers. The main topic ofthose
workshops was the social dimension of peacekeeping
and peacebuilding in implementing resolution 1325
(2000) between 2013 and 2015. Five other workshops
are due to be held in June. Egypt is fully committed
to this process and to implementating the plan of
action, and takes part in all relevant regional and
international forums.

