Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank the briefers
for their insights and I welcome Ms. Paleki Ayang to the
Council. We should hear the voices of women activists
from civil society in the Chamber more often.

I would like to begin with the words of another
activist, Nobel Laureate Leymah Gbowee. In 2003,
her group Women of Liberia Mass Action for Peace
successfully pressed Charles Taylor to attend peace
talks. Talking afterwards, she said,

"We are now taking this stand to secure the future
of our children, because we believe, as custodians
of society, tomorrow our children will ask us,
'Mama, what was your role during the crisis?"'

"What was your role during the crisis?" The
answer to that question for so many women in Africa
is not negotiator; it is not envoy; it is not delegate even,
and that needs to change. It is not just about ending
gender inequality. It is not just a women's issue; it is
a peace issue. When women's voices are heard in
peace processes, in negotiations and in State-building,
the chances of a lasting peace increase. If we are
serious about truly resolving conflicts and preserving
peace - not just for hours, but for generations - we
must heed the words of Leymah Gbowee and our briefer
Paleki Ayang. They demonstrate just how powerful
community-based activism can be. Just think how
powerful those women's voices could have been had
they actually been in the room at key times in peace
processes. So, whether in Africa or in any other part of
the world, we need to make sure that women are playing
the fullest role in conflict resolution. I am proud that all
future United Kingdom-hosted peacebuilding events
will ensure that women's voices are heard. If the rest of
the Council were to follow suit, then we would send a
strong message to the rest of the world.

To support that effort, we have to increase women's
participation in politics and society. That means
delivering on the commitments we made in resolutions
1325 (2000), 1889 (2009), 2242 (2015) and so many
others because breaking down barriers facing women
in peace talks requires breaking down barriers facing
women across society. It means helping girls stay in
school, improving health care and, yes, tackling sexual
Violence. At its heart, it is about ending discrimination
against women. We all have a part to play. In Somalia,
the United Kingdom is helping make health services
available to over 1 million Somali women and children,
but also providing legal assistance to thousands of
Somali women and will soon be supporting initiatives
that boost their participation in politics too.

But this issue will not be solved by one country
alone. That is why the United Kingdom is contributing
$1 million to the Global Acceleration Instrument
for Women, Peace and Security and Humanitarian
Action (GAI). By funding the GAI, we can all offer
material support that can break down those barriers.
In Burundi, a network of women mediators was able
to deal with 5,200 local conflicts in 2015. That is over
14 a day. Thanks to the GAI, they are now scaling up
their activities. At a time when the Council has been so
frustrated by the crisis in Burundi, it is heartening to
see how powerful women's civil society can be in their
local mediation efforts.

Ultimately, however, supporting this effort
requires more than just our money. When the Council
visited Mali, Guinea Bissau and Senegal earlier this
month, there was not a single female representative of
the Council on the trip. And even at Headquarters in
New York, only two of the 15 Security Council member
countries are represented by a woman at this debate.
Since we call upon Africa's leaders to do more to bring
women into conflict prevention and resolution, let us
also heed the call ourselves. What signal does it send
when the primary body for preserving international
peace and security only has one woman among its 15
permanent representatives. What message does it send
to that young girl in Somalia who dreams of becoming
president, or to those who want to answer the question
"What was your role?" with something other than
"survivor"? If we want half of the world's population
to have a say in conflict prevention and resolution, then
let us begin in this building. That is why the United
Kingdom has been clear that we need as many credible
women as possible to apply to be the next Secretary-
General. We have had three so far and I hope that there
are more to come.

It is time to make history and bring about a historic
moment that is long overdue. All things being equal, we
hope that this will be the year that we appoint a woman
to be Secretary-General for the first time. When asked
"What was your role?", she will be able to say that
she was at the forefront of the United Nations action
to prevent conflict and resolve crisis and represent the
entire world, notjust half of it.

