Ms. Ayang: I wish to thank you, Madam President,
for the invitation to provide a voice for the thousands
of women across Africa who are risking their lives to
prevent conflict and bring peace to their communities
and countries. Although there have been repeated
commitments made in this Chamber, and the Security
Council, the African Union and the international
community have evidence that has demonstrated time
and again that the broad, meaningful and effective
inclusion of women increases the durability of peace,
we continue to be excluded from these efforts. The
world, and Africa in particular, needs to move beyond
the stereotypical images of women as victims in
conflict and instead take into account their complex
experiences as fighters, peacebuilders, protectors and
community leaders.

I have seen first-hand the power that women
have in preventing and resolving conflict in my own
country. On 15 December 2013, the hopes and dreams
of the South Sudanese people of living in a peaceful
and independent country vanished. I remember vividly
the night that conflict broke out: the sound of heavy
weapons and artillery enveloped us as bullet holes
riddled my home. War had returned to my country. But
I was one ofthe lucky ones, able to put my family of six
into a car and drive to the Ugandan border; but I knew I
had to return. Thankfully, I was not alone: women from
widely differing ideological and political perspectives
joined together to reject the conflict and the violence
and created a platform to suggest peaceful solutions
to the conflict. We mobilized across the country,
and in Nairobi, Kampala and Addis Ababa, pushing
that agenda.

Women's efforts were deployed at all levels, from
grass-roots to international. Inside South Sudan, women
were crossing tribal lines to de-escalate tensions and
prevent further conflict. In a protection-of-civilians site
that was segregated between Dinka and Nuer tribes, a
Dinka woman joined with a Nuer to start a group in
which women from both tribes would meet and discuss
how to stop the violence. While the men wanted to fight
over their tribal differences, women bridged the divide
and reduced tensions within the community.

The scale of sexual violence in our country has
been shocking. As the most recent report of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
documenting the crimes committed in South Sudan
noted, "Women are in a state of permanent insecurity,
and are compelled to take great risks" (A/HRC/31/49, para. 36).

To help prevent and address these horrendous acts,
the South Sudan Women's Empowerment Network, of
which I am the Executive Director, created community
networks that worked on preventing sexual and
gender-based violence through awareness activities,
sensitization training and advocacy. These networks
were led and run by men. Men must be meaningfully
engaged in these programmes to ensure that the
violence subsides and the stigma is diminished.

Women's advocacy groups also began to form
to ensure that women's voices and experiences were
considered by the largely male negotiators determining
the future of South Sudan. I am a member of one
such group called the Task Force on the Engagement
of Women, supported by the Institute for Inclusive
Security. We advocated to the warring parties and key
international stakeholders the signing of a cessation of
hostilities agreement and the promotion of inclusive
peace talks that address the underlying root causes
of the conflict. These women were some of the only
people whom both parties trusted, allowing them to
send messages back and forth on their behalf.

As the Security Council and the international
community's attention turns to the 31 March deadline
for the parties to report on how they are implementing
the August 2015 peace agreement, accounting for the
role of women in monitoring and implementing this
accord is crucial. Women must serve as mediators,
community liaisons and monitors throughout this
process if the accord is to ultimately be successful, and
I urge the Security Council to do more to ensure that
this happens.

Evidence of women's ability to prevent and resolve
conflict spans the African continent. With limited
resources, and in spite of threats from their own
communities and sometimes families, women organize
peace marches, advocate for enhanced peace and
security policies, and lead reconciliation efforts across
conflict lines.

In order to support these efforts, I urge the Security
Council to do the following.

First, it must invest in programmes aimed at
increasing women's inclusion in conflict-prevention
and resolution strategies. These programmes should
be developed in consultation with diverse local
populations and designed to address the underlying
root causes of conflict and promote women-led early-
warning mechanisms.

I also urge the Security Council to promote
women's meaningful inclusion in elections, so that
their needs and concerns are better reflected in peace
and security policymaking. Support should be provided
for constitutional reforms that require a quota in
parliaments as one mechanism to get more women into
decision-making roles.

I also urge the Security Council to increase support
for the inclusion of women in national security forces
and police, including in all United Nations peacekeeping
missions. Furthermore, the Council should require
United Nations consultations with women-led civil-
society organizations to advance gender-specific and
community priorities in peace and security processes.

In addition to the promotion of gender equality
and women's empowerment, I want the Council to take
away two things from my remarks today.
First, we can continue to discuss strategies of
conflict prevention and resolution, but they will
be ineffective unless immediate attention goes to
addressing and preventing the systematic, deliberate
and widespread sexual violence in South Sudan and
on the continent. The scale of sexual violence in my
country has destroyed the social fabric of communities
and threatens to dismantle the already fragile peace.
Therefore, I urge the Security Council to take action.

First, the Council must insist on accountability
for atrocities committed by all warring parties,
armed groups, security forces and peacekeepers.
Accountability for sexual violence must be prioritized,
and efforts must be made to ensure that transitional
justice mechanisms, including community-led
programmes, such as truth-telling and reconciliation,
are gender sensitive and responsive to the unique needs
of women.

Secondly, little attention or support has gone
towards ensuring women's participation in what can be
the most critical aspect of the peace process, that is,
implementation. Therefore, I urge the Security Council
to demand that the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission in South Sudan, and any monitoring
mechanisms established in the region for other conflicts,
ensure that women's representation and participation
are integrated throughout the monitoring and
implementation of peace agreements, in coordination
with United Nations peacekeeping mandates.

