Mr. Mminele (South Africa): Let me first express
my appreciation to Angola, as President of the Security
Council, for having organized this important open
debate on the role of women in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts in Africa. My delegation also
wishes to thank the Executive Director of UN-Women
for her presentation.

South Africa reaffirms its commitment to the
full and effective implementation of resolutions 1325
(2000), 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009), 1960 (2010) and 2242
(2015) as the building blocks for advancing the women
and peace and security agenda.

It is important to acknowledge that resolution
1325 (2000) reaffirms the important role of women
in the prevention and resolution of conflicts and in
peacebuilding. It also stresses the importance of their
equal participation and full involvement in all efforts
aimed at maintaining and promoting peace and security,
and the need to increase their role in decision-making
with regard to conflict prevention and resolution.
The adoption of the resolution was a milestone, as
it constitutes a landmark international framework
that addresses the key role women play in conflict
management, conflict resolution and sustainable peace.

South Africa firmly supports the call for women

to be involved in decision-making processes and
conflict resolution. As key decision makers in society,
we believe that women in Africa and elsewhere have
an important role to play in addressing the root causes
of conflicts, as well as playing an important role as
mediators in conflict situations. A society that takes on
board the interests of women in an inclusive approach
to governance and development is a more stable society
as it ensures the well-being of the entire population.

Regrettably, women continue to remain excluded
from the various mediation and conflict resolution
initiatives at the highest level. The obstacles that impede
women's full participation in conflict prevention and
peacebuilding include the active, systematic cultural
exclusion that continues to exist in many parts of the
world, including Africa. We would like to emphasize the
need to enhance the inclusion of women as high-level
envoys and mediators and to increase women's roles in
peacebuilding. That would require a systemic shift from
women's participation and role in only certain areas,
such as advisers on issues of sexual exploitation and
abuse, to one that would allow the mainstreaming of
women's voices throughout all aspects of governance,
development and peace and security-related matters.

It is against that backdrop that South Africa
launched the Dialogue Forum on Conflict Resolution
and Peacemaking. The aim of the Forum is to train and
mentor women in conflict resolution and to produce
a new pool of mediators. The participants came from
different countries all across the African continent
who would work in the fields of mediation, peace and
security. Participants included ambassadors, officials
from Ministries for Foreign Affairs, officers of
regional organizations, such as the Southern African
Development Community and the African Union, as
well as women working in civil society. As our Foreign
Minister, Ms. Maite Nkoana-Mashabane, has argued,

"women are always peacemakers, and the ones who
are always exposed to situations where strong men
want to take over power".

We will continue to call for increasing the equal
participation, representation and full involvement of
women in preventive diplomacy efforts in Africa and
around the world.

South Africa recognizes the importance for women
to have unfettered access to justice in conflict and post-
conflict settings, including through gender-responsive
legal, judicial and security-sector reform processes and
other mechanisms. Women's legal status and rights must
be ensured in post-conflict situations. Strengthening
the legal framework to address issues of discrimination

against women with respect to land ownership, access
to economic opportunity and employment, education
and health care is an essential component of gender-
responsive peacebuilding.

South Africa believes that Member States have the
primary responsibility to put an end to impunity and
to prosecute the perpetrators of sexual violence against
women and children. We condemn all violations of
international law committed against civilians, women
and children in armed conflict and post-conflict
situations. We believe the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Peacebuilding Fund could play an important
role in supporting women's participation in peace
processes in Africa.

In conclusion, we will continue to work with the
rest of Africa and the world to ensure that we protect all
women from violence and discrimination.

