Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): Allow me to join others
in expressing appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
organizing this very important debate on the role of
women in conflict prevention and resolution in Africa.
We commend Angola on that count. I also wish to thank
all the briefers for their briefings.

We fully subscribe to the statement delivered by
the Permanent Observer of the African Union. What
follows are some comments on a few points in our
national capacity.

There is no doubt that women are uniquely
positioned to nurture a culture of peace, and there is also
no doubt that enhancing their effective participation
will have a meaningful impact, whether it be in
preventing and resolving conflicts or in contributing
to peacekeeping and post-conflict reconstruction and
peacebuilding endeavours. What was said this morning
by the Executive Director of the South Sudan Women's
Empowerment Network is instructive in that regard.

In that context, the adoption of the landmark
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, 15 years ago was indeed significant, but the
question to ask is how much progress has been made
in implementing it. Obviously, it has been far from
satisfactory. We commend the Secretary-General for
initiating a study to review the implementation of that
seminal resolution, and hopefully the recommendations
from the review will help create far more opportunities
for women's effective participation in issues of peace
and security.

As far as Africa is concerned, women and girls
are indeed the most vulnerable groups in society, and
they are the ones who bear the brunt of violence in the
various conflict situations afflicting our continent.
That is why the women and peace and security agenda
is so critical for us. The African Union's Gender, Peace
and Security Programme seeks to increase women's
participation in the promotion of peace and security,
as well as enhance the protection of women in conflict
situations in Africa; it is indeed a step in the right
direction. Furthermore, the adoption of regional action
plans by the various regional economic communities
aimed at implementing resolution 1325 (2000) is also a
positive development.

Although the efforts at the regional, continental and
international levels provide a useful framework for the
women and peace and security agenda, what matters the
most in making a real difference in improving the plight
of women and enhancing their effective participation
is implementation at the national level. In that regard,
Ethiopia subscribes to all of the relevant regional and
international treaties and conventions on the rights of
women and is committed to the women and peace and
security agenda. Accordingly, it has been striving to
promote women's participation in all spheres and at all
levels of Government, and a lot of progress has been
made over the past two decades.

In the area of peace and security in particular, it
is indeed a source of great satisfaction for us to note
that Ethiopia is the largest contributor of female
peacekeepers, with 558 of them deployed in various
United Nations peacekeeping missions. We are working
to further enhance our contribution of women to
peacekeeping efforts in terms of military and police
personnel in the coming years.

The growing number of allegations with regard
to sexual exploitation and abuse committed by United
Nations peacekeepers is indeed a matter of serious
concern. As one of the largest troop-contributing
countries to United Nations peacekeeping operations,
Ethiopia takes the matter very seriously and subscribes
to the Secretary-General's zero-tolerance policy. Our
peacekeepers are given the necessary predeployment
training and, whenever we have encountered allegations
of misconduct, we have committed ourselves to
carrying out the necessary investigations and taking
the appropriate action. Nevertheless, we believe that,
in order to make real progress in this critical area,
there can be no selectivity. What will help us achieve
the desired objective is a comprehensive and holistic
approach that encompasses all the civilian, military and
police components, engaging all relevant stakeholders
in a constructive manner and addressing the root causes.

Finally, let me conclude by reiterating my country's
firm commitment to improving the situation of women,
who constitute half of our societies and whose effective
participation is extremely critical to achieving the noble
objectives that we have set for ourselves in the peace
and security, governance and development spheres.

