The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.

Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil) Let me
congratulate Angola on having organized this debate
under the guidance of its Minister for Family and the
Promotion of Women, Ms. Maria Filomena Delgado. I
also thank the Executive Director of the United Nations
Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women, the Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission,
the Permanent Observer of the African Union and
Ms. Palegi Ayang for their presentations.

Today's debate provides a timely opportunity to
reflect on the results of the high-level review of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), and to focus
on the needs and perspectives of Africa. Brazil took
note with satisfaction of the recommendations of the
global study on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and, in particular, its emphasis on prevention
and the need to avoid the militarization of the women
and peace and security agenda. As highlighted by
the global study, increasing recognition of women's
participation and empowerment is an end in itself
and should not be part of counterterrorism strategies
or efforts to prevent violent extremism conducive to
terrorism; rather, it should be a part of the civilian
peace agenda. That point is highly relevant for Africa,
where most peacekeeping operations are deployed
and where women's organizations have been playing
and will continue to play a positive role in all peace
processes, from mediation and prevention initiatives
to reconciliation and reconstruction in the aftermath
of conflict.

Notwithstanding significant challenges, African
women have many success stories to tell. Women's
organizations were at the forefront of the Liberian
peace process. Post-conflict recovery initiatives led to
the economic empowerment of thousands of women in
Burundi and Rwanda. The policies and instruments of
the African Union Gender Policy, as well as the Gender,
Peace and Security Programme of the African Peace
and Security Architecture, provide valuable tools to
support the empowerment of African women as agents
of peace. We also welcome the adoption last year of the
African Union Agenda 2063 and its pledge to empower
African women in all spheres of social life.
It is also heartening to note that three important
peacekeeping operations in Africa are now led by
women. We pay tribute to the commitment and
leadership of Ellen Margrethe Loj, the Head of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan; Ai'chatou
Mindaoudou, the Head of the United Nations Operation
in Cote d'Ivoire; and Kim Bolduc, the Head of the
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in
Western Sahara. Another woman, Hester Paneras, until
recently steered the world's largest international police
component - that of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur.

Yet this positive trend cannot offset the fact that
women constitute merely 4 per cent of the 88,000
troops and police personnel currently deployed in
United Nations peacekeeping operations in Africa. In
that regard, we recall resolution 2242 (2015), which
calls upon the Secretary-General and Member States
to double the number of women in military and police
contingents of United Nations peacekeeping operations
over the next five years. Female peacekeepers
are uniquely well placed to build trust with local
communities and to address sexual and gender-based
violence. They also serve as role models to inspire
women and girls to seek more rights and participation
in our societies.

In recognizing and supporting women's role as
agents of peace, the international community is also
contributing to address one of the direst aspects of war
that mostly affects women and girls. Sexual violence
in conflict remains a serious concern for vulnerable
populations impacted by war around the world,
predominantly women and girls. Despite the strong
African commitment to fighting sexual and gender-
based violence, serious crimes against humanity,
involving rape and sexual slavery, continue to occur
in some regions of Africa. Brazil strongly condemns
these abhorrent violations. We have long upheld the
imperative to pursue accountability for serious crimes
and abuses against women and girls, including but not
limited to sexual and gender-based violence.

A milestone in this regard was the recent
International Criminal Court (ICC) trial, presided
over by Brazilian Judge Sylvia Steiner, leading to
the conviction of Jean-Pierre Bemba for war crimes
and crimes against humanity in the Central African
Republic. This was the first ICC case to specifically
focus on the use of sexual violence as a weapon of war,
and should serve as a powerful deterrent to would-
be perpetrators.
As the current Chair of the Commission on the
Status of Women (CSW), I am deeply committed to
gender equality in all political and security processes.
A specific concern are the human rights of women of
African origin, who are often subject to discrimination
and prejudice outside Africa. In this spirit, Brazil
and the United States co-organized last week a CSW
side event on the racial identity of women of African
descent in the diaspora, in the context of the 2015-2024
International Decade for People of African Descent.
We believe that visibility and self-representation are
powerful strategies for tackling racism and injustice.

Our South-South cooperation with Africa, a key
priority of Brazilian foreign policy, is closely aligned
with the women and peace and security agenda. In
Guinea-Bissau, we helped enable health institutions
to assist women and girl victims of gender-based
violence. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we
have financed projects to assist victims of sexual and
gender-based violence. In this respect, I cannot fail to
refer to the inspiring work of Dr. Denis Mukwege, a
physician who has treated thousands of survivors of
rape in Bukavu, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and a role model not just in Africa, but worldwide.

Through the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, I have witnessed first-
hand the essential role played by women in building
sustainable peace. The Brazilian Peace Operations
Joint Training Center in Rio de Janeiro regularly holds
workshops and courses to train peacekeepers on gender
issues and the protection of women, where rigorous
standards regarding the conduct and discipline of
personnel are upheld.

At the domestic level, let me highlight the drafting
process of our national action plan on women and
peace and security. We are striving to elaborate an
effective plan to address the four pillars of the agenda:
prevention, protection, participation, and peacebuilding
and recovery. This will include but will not be limited
to measures to increase the percentage of female
peacekeepers; to foster the participation of women in all
peace and security processes, including in our Foreign
and Defence Ministries; to further improve relations
between troops and civilians, particularly women
and girls, in peacekeeping operations; and to fortify
humanitarian assistance and technical cooperation
initiatives on gender issues in conflict and post-conflict
situations. Since the women and peace and security
agenda is not solely a Government matter, we have
established a broad-based working group comprising
representatives not only of relevant ministries and the
armed forces, but also of academia and civil society, to
debate and draft our national action plan.

In conclusion, let me reiterate Brazil's firm
commitment to both the promotion of peace in Africa
and the crosscutting campaign on gender equality and
women's empowerment. We will continue to advance
these inseparable agendas at all levels of the United
Nations.

The President: I give the floor to the representative
of India.


