Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): We thank the Angolan
presidency for organizing this important open debate
in what has been dubbed as the "month of Africa" in
the Council.

Bangladesh takes this opportunity to recall our
pioneering role in contributing to the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) during our membership in
the Security Council in 2000 and 2001. The global
study that was conducted last year on the resolution's
implementation has done a commendable job in
charting the progress achieved in terms of measurable
results and tangible objectives. It is encouraging to
see that women have assumed a central role in 67 per
cent of peace agreements that have been mediated or
facilitated by the United Nations in recent times. We
expect this to be replicated further at the regional and
national levels. As we heard this morning from the
briefers, the normative and standard-setting exercise
that has been undertaken by the African Union captures
the underlying principles and objectives of resolution
1325 (2000) and its successor resolutions.

The changing nature and dynamics of conflicts
and the diverse motivations of the actors involved
tend to escalate the situation for women during
armed conflicts. While the protection needs of women
remain a foremost concern, it is critically important to
empower women and to allow them the space to serve
as instrumental and effective buffers against conflicts.
This is not likely to happen in an extraneous manner,
and should ideally evolve in an organic fashion from
within the conflict-affected society.

In Bangladesh, our sustained investment in
women's empowerment and gender equality has
allowed us to make the overall environment further
conducive to preventing the escalation and recurrence
of conflicts. It is perhaps no surprise, as manifest
in other contexts around the world, that violent
extremists and terrorists make it a point to reverse the
trend of women's development and empowerment in
advancing their twisted narrative of social norms and
arrangements concerning women. It would be crucial
for women's groups and organizations to scale up their
voice in protest of such trends, and to enhance their
engagements with those women who are forcibly or
unwillingly made to be complicit with such misguided
agenda of violent extremists and other such actors.
In order to find resonance with the African
situation, we would wish to reinforce five key issues
in relation to the women, peace and security agenda, as
we see them from our national perspective.

First, the confluence of the reviews undertaken
last year around the United Nations peace and security
agenda needs to be translated into, among other things,
a further accent on developing national plans of action
corresponding to resolution 1325 (2000) and affiliated
resolutions. There are a number of best practices
available in diverse socioeconomic contexts that
may be built upon further through in-depth national
consultations. The critical role of men and boys,
particularly youth, needs to be factored into the plans
of action.

Secondly, women's role in conflict prevention,
mediation, negotiations and peace agreements needs to
be bolstered in real terms beyond mere showcasing. It
would be critical to invest in women's leadership in order
for them to effectively contribute to decision-making
and negotiations with a view to mainstreaming women's
specific needs and concerns into the broader framework
of peace agreements or settlements.

Thirdly, the need to enhance women's participation
United Nations United Nations peacekeeping
operations, including in senior leadership positions, has
been duly recongized as an enabling factor for ensuring
the protection of women and enhancing women's role in
preparing the ground for sustainable peace. As a major
troop-contributing country, we remain convinced of
the qualitative difference that women can make as
peacekeepers on the ground. We are working with the
United Nations and other partners to further enhance
women's participation among our troops and police
and to strengthen and mainstream the work of gender
advisers in missions.

Fourthly, women's role in peacebuilding is widely
recognized, but remains constrained by a lack of
resources and, at times, expertise. Within the United
Nations, there is scope for reinvigorating a system-wide
approach to implementing the gender strategy of the
Peacebuilding Commission to use it as a possible guide
for a customized approach to specific contexts. In
Bangladesh, we are currently in the process of setting
up a peacebuilding centre, where we wish to undertake
specialized research and training on women's role in
peacebuilding, among other issues.

Lastly, the overriding importance of prevention
and eliminating sexual and gender-based violence
during armed conflicts cannot be overemphasized.
The political momentum that has been galvanized
to this cause must be sustainedThe importance of
ensuring justice for such crimes and promoting healing
and reintegration for the victims should constitute an
essential element in halting and reversing such crimes
anywhere in the world. Bangladesh stands ready to
share its experience in this regard, especially with
regard to promoting justice and recognition for the
victims of sexual and gender-based violence committed
during our Liberation War in 1971.

The African continent is setting examples on
a range of norm-setting issues, and also with their
implementation. With the exemplary leadership shown
by the women of Africa, we are confident that further
new dimensions to strengthening women's role in peace
and security will emerge in the days ahead, including to
enrich the work of this Council.

