Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French):
My delegation thanks the Angolan presidency for
organizing this open debate on the role of women in
conflict prevention and resolution in Africa. I also
thank all speakers for their contributions to this debate.

The international community unanimously recognizes
the positive contribution that can be made by women to
conflict prevention and resolution. History has shown
that peace and stability are more sustainable when
women are involved in the implementation of conflict
prevention and resolution measures. The reason for that
is simple - women are a fundamental part of society
and, as such, their involvement in these processes makes
it possible to fully and effectively take their needs and
concerns into consideration.

In its general recommendation No. 30 published
in October 2013, the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women noted

"the low participation of women in institutions
working on preventative diplomacy It is only by
including female stakeholders and using a gendered
analysis of conflict that States parties can design
appropriate responses."

Moreover, the Committee recognized that women play a
leadership role during periods of conflict, and affirmed
that the inclusion of a critical mass of women in
international negotiations and peacekeeping activities
can make a difference.

On the normative front, the important role that
women play in conflict prevention and resolution and
their participation on an equal footing in all efforts to
maintain and promote peace and security have been
reaffirmed in a number of United Nations documents,
in particular Security Council resolutions, including
the landmark resolution 1325 (2000). That resolution
enshrines the relevant provisions of international
instruments related to the rights of women.

With the support of its women, the African continent
has overcome many conflicts. Indeed, African women
have demonstrated a great capacity to contribute to
efforts for lasting peace and reconciliation. In several
of the conflicts that continue to beset our continent,
African women have made effective contributions,
including through non-confrontational means, to
resolve conflicts and focus more on collective well-
being. African women have distinguished themselves
as talented negotiators in many situations, particularly
due to their non-involvement in fighting. Themselves
often targets or even victims of violence, in particular
of a sexual nature, African women have found
practical measures to prevent conflict and joined in
efforts intended to rebuild and achieve lasting peace.
African women have also played an important role
in inter-ethnic integration and the dissemination of a
culture of peace at all levels, from early childhood to
adulthood. That has helped in many instances to create
social cohesion and dispel sociocultural dissension,
and enabled different ethnic groups to live together
harmoniously in the same space or side by side.

Today's world requires us to strengthen the
involvement of women in conflict prevention and
resolution processes. Women must participate at all
stages of negotiations on conflict prevention, peace,
transitionaljustice and reconstruction. We cannot simply
consider them as victims of conflicts or as observers of
the decision-making process. Strong political will and
firm commitment from the international community
are needed to promote women's empowerment and to
ensure their full and systematic participation in all
aspects of social life and the various peace processes.

Finally, it is imperative to support the work
of civil society, including organizations of women
human rights activists, and to promote international
justice mechanisms. They are the eyes and ears of the
international community in the promotion of peace and
women's rights.

