Mr. Eler (Turkey): At the outset, allow me to
express our strongest condemnation for the heinous
and cowardly terrorist attack perpetrated in Lahore,
Pakistan, yesterday. We firmly stand in solidarity with
the Government and the people of Pakistan in their
fight against terrorism.

I would like to express our appreciation to the
Angolan presidency for organizing this timely debate
on the theme of women and peace and security, with a
special focus on the role of women in conflict prevention
and resolution in Africa.

Last year was a landmark year for gender equality
and the women and peace and security agenda. We not
only celebrated the twentieth anniversary of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action, but we also
marked the fifteenth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000). The high-level review of the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), along with the review
processes carried out by the High-level Panel on
Peace Operations and the Advisory Group of Experts
on the Review of the United Nations Peacebuilding
Architecture, yielded a sound foundation to reflect on
an international framework of cooperation concerning
conflict prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding,
with a strong emphasis on the empowerment of women.
The United Nations reaffirmed its firm commitment to
strengthening the role of women in conflict prevention
and resolution with the adoption of resolution 2242
(2015).

The severe effects of conflicts on women and
girls in various locations across the globe continue
to constitute a significant challenge that needs to be
addressed. Furthermore, our world is now facing the
largest humanitarian crisis since the Second World
War, with an increasing influx of displaced populations
due to protracted conflicts and the lack of security and
stability, which gives rise to even further difficulties
to vulnerable groups, including women and girls.
Moreover, the horrific acts perpetrated against women
and girls by terrorist organizations, such as Boko Haram
and Da'esh, demonstrate the need for a comprehensive
strategy for countering violent extremism and terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations.

African women and girls are not immune to the
difficulties and challenges I have just described. On the
contrary, during times of conflict and insecurity, there is
no doubt that African women suffer the most as victims
of widespread sexual and gender-based violence. Yet
during hard times, women also play a primary role in
building and supporting peace. We are cognizant of
the fact that women in Africa have been enablers of
economic development, peace and social solidarity.
It should be underlined that overall stabilization and
development efforts in Africa cannot succeed if women
lack security and access to political, economic, social
and judicial formal and informal settings.

In that context and within the framework of a
multifaceted African partnership policy, Turkey
encourages increased political and social participation,
as well as the economic empowerment of women on the
continent. To that end, Turkey implements joint projects
at the multilateral and bilateral levels with the African
Union and African countries for the capacity-building
of women in socioeconomic development. Turkey also
attaches importance to the efforts aimed at promoting
and advancing the women and peace and security
agenda in Africa. To mention one recent example,
Turkey co-hosted with the Somali federal Government
and the United Nations an event on women and peace
and security at the margins ofthe High-level Partnership
Forum: New Deal Somalia, held in Istanbul from 23 to
24 February. The meeting included the participation
of international partners and women leaders from the
central and regional Governments of Somalia and civil
society representatives. The participation of the First
Ladies of Turkey and Somalia, who delivered closing
speeches at the event, added a strong voice to the cause
of African women.

In conclusion, I would like to underscore that
Turkey will continue to work with African partners
and the international community to ensure women's
active involvement in sustaining peace, stability and
prosperity in Africa.

