Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Through
you, Madam President, France would like warmly to
thank the delegation of Angola for organizing this
open debate, which allows the Security Council, in the
context of its work on the prevention and resolution of
conflicts, to continue to add value to and to promote the
crucial role of women on these issues. I also thank all
the briefers for their precise and enlightening briefings
on the evolution of the role of women and, I would even
say, the real and potential power they possess in terms
of settling conflict in Africa.

I heard the statistics and the information presented
by the Executive Director of UN-Women, and the
message is clear: women's involvement in these issues
is crucial for achieving lasting peace. The growing
recognition of this fact is an important trend for the
Organization, a deep-rooted movement in whose favour
France is firmly committed. Our efforts should therefore
focus on the ways in which to concretely implement that
principle. What tools not only to strengthen but also
ensure active participation by women in the prevention
and settlement of conflicts? How can we ensure that
all Council resolutions - from 1325 (2000) to 2242
(2015) - are fully and effectively implemented? I will
try to answer those questions by stressing three points
today.

First, the decision-making power of women in
peace processes must be enhanced by facilitating the
participation of civil society. I remind everyone in the
Chamber today that civil society is an indispensable
force essential to any democratic process, and therefore
to every post-conflict stabilization process. It is a simple
equation: without Civil society there is no inclusivity
and, without that, there can be no lasting peace. It is
therefore necessary that Governments open the doors
to organizations representing women, if they want to
lay the foundation for sustainable development. We
are convinced that in our fight against climate change,
women will play a decisive role.

During the Council's visit to Mali, we noted the
wealth and dynamism of Malian civil society. Let
us heed it, because it has something to say about the
peace process under way. Its expertise and analysis can
serve as a valuable guide to the implementation of the
second national action plan for women and peace and
security in Mali, which aims to involve women in the
peace process. The support provided by UN-Women
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali is essential.

On a regional level, France also encourages the
African Union to continue its efforts to give more
space to women through its Gender, Peace and Security
Programme, which the African Union Special Envoy
on Women, Peace and Security Ms. Bineta Diop,
spoke about compellingly. France also calls for the full
participation of women in all ongoing and future peace
processes and dialogues in Africa. What goes for Mali
also applies to Burundi, the Great Lakes region and the
Sahel region. It is a real priority.

Finally, at the national level, France is working
closely with civil society. During the sixtieth session of
Commission on the Status of Women, which came to an
end a few days ago, Ms. Laurence Rossignol, France's
Minister for Families, Children and Women's Rights,
incorporated into her delegation nearly 20 organizations
representing women. In France, civil society is an
integral part of women's rights diplomacy.

Secondly, the role of women in the prevention and
settlement of conflicts should be increased as part of
our strategies against violent extremism and terrorism.
The African continent was tragically and repeatedly
struck by the recent attacks in Mali, Cote d'Ivoire
and Burkina Faso, as well as by the constant deadly
attacks of Boko Haram in Nigeria and Al-Shabaab in
Somalia in particular. We know women are victims of
intolerable violence on a daily basis that is an affront
to the human conscience. Terrorist groups target them,
exploit them, reduce them to sexual objects and sell
them in public squares or online. Women are objects
of a parallel economy, victims of human trafficking
for sexual exploitation purposes and the trafficking
in them finances the activities of terrorist groups.
That is the very condition of women and their rights,
which are denied. Above all, we must give women the
means to reverse that logic of control, so they can make
decisions about their bodies, their lives and the society
in which they live. To do that, women must have access,
including in conflict situations in Africa, to sexual and
reproductive rights and health services, to education
and economic resources.

Women are not just victims of terrorist groups;
they have multiple roles to play. I am convinced that the
women and peace and security agenda must be fully
integrated into counter-terrorism strategies. The fight
against terrorism and violent extremism is a common
undertaking and, to be effective, no stakeholder should
be neglected. Women are an integral part of the fight
against terrorism and it is essential to provide them
with the necessary means to play their parts.

Finally, and thirdly, we must redouble our efforts
to reintegrate women associated with armed groups.
Women who have suffered the violence of conflict are
often marked by a considerable post-conflict stress:
they bear the stigma of sexual violence. We must
ensure that they are able to return to their societies
and their communities of origin. That return is often
violent. Husbands, families and the labour market all
reject them. Therefore, it is crucial that women who are
liberated from those armed groups should enjoy -just
like men or soldiers - disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) programmes. Similarly, it is
necessary for security sector reform (SSR) programmes
implemented in post-crisis situations to take into
account women and gender issues. Without that proper
rehabilitation, women will remain marginalized and
represent a gap in the rebuilding of societies. It is time
for DDR and SSR to become more female-oriented.
That is why France, within the framework of its
national women and peace and security programme,
covering the period 2015-2018, has contributed to
several programs in Africa, devoted to, among other
things, social cohesion, education, access to justice for
women in post-conflict situations on the continent.

The future of Africa is in the hands of its people,
especially its women. Today they continue to be
victims of the conflicts ravaging the continent, and it
is therefore up to the United Nations to give them the
tools to serve as stakeholders in the peace of tomorrow.
The Council can count on the full support of France to
assist women in post-conflict situations in Africa.

