Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): I should like to
take this opportunity to thank Angola for organizing this
important debate, and Minister Delgado for presiding
over it. We also thank the briefers for their insights.

We have made significant progress in the 15 years
since the Security Council adopted its landmark
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security. The fundamental importance of addressing
the impact of conflict on women and girls is now
widely acknowledged. We have agreed frameworks in
place. However, practical implementation lags behind,
particularly with women's participation in conflict
prevention and resolution processes. Meaningful
participation is the exception rather than the rule. That
was evident at last week's open debate on conflict
prevention in the Great Lakes region (see S/PV.7653).
Empirical evidence confirms that the meaningful
participation of women during all stages of conflict
resolution contributes strongly to preventing escalation
and sustaining peace.

Including women works. Failure to include women
in peace processes perpetuates inequality. It makes
breaking the cycle of conflict more difficult. We know
this, and yet we continue to hear arguments that women's
participation is peripheral rather than essential. We
hear cultural justifications for the exclusion of women
from the negotiating table or mediation roles, and
we are asked to delay women's involvement until the
reconciliation phase, often after an agreement has been
reached. These outdated attitudes and approaches must
be challenged.

Highlighting examples of how women have made
a difference in preventing and resolving conflict in
Africa demonstrates the practical benefits of women's
participation. Take, for example, the role that women's
groups continue to play in de-escalating and preventing
election-related violence. The establishment of women's
situation rooms and the deployment of trained female
election monitors in Senegal, Kenya, Nigeria and, most
recently, in the Central African Republic have had a
measurable impact on preventing, monitoring and
mitigating incidents of violence and intimidation.

Women's groups also play a key role in de-escalating
crises and advocating for an end to conflict. The critical
role played by the movement Women of Liberia Mass
Action for Peace in ending the conflict in that country
is well documented. Women have also mobilized to
support peace in Burundi by bringing parties together
to engage in dialogue. A nationwide network of women
mediators, established by the United Nations in close
partnership with the Ministry of the Interior and
civil society organizations, has effectively prevented
violence at the local level, dispelled false rumours and
mitigated the impact of the ongoing political crisis on
everyday people. As the mediation process in Burundi
moves forward, those gains must not be side-lined or
suppressed. The efforts of those women, undertaken
with minimal resources and at personal risk, deserve
more than our applause; they deserve support and
empowerment, because what they do works. We have
taken particular note ofthe steps called for by Ms. Paleki
Ayang to end sexual violence in South Sudan as a
necessary ingredient to rebuilding peace in her country.

We must facilitate the active contribution of
women in peace operations in Africa. We must ensure
that United Nations operations are appropriately
prepared and equipped to address the needs of women
and girls in conflict and post-conflict settings. New
Zealand lies far from the African continent, however
we strive to make a modest, practical contribution to
those efforts. New Zealand has long reflected women
and peace and security considerations in its doctrine,
policy and training for uniformed personnel serving
internationally. Last November, an all-female New
Zealand Defence Force team provided training on the
the theme "Operationalization of gender" at the Kofi
Annan International Peacekeeping Training Centre in
Ghana. The training incorporated conflict-prevention
techniques through the inclusion of women, increasing
the employment of women in conflict prevention and
resolution processes, and women's experiences of
leadership in conflict.

Our experience in gender-sensitive approaches
to community policing in post-conflict settings has
proved the value of women's participation. Female
police officers interact better with the local female
population. The presence of female personnel empowers
local women, thereby ensuring that they are not seen
only as victims but as actors and providers of safety
and security.

Regional leadership has played an important role in
African efforts to support the role of women in conflict
prevention and resolution. We commend the African
Union's Gender, Peace and Security Programme. It has
framed the integration and strengthening of the African
peace and security architecture's responsiveness to
gender issues.

Finally, we urge the Security Council to incorporate
the perspectives of women in its work as a matter of
course. We should encourage greater participation by
women in all mediation efforts and conflict-prevention
processes. It is simple: when women are included as
active participants, there is a far greater chance of
ending conflict and sustaining peace.

