The President: I thank Ms. Ayang for her briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my national
capacity as the Minister for Family and the Promotion
of Women of Angola.

It is a great honour to address the Security Council
on behalf of the Government of the Republic of Angola
and to offer some insights on the important issue
of women and peace and security, with particular
emphasis on the role of women in conflict prevention
and resolution in Africa.

I would like to express my gratitude and
appreciation to the briefers for their significant
contributions to the subject matter under consideration.
I welcome the Under-Secretary-General and Executive
Director of UN-Women, Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-
Ngcuka; the Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Mr. Taye-Brook Zerihoun; the Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Macharia
Kamau; Ambassador Tete Antonio, Permanent
Observer of the African Union; and Ms. Paleki Ayang
of the South Sudan Women's Empowerment Network.

The African continent is still engulfed in conflict
situations, some of them dragging on for more than a
generation. Civil strife and fratricidal conflicts have
greatly affected the social, economic and human
development of the continent. Besides the colonial
legacy, policies of social and political exclusion,
coupled with widespread economic inequalities and
violations of human rights, are relevant root causes of
those conflicts. Such situations have exacted a heavy
burden, primarily on the civilian populations of the
countries affected, as well as on the international
community, which has been required to intervene in
order to contain the spillover effects of the conflicts.

It is universally understood that prevention is
the most effective way to avoid the human, social
and financial costs caused by conflicts. It is also
understood that the best means to prevent conflict is to
build societies based on principles of inclusivity, with
equal rights accorded to all citizens without exclusion
or discrimination and with the prevalence of the rule of
law. It is also understood that the resolution of conflicts
should take place through the channels of dialogue,
mediation and the compatibility of diverging interests,
which is possible only when dialogue and mediation
lead to meaningful compromise and everybody's
interests are safeguarded.

The Security Council is currently dealing with a
large number of such conflicts - deploying military
means through peacekeeping operations, after the
signing of peace deals and managing post-conflict
situations. The Council has also established a number
ofpolitical special missions ofa preventive nature, and
the Secretary-General or his envoys have exercised
good offices and mediation efforts to seek to avert the
outbreak of conflicts.

In the search for more effective means to deal
with conflict situations, in 2015 the Secretary-General
launched three major peace and security reviews. They
include the High-level Independent Panel on United
Nations Peace Operations, the Advisory Group of
Experts for the Review of Peacebuilding Architecture
and the global study on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security.

The reviews agreed on the postulate that the
greatest responsibility of the international community
is the prevention of armed conflict and highlighted
the critical need for greater investment in prevention
strategies. The reviews furthermore stressed the value
added of the women and peace and security agenda
to conflict prevention and the potential for early
warning in gender-sensitive analysis by identifying
the drivers of conflict, such as changing dynamics,
namely, at family and community-level relations. It
also highlighted that conflict prevention could be
greatly improved by engaging with women, given their
grass-roots knowledge, especially in providing relevant
indicators for dealing with the threats of conflict and
for the implementation of preventive measures.

The global study on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) recognizes the importance of enhancing
the role of women and of their participation at all
phases and levels ofpeace processes, given its potential
for accelerating the attainment of solutions to conflict
and the sustainability of peace. Women's participation
in the prevention and resolution of conflicts can take
on different forms and dimensions, inter alia, direct
involvement in formal peace negotiations, consultative
commissions, public policies, decision-making,
national dialogues, peacebuilding and comprehensive
reforms, leading to democratization processes.

In addition, besides ensuring the inclusion of
gender-sensitive language in peace agreements,
women can bring more than gender issues to the
negotiating table by instilling the holistic approach
that a peace process entails. The global study refers
to paradigmatic cases in Liberia, Kenya and Burundi,
where women's groups have achieved significant
results through the exercise of a strong influence in
the negotiating processes, by exerting pressure for
the start and conclusion of negotiations and, in some
cases, mobilizing for the signing of a peace agreement
or, alternatively, promoting measures to prevent a new
cycle of violence, addressing the root causes of conflict,
thereby contributing to changing power relations
in society.

Women and children are the main victims in today's
armed conflicts. Therefore, their participation in those
processes becomes a crucial issue. Their voices must be
heard in the prevention of conflict, in the negotiation of

peace settlements and in ensuring that their interests are
taken into account in post-conflict reconstruction. It is
of pivotal importance that the institutional mechanisms
established in Africa promote an environment conducive
to the meaningful participation of women in peace and
security, while reasserting the full commitments of the
African States to that objective.

The Protocol to the African Charter on Human and
Peoples' Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa, the
African Union Solemn Declaration on Gender Equality
in Africa, the African Union's five-year Gender, Peace
and Security Programme and the emphasis on women's
leadership on issues related to peace and security are
achievements translating a renewed awareness of the
essential role played by women.

Women in Angola have participated decisively
in all efforts towards the attainment of peace. The
immediate post-conflict period included women's
direct involvement in peacebuilding and national
reconstruction. Women were instrumental in providing
psychological support to the victims of the armed
conflict as counsellors of peace, national reconciliation
and social healing. The Government established
counselling centres to raise awareness on their
economic, social, political and civil rights and as a tool
for families' participation in the country's development.

Through partnerships with civil society
organizations, efforts have been deployed in order
to strengthen women's participation in the country's
political and economic life. The non-governmental
organization Roots of Peace was created with the aim
of bringing together women from all political parties
represented in Parliament to participate in the efforts
to consolidate peace and democracy. Angola joined
the campaign He for She, which is aimed at raising the
awareness of men and boys for the eradication of all
forms of gender-based violence.

Angola has been playing a role in the preservation
of peace and security in Africa, especially in the Great
Lakes region, in promoting a culture of peace based on
experience gained in conflict-prevention processes, in
the promotion of dialogue and national reconciliation.
Today, we have many women at all levels of the army and
the police. In my delegation, we have a woman brigadier.
Women also participate in electoral observer missions.

Finally, it is our expectation that the new awareness
on the key role women play in social, political and
economic life will lead to a world where women can
effectively carry out their responsibilities and fully
exercise of their rights. We are sure that if strong
political will and commitment are fully brought into
action towards the attainment of such goals, women
will make a tangible contribution to building a more
just and peaceful world.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.

