Mr. Emvula (Namibia): Allow me to thank the
briefers for their insights. I wish to thank you, Madam
President, and your country, Angola, the President
of the Security Council for the month of March, for
organizing this open debate on the role of women in
the prevention and resolution of conflict in Africa,
a subject that is close to our hearts in Africa. I wish
also to extend Namibia's appreciation to you for
focusing your presidency on issues that are important
to the African continent, the Middle East and other
parts of the world - issues that need the Council's
renewed attention.

Namibia associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

As we focus on this subject matter, it is important
to recognize that more must be done to fully engage
women in conflict resolution and mediation. Women's
full participation in peacemaking is fundamental
to building peace and security. The Charter of the
United Nations not only committed its members to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
but also unequivocally reaffirmed fundamental human
rights and the equal rights of men and women. Despite
this strong commitment, the understanding of the
impact of armed conflict on women and girls and the
role of women in conflict resolution and peacebuilding
developed slowly within the United Nations.

Under the presidency of Namibia, the Security
Council adopted resolution 1325 (2000) on women and
peace and security on 31 October 2000. The adoption
of that resolution marked another milestone in the
process of elevating women's role in peace and security
to a high political agenda and urged an enhanced role
for women in preventing conflict, promoting peace
and assisting in post-conflict reconstruction and the
incorporation of a gender perspective into United
Nations operations. Through resolution 1325 (2000),
the increased participation ofwomen in peace processes
was recognized as a goal for the first time in the United
Nations history.

It is important to note that through the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), the conventional impression
of women as helpless victims of war was replaced by
an understanding of the important role women play
in fostering peace and security. We believe that when
women are involved as agents of peace, sexual violence
against women and children in war and conflict
situations can be addressed. Resolution 1325 (2000)
is the first-ever resolution adopted by the Security
Council that specifically addresses the disproportionate
impact of war on women and stresses the significance
of women's equal participation and full involvement in
all efforts to maintain and promote sustainable peace
and security.

Namibia attaches great importance to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). In the region
of the Southern African Development Community
(SADC), Namibia was the first country to ratify the
SADC Protocol on Gender and Development in October
2009. The Protocol calls upon members States to put
in place measures to ensure that women have equal
representation and participation in key decision-making
positions and peacebuilding processes. This explains
why Namibia contributes one of the largest female
contingents to the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur. Namibian women in
peacekeeping missions have demonstrated remarkable
commitment, high competencies and aptitudes for
innovation. Today, Namibian women are also steadily
rising through the ranks and expanding their influence
at an ever-increasing rate, serving bravely at national,
regional and global levels in many different ways. More
critically, they serve and sacrifice as courageously as
any man out there, as they did during our struggle
for liberation.

At the global level, it is high time that we establish
and implement an ambitious but achievable agenda
for action on women in armed conflict and allow
an increased role for women in the peace process.
The provisions of resolution 1325 (2000) must be
framed in State obligations to address structural and
systemic gender inequality and discrimination through
comprehensive legislation, policies and institutional
reforms. Our work and advocacy should now be aimed
at the everyday and we should never give up. We must
succeed, as we cannot afford to fail our next generation
of women.

History has clearly demonstrated that those women
who have been afforded the opportunity to participate
in peacekeeping missions have shown that courage
and leadership recognize no gender, as women who
participate in peacekeeping missions do so facing
the same risks and are prepared to die, live and lose
limbs just like their male counterparts. We must
constantly bear in mind that resolution 1325 (2000)
and subsequent resolutions, especially resolution 2242
(2015), require us to take robust action at the national
level to put policies in place that will pave the way
for international deployment of female peacekeepers.
Equal to the same task, it is our obligation to implement
the recommendations of the global study on resolution
1325 (2000).

We have just adopted the new 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1), which encompasses our collective targets that will
not only have a life-changing impact on hundreds of
millions of women, but will also help to create a better
world that is more equitable. However, its effective
implementation will depend on its simplicity and its
transformational power to sanction, within its life
span, an immense global response to the most pressing
issues of women empowerment and, more importantly,
the full participation of women in peace and security.
Resolution 1325 (2000) is for the benefit of the whole
human race, and has been intended to be so since its
adoption in October 2000. It should be regarded as
a global objective that reflects peace, equality and
development. Its effective implementation in good faith
should not be half-hearted.

