Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): On behalfofthe Malaysian
delegation, Ijoin previous speakers in welcoming you
to the Security Council, Madam President. I wish to
thank you and the Angolan presidency for convening
today's open debate focused on the role of women in
conflict resolution and prevention in Africa. Allow me
also to express my appreciation to the briefers, namely,
Under-Secretary-General Mlambo-Ngcuka, Assistant
Secretary-General Zerihoun and Ambassador Kamau,
as well as Ambassador Antonio, for their contributions
to this discusion. I also pay tribute to Ms. Paleki Ayang,
whose insights and personal experience in the conflict
situation in South Sudan lends greater persuasion and
legitimacy to the role of women.

Malaysia associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Iran on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

This open debate is timely and important follow-
up to the high-level review of resolution 1325 (2000),
on women and peace and security, which took place in
October of last year. On that occasion, Malaysiajoined
members of the Security Council, States Members of
the United Nations and the Organizaiton in reaffirming
the importance of this agenda, as well as of renewing
our commitment to strengthening the role of women
in establishing and preserving peace and security with
greater inclusivity.

The important role and potential contribution of
women to conflict resolution and prevention can no
longer be sidelined or ignored. The situation in Africa
requires a wider aperture for us to assess what strategies
have worked and what challenges need to be overcome
to ensure that women are allowed to fulfil their potential
as agents of peace and security. In that connection,
the October 2015 global study on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) provides a rich empirical
resource for us to drawn upon on the value of women's
contributions to peace and security. We would like
to highlight three areas in which we believe that the
involvement of women would greatly enhance conflict-
prevention and resolution efforts, namely, political
participation, early-warning mechanisms and building
long-term resilience against conflict.

Malaysia believes that increasing meaningful
political participation by women is crucial to ending
current conflicts and preventing future ones. The
Security Council has consistently emphasized that
achieving sustainable resolutions to armed conflicts
cannot be achieved through military means, but only
through peaceful political processes. However, such
processes have almost always been led exclusively
by men - women and their voices have for far too
long been excluded. Malaysia fully supports efforts
to increase the participation of women in political
processes, including placing women in decision-making
positions that can influence negotiation outcomes.
Apart from the necessary training and capacity-
building to sharpen women's political leadership, that
also requires political will on the part of negotiating
parties, mediators and organizers of peace processes
to actively include women at all stages of negotiations.
In addition, providing avenues for women's civil
society organizations to contribute to, and monitor
the implementation of, peace processes will also help
ensure that women's perspectives are reflected.

An important element of conflict prevention is the
ability to detect early warning signs and to act upon
them. In conflict situations, there is ample evidence
of women being able to provide insights into changing
dynamics, especially at the community and grass-roots
levels. We must encourage actors on the ground to tap
into such insights. Strong early-warning mechanisms
that take into account gender-sensitive indicators and
allow for the confidential channelling of information
would greatly aid conflict-prevention efforts. In that
regard, we welcome initiatives such as the setting up
of women's situations rooms to monitor, prevent and
mitigate electoral-related violence, which warrant
continued support.

The long-term consolidation of peace and security
requires addressing the root causes of conflict and
placing women at the heart of peacebuilding efforts. In
our view, establishing national legal frameworks that
uphold gender equality and protect the rights of women
stands the best chance of staving off a relapse into
conflict. At the same time, socio-economic recovery
strategies that provide livelihoods and educational
opportunities for women and girls will go a long way
towards building community resilience.

More broadly, we believe that peacebuilding
activities should also emphasize women's empowerment
so that they can become key contributors in the political,
economic and social spheres. In that regard, we welcome
the Peacebuilding Commission's initiative in developing
a gender strategy to strengthen its engagement in and
support for gender equality in peacebuilding activities.
As a current member of the Commission, Malaysia is

committed to engaging proactively in developing the
strategy and looks forward to its adoption as soon
as June.

Efforts to build inclusive and resilient communities
are especially crucial as the whole world, including
Africa, continues to grapple with the rising threat of
violent extremism. Boko Haram is a continuing menace
in the region, terrorizing civilian populations across
national borders, including by targeting women and
girls. At the same time, we condemn the unacceptable
exploitation of women and children as suicide bombers.
We underscore the importance of ensuring that
measures aimed at countering violent extremism take
into account the protection of vulnerable groups that
have been coerced or manipulated.

The full realization of the potential of women
for conflict prevention and resolution requires the
cooperation of the entire international community,
including Member States, regional organizations, the
United Nations and civil society. A comprehensive
and coherent approach, led by the United Nations, that
promotes the role of women in conflict prevention and
resolution efforts, is key to the effective implementation
of this agenda. In that context, Malaysia supports and
is encouraged by the various measures initiated by the
Secretary-General and the United Nations system to
promote greater representation of women in the senior
leadership, mediating teams and peacekeeping missions
of the United Nations, as well as better coordination
among United Nations entities in mainstreaming the
issue of women and peace and security.

We also support a more in-depth consideration
of women's perspectives throughout the work of the
Security Council, including through the Informal
Experts Group on Women, Peace and Security set up
under resolution 2242 (2015). Furthermore, we see
benefits in regular consultations between the Council
and the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union (AU), and between the United Nations and AU
counterparts on women and peace and security, aimed
at strengthening cooperation on our shared goals of
the protection and empowerment of women in order to
promote and security.

I would like to conclude by emphasizing that we
will all come closer to achieving our shared goal of a
more peaceful and stable world when we encourage
women to play their rightful role in peace and security
efforts. Malaysia remains fully committed to doing its
part to realize that mission.

