Mr. Suarez Borges (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I should like to welcome
the presence of the Angolan Minister for Family
and the Promotion of Women, Ms. Maria Filomena
Delgado, and to thank the presidency for its initiative
of convening this important debate and for preparing
the concept paper (S/2016/219, annex). We would like
also to express our gratitude to Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-
Ngcuka; Mr. Taye-Brook Zerihoun; Ambassadors
Macharia Kamau and Tete Antonio; and Ms. Paleki
Ayang for their briefings.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela associates
itself with the statement to be made by the representative
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

In the three global studies carried out last year
on the review of the peacebuilding architecture,
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
peacekeeping operations, there is reference to the fact
that priority should be attached to the prevention of
conflicts. The Global Study on the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) states:

"Conflict prevention and resolution, as practiced
today, continues to focus on neutralizing potential
spoilers and perpetrators of violence, rather than
investing in resources for peace".

The study added that it was key to take into account
the fact that militarism sustains and perpetuates
structural inequalities, which disenfranchise women
and girls from public goods and entrench exclusion and
marginalization, which exacerbate inequality.

Venezuela fully agrees with what was said earlier.
That is why we stress the fact that prevention and
the peaceful resolution of disputes is always the best
and most appropriate mechanism for averting the
harmful and devastating effects of armed conflict on
the civilian population, especially on women, girls
and boys. For that reason, we are convinced of the
need to redouble our efforts and muster the necessary
will to find political solutions to situations that would
make it possible to create an environment conducive
to the empowerment and development of women, with
special emphasis on promoting national capacities
and increasing assistance, with a view to helping the
countries affected to overcome the difficulties and
underlying causes that lead to armed conflict, including
exclusion, poverty, social inequity and lack of access to
basic resources and services.

It is important to highlight here the fact that
women, including girls, suffer in a disproportionate
manner from the harmful consequences of war owing
to the violence perpetrated against them by various
armed groups, which is reflected in the very painful
statistics on victims. Women and girls represent half of
the population affected, and therefore all efforts made
to prevent their exposure to harm will be an investment
in a more humane future.

Thus peace processes provide us with an ideal
scenario for putting an end to violence and to the root
causes of conflict. Including women therefore represents
a strategic opportunity to address comprehensively and
from a gender-based perspective the shifts that will
that lead to lasting peace, development, justice and
social equality.

Since resolution 1325 (2000) was adopted 15 years
ago, and following subsequent resolutions on the issue
of women and peace and security, significant progress
has been made in the normative area, in the United
Nations, regional organizations and Member States.
Notwithstanding this, there remain major challenges
before us, among which I would highlight the fact
that women in situations of armed conflict continue
to suffer in a repeated and systematic manner from
sexual violence used as a tactic of war and continue
to be underrepresented in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts.

In this context, we condemn the violence unleashed
by terrorist groups, which impacts with unusual cruelty
the Middle East and Africa. The main victims of this
violence are women, boys and girls, as those groups
use sexual exploitation and abuse as a strategy for
their criminal action, in clear violation of international
humanitarian law and human rights law. In this context,
it is vital to fully respect, in keeping with international
law, the ban on third parties supplying weapons and
financial support to those groups. In this way it will
be possible to limit their operational capacity, thereby
reducing the harmful and irreparable consequences of
armed conflict on civilians, especially on women, girls
and boys.

The optimization of efforts geared to the effective
implementation of resolutions related to the issue
of women and peace and security requires effective
coordination among all States concerned; the various
United Nations bodies with competence in the area, in
keeping with their respective mandates; and with the
various regional and subregional mechanisms that deal
with this issue. These efforts and initiatives must take
into account how women can participate in each of the
different national contexts and consider the prevailing
political models as well as the social, cultural and
religious structures of each society, so as to respond in
the most appropriate manner to each of these specific
contexts. All of these actions must be based on respect
for national sovereignty.

A number of studies have shown that in the area of
peace and security, the percentage of aid earmarked for
promoting gender equality and equity is well below what
would be necessary in order to fulfil the commitments
made in this area. That is why it is very important to
provide sufficient resources for the empowerment
and training of women and for the preparation and
implementation of national action plans on women
and peace and security. Moreover, it is imperative to
provide support for promoting the participation of
women in local initiatives for peacebuilding, addressing
not just their technical capacities and ability to have an
impact, but also their basic needs and security. In that
context, we urge political missions and peacekeeping
operations to continue to promote the participation
of gender advisers on the protection of women in the
various missions carried out by the United Nations,
which should recognize gender mainstreaming as a key
part of their responsibilities. Moreover, it should also
be borne in mind that the implementation of this policy
will have positive and practical impacts in the progress
on overcoming the various obstacles that women face
in peacebuilding and conflict-prevention activities, as
well as in the oversight of peace agreements.
We wish to conclude by affirming that, for
Venezuela, women play a leading role and are an essential
driving force in the struggle for the emancipation of
our peoples. To that end, we wish to reiterate that, at
the global level, women are called upon to assume
positions with equal opportunities and in conditions
leading development and peacebuilding processes
that are inclusive, equitable and transforming. In that
historic and crucial process, Venezuela reiterates its
commitment to continue to work resolutely towards
achieving these goals.

