Mr. Ashykbayev (Kazakhstan): We thank the
presidency of Angola for focusing attention on the role
of women in the prevention and resolution of conflict
in Africa. My delegation would also like to support
and commend the African Union's laudable initiatives,
including the initiative to silence all guns in Africa by
2020 and the African Peace and Security Architecture
aimed at strengthening capacities for peacebuilding,
conflict prevention and response, post-conflict
rehabilitation and development, with a focus on women
and girls.
The recently concluded twenty-sixth African Union
Summit, at which 2016 was designated the African
Year of Human Rights, with its particular focus on
the rights of women, called for special attention to be
paid to the atrocities inflicted on women in times of
peace and conflict. The much-welcomed verdict of the
International Criminal Court on 22 March sends a clear
signal that the widespread and systematic use of sexual
and gender-based violence as a weapon of war must
be eradicated - hence, the need for enhancing gender
equality and empowerment by implementing resolution
1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions. Capacity-
building is also necessary to achieve peace and security
and a broad range of the Sustainable Development
Goals in Africa.

The conflicts in Africa engulf neighbouring
regions as well, with grave consequences. There is
therefore a need to have closer collaboration among
the African Union, the United Nations and African
subregional organizations, as well as the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence against Women, and for Children and Armed
Conflict, so that the new forms of hybrid peacekeeping
operations are comprehensive and have clear mandates
for the protection of civilians, especially women and
girls. All operations must have well-qualified gender
specialists in senior positions and adequately staffed
gender teams integrated within the military, police and
civilian components of peacekeeping operations. A
gender focus must be intrinsic to the human rights, rule
of law, transitional justice and security sector reform
units in multidimensional operations.

Troop- and police-contributing countries should
impart special gender-sensitive training and include
more women in their national deployments to field
agencies, especially in conflict zones. We call for the
full implementation of the Secretary-General's zero-
tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse by
United Nations personnel. We are confident that those
important mechanisms will create the conditions
necessary to prevent and peacefully resolve conflicts
in Africa. At present, Kazakhstan is contributing by
fielding its highly qualified military observers with
gender competence to several peacekeeping missions
in Africa. We hope to expand this deployment in
the future.

The international community needs to provide
greater support to African countries to involve women
in grass-roots organizations working for a culture
of peace, organizing political awareness and peace
education, promoting community-based reconciliation,
and ending all forms of impunity. Training has to be
offered to women engaging in social reconstruction and
integration activities, such as education, health care
and social services. Women have a critical contribution
to make in the management and security of camps for
refugees and internally displaced persons, especially
vulnerable women and girls, and in the demilitarization,
demobilization and reintegration processes.

While progress has been witnessed in many
countries at the grass-roots level, there is a stark deficit
in the number of women included in formal regional and
international peace negotiations and agreements, policy
and decision-making, and in planning service delivery
for their countries. These gaps in implementation
need to be bridged together with host Governments,
Department of Political Affairs missions, peacekeeping
operations, international organizations and development
agencies. In that regard, in 2015 Kazakhstan and the
United Nations Development Programme launched
a project to update professional skills to improve
productivity, employment and development in support
of the delivery of development assistance to countries in
Africa through capacity-building training. The project,
in which more than 70 specialists from African States
participated - most of them women - focused on oil
and gas exploration, public health and agriculture. The
women of Africa are ready to be involved and actively
implement national, regional and global programmes
as part of post-conflict recovery; however, they
need opportunity.

Kazakhstan supports the international community's
implementation of comprehensive measures against
violent extremism. At the seventieth session of the
General Assembly, the President of Kazakhstan,
Mr. Nursultan Nazarbayev, proposed the establishment
of a global anti-terrorism network under the auspices of
the United Nations, as well as the creation of universal
mechanisms to bring perpetrators to justice. He also
underlined that

"humankind needs to shift its focus from routine
conflict prevention and post-conflict rehabilitation
to a new development strategy that would make
such conflicts meaningless" (A/70/PVI3, p. 47).

He proposed that the United Nations formulate a
2045 global development strategy as a vision for the
United Nations' centenary. Another initiative is to
reserve 1 per cent of the defence budget of each United
Nations Member State, annually, for the Sustainable
Development Goals Fund.
Kazakhstan believes that it is of vital importance
that the Security Council maintains as a high priority
the commitment to protect women and girls. My country
pledges to be a strong voice on their behalf.

