Mr. Menkveld (Netherlands): At the outset, I
would like to thank Angola for convening this open
debate on the role of women in conflict prevention and
resolution in Africa.

Nowadays there are many African women who
are empowered, going to school, joining the workforce
and sustaining their families. It is very encouraging
to see that more women are being nominated and
appointed to leadership positions, such as Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General and Force
Commanders. In various positions and among civilian
staff of the United Nations, the number of women has
increased substantially. If, in the near future, we are
also able to increase the number of women among the
ranks of the military and the police, we will make
more measurable steps towards sustainable conflict
prevention and resolution.

But we also see a backlash and fear that, as the global
study emphasized, women's empowerment threatens
the social fabric. We see that in many conflict areas
across Africa women still are not involved in formal
conflict prevention and resolution. Women in those
areas daily face risks and violence, sexual exploitation
and abuse.

Violent extremism is on the increase. The
disturbing trend in the use of sexual violence as a tactic
of terror and the mass-scale violence against women
are examples of the specific targeting of women by
extremist groups. As a consequence, women and
girls often face stigmatization from their families and
community members. We need to stop those disturbing
developments now. We can do so by increasing
women's roles in conflict prevention and resolution and
by emphasizing that women are also leaders and agents
of change.

By integrating gender perspectives in conflict
prevention and resolution, we can build just, sustainable
and peaceful societies everywhere - societies where
women are safe and go to school, where women are
actively involved in the future of democratic societies
and where women actively participate in politics. Last
but not least, in such societies women have equal
economic opportunities to take care of their families
and communities.

We have seen the results of the efforts of powerful
African women, such as Nobel Price Winner Leymah
Gbowee, who demanded peace in Liberia during the
peace process in 2003 by starting a women's peace
movement. There are many more agents of change
like her.

The topic of women and peace and security is
one of the priorities of the foreign and development
policy of the Netherlands. It is time to put words into
action. We believe that we can improve women's roles
in conflict prevention and resolution in Africa through
three important pathways to change.

First we need to exchange knowledge and
good practices on conflict prevention and women's
participation from the local to the international level.
We need to prevent conflicts by bringing together
diplomatic, development and economic actors
and perspectives. The Netherlands supports the
implementation of the national action plan of Mali and
has appointed gender experts to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali and to the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

We can also achieve change and peace by supporting
and working with civil society. Our new third national
action plan is an example of that. Together with our civil
society partners, we are contributing to an enabling
environment in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and South Sudan so that women can meaningfully
participate in conflict prevention and resolution,
peacebuilding, protection and relief and recovery. If
we want to improve women's roles in prevention and
conflict resolution, we have to extensively engage
local communities.

While acknowledging that States are primarily
responsible for the prevention of conflicts, we also see
the shared responsibility of the international community
and civil society to build a more secure world. To give
an example, within the framework of our national
action plan, women's organizations in the Sudan, at the
grass-roots level, have convinced conflicting groups
and tribes to put down the weapons and start a dialogue.

The third pathway to change is to increase the
protection of women. We cannot solely focus on
women's participation without ensuring them protection
and safety. The prevention of, and protection from,
sexual violence is an issue that continues to need our
full attention.

In October 2015, we Member States attended the
open debate (see S/PV.7533) on women and peace and
security. We shared our dreams and hopes for women
in conflict environments. But we need to rise up and
translate those hopes to practical improvements. We
need to move beyond the rhetoric. We can do that
together by protecting women, working with civil
society and exchanging knowledge and good practices.

In conclusion, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
continues to play its role as a partner for peace, justice
and development. The Netherlands continues to
strongly support the implementation of resolutions 2171
(2014), 1325 (2000), 2242 (2015) and the other follow-
up resolutions on women and peace and security.

