Mr. Kamau: I wish to thank you, Madam, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council today in my
capacity as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
during this important and timely open debate on the
role of women in conflict prevention and resolution in
Africa. I also thank you, Madam, for providing us with
a comprehensive concept paper (S/2016/2l9, annex) to
guide the debate.

Since its establishment, the Peacebuilding
Commission has supported the idea that women must
participate in peacebuilding processes and contribute
to decision-making in the reconstruction of their
countries. The Peacebuilding Commission strongly
believes that women's participation is crucial to
inclusive, participatory and sustainable peacebuilding
processes. The report of the Advisory Group of Experts
on the review of peacebuilding architecture strongly
reaffirms that ensuring women's full participation
in peacebuilding processes is "crucial to the success
of economic recovery, political legitimacy and social
cohesion" (5/2015/490, annex, para. 56).

That understanding of women's role in
peacebuilding is widely shared. The Security Council,
in its landmark resolution 1325 (2000) and in subsequent
resolutions, including resolution 2242 (2015), adopted
by the present Council, has given us a broad normative
framework that I believe is universally supported by
Member States. Yet as the report from the Advisory
Group of Experts and as the global study on resolution
1325 (2000) reminded us last year, much remains to
be done in practice to turn global commitments into
reality on the ground.

That is also true of the work of Peacebuilding
Commission. During its entire lifetime, the Commission
has demonstrated a keen interest in gender equality and
women's empowerment. Mirroring international policy
developments, particularly the presentation of the
Secretary-General's report (S/2010/466) on women and
peacebuilding, and including his Seven-Point Action
Plan, in 2010, the Commission developed its own
declaration on women's economic empowerment for
peacebuilding in 2013. Equally, the Security Council
has adopted various resolutions on women and peace
and security since the late 2000s.

While the Peacebuilding Commission's country-
specific instruments of engagement recognize the
role of women in peacebuilding, translating formal
commitments into concrete action on the ground has
not been as systematic and efficient as we would like
it to be. The high expectations for the transformative
change and strengthening of women's participation in
peace and security anticipated in resolution 1325 (2000)
has not been fully delivered.

Yet despite the persistent exclusion of women from
the loci ofpower and influence in many societies across
the world, women have continued to make a significant
contribution to developing inclusive approaches to
security, peacebuilding and conflict prevention in their
own unique ways. As such, women remain a resource
that has not been effectively utilized or enabled to build
sustainable peace.

Hindrances to women's participation in peace and
security include cynical cultural practices that maintain
patriarchal attitudes and norms; insufficient political
will across the board to fully implement resolution
1325 (2000) and associated resolutions; militarized
interventions and approaches to conflict resolution
that tend to crowd out other organic initiatives within
society that help build resilience, particularly during
peacekeeping and countering violent extremism,
which put women at a disadvantage; and the absence of
gender-sensitive economic recovery following conflict,
which poses a barrier to women empowerment during
transitions. Similarly, top-down bureaucratic processes
in implementing the women and peace and security
agenda have neglected the local ownership aspects
that a complementary bottom-up approach would help
bring about.

Those manifest bottlenecks have compelled
the Peacebuilding Commission to embark upon the
development of its first gender strategy, with the
support of the Peacebuilding Support Office and UN-
Women. The strategy, which we expect to adopt before
July, spells out specific recommendations to strengthen
the substantive, cross-cutting integration of gender
perspectives in all Peacebuilding Commission country-
specific thematic and strategic engagement. It identifies
thematic priority areas such as women's participation in
peacebuilding/mediation processes and prevention. It
also identifies post-conflict governance and leadership,
the rule of law, economic empowerment and access to
basic social infrastructure - while emphasizing that
men and boys need to be engaged as partners.

The Peacebuilding Commission will continue
to use its unique leverage to advocate actively for
dedicated technical expertise on gender equality and
peacebuilding, as well as dedicated funding within
the United Nations, and also among its national and
international partners. The combination of senior
leadership commitment, specialized expertise and
dedicated financial resources is what can make a
real difference. Her Excellency Ms. Julia Duncan-
Cassel, Minister for Gender, Children and Social
Protection of Liberia, reminded us just last week, in her
address to the Commission on the Status of Women,
that Liberia has been able to make great strides towards
sustaining peace and empowering women economically
thanks to the commitment of the national authorities,
the in-country expertise from the UN-Women country
office and catalytic funding from the Peacebuilding
Fund. We should also not forget that Liberia is a country
governed by a woman, and it was that woman who led
the country out of a very difficult transition from war
to peace, and the same woman who steered the country
through another transition, a very difficult one, from a
horrific epidemic to normalcy.

In Burundi, as stated by the Executive Diretor of
UN-Women this morning, the same combination of
leadership, strategic funding from the Peacebuilding
Fund and in-country expertise allowed UN-Women to
support a network of 534 women mediators working
across all municipalities. By their count, women
mediators addressed over 5,000 conflicts at the local level
in 2015 alone. They have been tackling familial, social
and land-related conflicts at the community level, which
can easily become politicized and risk destabilizing
communities. The mediators promote non-violence and
dialogue, and work to counter rumours and exaggerated
fears with verifiable information. Clearly, the inclusion
of women is essential for achieving lasting peace in
Burundi, and the experiences of the women mediators
could be instructive for all stakeholders involved in
ongoing dialogue processes.

Peace will be sustainable only with the participation
of all the relevant national stakeholders, including civil
society. The recent adoption by the Security Council of
resolution 2250 (2015), on youth, peace and security,
was an important step towards greater inclusivity in
peacebuilding. The role of young women and men in
conflict prevention and resolution and in peacebuilding
is finally getting the recognition that it deserves. The
Peacebuilding Commission also firmly believes that
young women are central actors, not just for the future
of their countries but also for the present - starting
right now.

In conclusion, let me reiterate that the
Peacebuilding Commission is committed to advocating
on behalf of women and young people and to using its
intergovernmental approach and its convening power
and leverage to engage national partners, to open up
space for their participation and to help ensure that they
receive the acknowledgment and dedicated support
that they deserve. The Peacebuilding Commission
gender strategy is an important step in the process of
operationalizing a transformative women and peace
and security agenda.

IfI may, Madam President, I would like to add a
special personal emphasis on the issue of gender. I have
just come from Kenya, and I have witnessed again the
ruin that 100 years of colonial and post-colonial policies
have caused to the place of women in our culture and
in our society. Women in Kenya, even today, 50 years
after independence, remain firmly at the bottom on
the rungs of social progress and empowerment. I
cannot emphasize enough how conscious I am of the
fact that gender is a central factor in the delivery of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) and the better future that we
all want.

Realizing the ambition of a better more inclusive
future and a sustainable world that achieves sustainable
development - with sustainable peace and security for
all at its core - will require that we respond forcefully
and with determination to the issue and condition
of women and girls in our societies. The centrality
of gender issues within families and communities,
especially with regard to the protection and promotion
of girls and women, cannot be gainsaid. That is equally
true within, and among, nations. That is why we are
having this debate here today in the Security Council.
But words without actions are shameful and futile.
Global peace and harmony are intrinsically tied up with
the promotion and protection of the human rights of
women and girls everywhere. We must act accordingly.
Let there be no doubt about that.

