Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka: Last year, the Secretary-
General identified four priority themes common to all
three reviews on peace and security that were undertaken
in 2014. This Council debate addresses the relationship
between two of the four themes, specifically the need to
focus on the prevention of violence and to pay attention
to the critical importance of gender equality.

The critical role of women in conflict prevention is
increasingly being acknowledged even though it is still
rarely visible. It is often missing from discussions about
peace and security that take place at the highest levels,
which is why this briefing is most appreciated. Today,
I am pleased to share specific examples of conflict
prevention led by women from across the African
continent. These examples are about the deliberate
prevention of violence while ensuring gender equality,
and are not unique to Africa. Women in the Middle East,
Central and Eastern Europe, Asia and Latin America
have made similar contributions.

I will start with women's situation rooms, which
monitor and prevent election-related Violence. In the
past five years, women's situation rooms have been
established in Guinea-Bissau, Kenya, Liberia, Mali,
Senegal, Sierra Leone and Uganda. The model is being
replicated in a growing list of countries across the
African continent, with our support. These mechanisms
are established during the electoral period to train
and deploy female observers and monitors, receive
and analyse hundreds of complaints and reports of
violence or intimidation, and refer those to the relevant
authorities for follow-up. Often, nationally renowned
women are mobilized to engage with heads of political
parties, security sector institutions, and leaders offaith-
based entities to respond to situations as they arise.
They save lives, diffuse and de-escalate dangerous
situations. They support women candidates and fight
discrimination against women in the electoral process
and gender-based election violence and harassment.

Our research also shows that women play a key role
in de-escalating tensions and preventing radicalization
in their families. In Mali, the most important influence

for the successful reintegration of many ex-combatants
has been the women in their families and communities.
In the broader Sahel region, the income status and
resilience of women have been boosted by programmes
that address the gender gap in access to land and other
productive assets. It is that status and resilience that
have provided a safeguard against radicalization and
economic, political and climate shocks.

In poor areas in Kenya, women's organizations are
dedicated to working to identify and prevent the spread
of radicalization. Mothers are using their influence to
help their sons and their peers to resist recruitment by
armed groups. Their success saves lives. In Burundi,
hundreds of women mediators are working tirelessly
to address local conflicts, and they prevent and stop
the escalation of tensions. Women's empowerment
contributes to our defence against militarism and
violent extremism, and requires our greater support
and investment.

In 2015, we learned from the global study on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, which highlighted that countries
with lower levels of gender inequality are less likely to
resort to the use of force, and that the security of women
is one of the most reliable indicators of the peacefulness
of a State. We also learned that the spending patterns
of women contribute directly to post-conflict social
recovery. Women are the first to notice attacks on
their rights and freedoms and the militarization and
radicalization of individuals in their families and
communities. They possess important insights and
intelligence that are key to decision-making.

Revamping and strengthening the prevention work
of the United Nations must include more frequent
deliberations of the Council that are informed by the
perspectives and analysis of women on the ground.
That is why I am pleased today to brief the Council
alongside Ms. Anyang today, who is one of our civil-
society partners in resilience and conflict prevention
among women in South Sudan. The practice of hearing
from civil society representatives is now common in the
thematic debates of the Council, and that is important.
However, it should be extended to consultations on
country-specific situations, the work of the Council's
subsidiary bodies, and during Council visiting missions.

For example, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
should regularly consult with women's organizations
to ensure that our efforts to counter violent extremism
are not shutting down space and funds for the civil
society actors who are key to prevention and saving
lives. Council members should demand a robust gender
analysis in the reports they receive and in all atrocity-
prevention efforts. The new Informal Experts Group
on Women, Peace and Security, which held its first
meeting last month, is an important step in ensuring
consistent and quality information flows to the Council.
UN-Women is proud to serve as the secretariat for that
new Group.

Existing early warning systems should find
ways of linking directly with women-led monitoring
and prevention initiatives at the local level, which
are are happy to facilitate. Women are critical to
intelligence-gathering. Women need to be resourced
so that they do more. The commitment to allocating
at least 15 per cent of peacebuilding funds to gender
equality and women's empowerment must become a
reality, and extended to all efforts at preventing and
countering violent extremism. Women's organizations
must receive the political and financial support needed
to engage in violence prevention, mediation, and
diplomacy. Investing in gender equality as part of
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) is the best recipe for
structural, long-term prevention.

The work of women peacemakers takes many
forms in Africa and elsewhere, but their commitment is
consistent, dependable and universal. It is also directly
linked to strengthening efforts in conflict prevention,
which is so needed in the face oftoday's complex peace
and security environment.

