Mr. Krzywosadzki (Poland): I would like to thank
the Angolan presidency for convening today's debate
on this important topic relating to the maintenance of
peace and security in Africa.

Poland aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union. I would,
however, like to add a couple of remarks from our
national perspective.

As underlined in the excellent concept paper
(S/2016/219, annex) prepared by the delegation of
Angola for this debate, the role of women in the
prevention and resolution of conflicts in Africa simply
cannot be overestimated. As shown by various studies,
the participation of women in conflict prevention, as
well as in peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts,
has a positive impact on the potential success of those
efforts. There is no doubt that the role of women in the
African continent is growing. They play a key role in
many economic and social activities. The increasing
number of women's associations - the positive
example of Ethiopia can be cited - should also be
seen as an important sign of the growing position of
African women.

There are also positive developments in the political
area. Rwanda now leads the Inter-Parliamentary
Union's Women in Parliaments ranking, with more
than 63 per cent of the members in the lower house of
the Parliament being women. Poland also welcomes
the increasing role of African women leaders, such as
President Ellen J ohnson- Sirleaf of Liberia and President
Ameenah Gurib-Fakim of Mauritius. It is no wonder
that the African Union has declared the current decade
as the African Women's Decade.

While recognizing the progress in the situation of
African women, we have to bear in mind the challenges
ahead ofus. As stated in resolution 2242 (2015), adopted
in October 2015, the relatively low number of women
in senior positions in political, peace and security-
related institutions can have a detrimental impact on
the maintenance of international peace and security.
We need more women engaged in all United Nations-
led activities, especially in peacekeeping operations
and peacebuilding. We also need a predictable and
sustained funding mechanism for the women and peace
and security agenda. That is why Poland has decided to
earmark a minimum of 15 per cent of all of our future
funding for the Peacebuilding Fund to be dedicated
to women's specific needs, in particular to advancing
gender equality in post-conflict situations.

Let us not forget, however, the fate of women as
victims of conflicts. That is why Poland recognizes the
importance of and plans to sign the Kigali Principles
on the Protection of Civilians. We also call for the
strict implementation of the zero-tolerance policy
for acts of sexual exploitation and abuse committed
by United Nations peacekeeping personnel. In that
regard, it is also important to achieve a high level of
coherence among all of the ongoing reviews of United
Nations peacekeeping operations, the peacebuilding
architecture and the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).

Let me end by stressing that tapping into
the immense potential of women is essential for
sustaining peace. We hope that the entire international
community, including the United Nations, will support
and complement those efforts with the aim of achieving
success in ensuring peace and prosperity in Africa.

