Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): I thank Angola for
its constant focus on our continent and for convening
this important debate on the role of women in conflict
prevention and resolution in Africa, as well as for the
concept paper (S/2016/219, annex) that you, Madam
President, circulated in preparation for this debate.

Algeria aligns itselfwith the statement delivered by
the representative of Iran as the Chair of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries.

I wish to recognize the work of the Executive
Director of UN-Women, Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-
Ngcuka, as well as the Assistant Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, Mr. Taye-Brook Zerihoun;
Ambassador Macharia Kamu of Kenya, in his capacity
as the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission; and, of
course, Ms. Paleki Ayang, the Executive Director of
the South Sudan Women's Empowerment Network, for
their contributions.

The landmark resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, awakened the Security Council
to the vital role women play in conflict prevention
and resolution, peace negotiations, peacebuilding,
peacekeeping, humanitarian response and post-conflict
reconstruction. Today's legitimate question must be:
what have we done since then? Of course, we more
often stress the importance of equal participation and
women's full involvement in all efforts towards the
maintenance and promotion of peace and security, as
stated in the resolution. But we again reaffirm the need
for the inclusion of women in the processes of conflict
prevention and resolution, as those processes are
directly linked to the sustainability ofpeace agreements
and to decreasing the levels of recurring violence.

We should never forget or ignore the fact that
women are often the primary victims of conflicts and
of terrorist acts and that even sexual violence and all
violence against women have become a weapon in
conflict situations. Let us not forget that we have another
resolution, resolution 2242 (2015), which underscores
and stresses the need to ensure the participation and
leadership of women in countering terrorism and violent
extremism. When working with Governments, we also
need to reach out to local communities, and women
in particular, to resolve disputes through inclusive
participation and dialogue. Lasting peace requires
that key actors, women specifically, have access to
institutions. As we have noted, and as was indicated
in the concept paper, inclusive peace processes result
in a 20 per cent increase in the likelihood of a peace
agreement lasting at least two years. Obviously, it is
necessary to repeat that women's empowerment is not a
luxury; it is a necessity for the sake ofpeace.

Women's participation in conflict prevention in
Africa facilitated a more inclusive appreciation of
the causes and alternative solutions to conflict. For
his briefing this morning, I thank Ambassador Tete
Antonio of the African Union. He rightfully pointed out
to all what our African institution has been doing and
intends to do, thereby setting an example to be followed
and supported. In our continent, several mechanisms,
policies and structures were created to foster an
environment conducive to women playing a crucial role
in peace and security.

The Protocol to the African Charter on Human and
Peoples' Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa, the
Maputo Protocol, and the 2004 Solemn Declaration on
Gender Equality in Africa committed African Union
(AU) member States to the aforementioned resolution
1325 (2000). Moreover, 2016 is the African Year of
Human Rights, with particular emphasis on the rights
of women. Just a few days ago, my capital, Algiers,
hosted the fifth meeting of the General Assembly of
the Kigali International Conference Declaration on the
role of security reform in putting an end to violence
against women, which was marked by the presence of
the Secretary-General.

We emphasize the importance of better synergies
between regional, continental and international early-
warning structures. These structures have benefited
from women's involvement, in particular in Africa.
Today, progress is being made in detecting and
monitoring early signs of conflict, and this is enhanced
by local initiatives across Africa that facilitate
ownership. Conflict-prevention mechanisms have
been established at the regional and local levels that
provide useful insights into potential crises. However,
these mechanisms need to be strengthened so they can
produce timely and tangible outcomes.
In the African Union, the Continental Early Warning
System is being operationalized and collaboration
with the regional early-warning mechanisms is being
developed. Moreover, this mechanism could benefit
from strategies developed by the United Nations in its
national conflict-prevention work, specifically with
regard to building local actors' capacity in this area and
addressing the root causes of conflict and not only its
symptoms, as such structures and the involvement of
women have proven critical to preventing and rapidly
addressing potential crises.

The experience of the African Centre for the
Constructive Resolution of Disputes is that, at the
regional level in Africa, practical efforts are being
made to focus on gender in line with AU commitments
at the regional level, such as those pertaining to the
Southern African Development Community, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa.

As a demonstration of the importance that Algeria
attaches to the role played by women in the political
sphere, it has called for the implementation of the
gender-equality programme for an extended period
from 2015 to 2017, in association with UN-Women.
We will absolutely and firmly pursue our efforts with
our partners from the United Nations and regional
organizations to empower women at local, national and
regional levels.

