Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
voted in favour of resolution 2272 (2016), for we are
convinced that acts of sexual exploitation and abuse
committed by any foreign force or military, police
or civilian personnel participating in United Nations
peacekeeping operations or special political missions
must be categorically rejected. No one can justify such
cowardly and absolutely reprehensible crimes. All
those responsible should be punished. In that regard,
we reiterate our support for the Secretary-General's
zero-tolerance policy.

As we stated during the briefing yesterday (see S/PV.7642), this is not an issue of an exclusively
disciplinary nature; these are reprehensible acts that
contradict and undermine the purposes and principles
of the United Nations for which peacekeeping missions
are established. In situations of armed conflict, such
acts could constitute violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
The United Nations should be an example of consistency,
firmness and high moral and ethical commitment with
regard to the importance of preventing these acts and,
above all, with regard to the accountability of any such
personnel authorized by the Security Council that
commits this type of crime.

Most of the interventions made yesterday stressed
how important it was that the discussion and actions
to be taken within the Council on this sensitive issue
entaild close and organic coordination with other
bodies with competence in the matter, namely, the
General Assembly, in particular through its Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations. We want to
insist on that point. The spirit of cooperation should
prevail among the various organs of the United Nations.
It is very dangerous for the Security Council to assume
the powers of other bodies on the grounds of the latter's
inaction. There should be mutual support since, by that
same reasoning, other organs of the United Nations
could take into their own hands the matters that fall
within the competence of the Security Council, but
which it has not been able to resolve in 25 or 60 years,
and for which the inhabitants in the territories affected,
for example, have been calling for more direct action by
some organ of the Organization.

We also recognize that the scope of the resolution

adopted today was improved by the incorporation
of several proposals - for instance, in addition to
peacekeeping missions, including also forces outside
the Organization, which seems to us very important in
order to be consistent with the idea of zero tolerance.
However, as always, we would have wished for a more
comprehensive and inclusive process in the discussion of
this important resolution. This has become a recurring
problem in the Security Council. In this spirit, we voted
in favour of the proposed amendment submitted by the
delegation of Egypt to paragraph 2, because we believe
that it gives a sense of balance to the provisions therein
and would preclude any arbitrary actions that could
be committed against troop-contributing countries.
We would have wished as well that all members of the
Council could have agreed on it without it having to be
put to a vote. We recall that the unity of the Council
demands that the views of its members be duly taken
into account to the extent possible in the formulation
of proposals.

To avoid deficiencies, fragmented and bureaucratic
responses to these cases, which the Organization
has suffered from in the past, it is essential that the
Council's decisions be guided by the principles of
objectivity, non-selectivity and impartiality, and
that the mechanisms and frequency of dialogue and
coordination with countries that contribute military,
police and civilian personnel be improved with a
view to examining and discussing this issue, and to
advancing concerted actions that have greater impact
on prevention and the fight against impunity. With this
resolution, the Security Council has taken up the flag
in the fight against this type of act and is obliged to
coordinate with troop-contributing countries.

Finally, we believe that it is not a question of
stigmatizing countries, but rather a question of
delivering justice. We therefore insist on the need to
fully implement Article 44 of the Charter of the United
Nations, which establishes the requirement to invite
troop-contributing countries to participate, in an active
and binding manner, in the decision-making process
with regard to the deployment oftroops in peacekeeping
missions. That has never really been operational. That
single action could help enormously to prevent and
punish this type of reprehensible and despicable crime.

In conclusion, having adopted this resolution, we
hope that we will never again have to discuss abuses
against women, children and the most vulnerable
groups in armed conflict.

