Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
voted in favour ofresolution 2272 (2016), prepared by the
United States Mission, a resolution that strengthens the
fight against sexual abuse in peacekeeping operations.

We believe that the fight against sexual abuse is
an absolute imperative, both moral and political, and
deserves the Council's full attention as an interlinked
complement to the work undertaken by the General
Assembly on these issues. At stake are not only our
most fundamental values but also the reputation and
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations personnel.
Sexual abuse cannot and should no longer be treated
as a simple disciplinary or behavioural problem and
tackled at the administrative level. The United Nations
had to provide a political and operational response to
the allegations made and confirmed cases by providing
clear guidelines to commanders and troops deployed on
the ground. The goal is to strengthen the fight against
sexual abuse not only within peacekeeping operations
but also when committed by forces that are not under
the command of the United Nations but contribute to
such operations.

Unfortunately, today peacekeeping operations
account for 70 per cent of the allegations of sexual abuse
within the United Nations system. At a time when the
Secretary-General is undertaking determined action,
the Council's support is indispensable.

Let us recall once again that sexual abuse is
unacceptable, regardless of the perpetrator or source
of these actions - military, police, civilian personnel,
United Nations or non-United Nations. The colour
of the helmet or uniform means little to the victims.
The resolution allows us to send a clear message to all
actors: Blue Helmets, police, civilian personnel and
international forces. We must do our utmost to translate
into reality the zero-tolerance objective, which must
serve more than ever before as our compass and our
shared obligation.

France, which contributes to peacekeeping
operations, has consistently during the negotiation
process supported this broad-based approach, which
sends a strong message to all players. I should note,
however, that we do not intend here to collectively
stigmatize the soldiers who bravely fight for our
Organization's ideals; that is not, and will never be, our
intention. This issue is too important for us not to all
mobilize in a collective spirit of goodwill. Everyone
must feel heeded. This is why an in-depth, inclusive
dialogue with the troop-contributing countries is so
important, for the sake of efficiency, in order to achieve
the result that we all wish to see. It is vital for everyone
to take ownership of the zero-tolerance objective to
which I have just referred.

We must meet this challenge. Our collective action
will serve as the best possible reply to the Secretary-
General's call and, ofcourse, to the victims. Rest assured
that France's determination in this respect is absolute,
both nationally and in the framework of the United
Nations. France will spare no effort in supporting the
Secretary-General's efforts aimed at strengthening our
policy of zero tolerance for sexual abuse.

I should like to conclude by once again paying
heartfelt tribute to all of the soldiers who are
working for the maintenance of peace and to their
invaluable contribution.

