Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): Malaysia supports
resolution 2272 (2016), which the Council just adopted.
It sends an unambiguous message that the Security
Council, the United Nations and the international
community will not tolerate sexual exploitation and
abuse by peacekeepers. We have repeatedly called
for zero tolerance in that regard, and today we have
strengthened our resolve on the matter. We support
many of the strong measures initiated by the Secretary-
General to strengthen accountability for perpetrators of
abuse, as set out in resolution 2272 (2016). Malaysia
firmly believes that peacekeepers must uphold the
highest standards of professionalism and moral values,
as they are mandated to protect civilians, and to uphold
international humanitarian law and human rights law
while serving in areas of conflict.

In our view, the provisions on the repatriation
of contingents that demonstrate widespread
and systematic sexual exploitation and abuse or
non-response to allegations of misconduct are wholly
justified. In that regard, we note that the route leading
towards a decision on possible repatriation must come
with clear and transparent criteria and guidelines,
developed in full consultation and engagement with the
concerned troop-contributing countries throughout the
process. In the spirit of renewing and re-energizing the
United Nations peacekeeping institutions, we would
also stress the importance of trilateral consultations
among the Council, troop-contributing countries and
the Secretariat.

We regret the missed opportunity to rally consensus
around such an important resolution. We believe that
the rationale to address sensitivities surrounding this
issue warrant, at this time, engaging the concerned
stakeholders, namely, the troop-contributing countries.
As mentioned by many delegations yesterday (see S/PV.7642), combatting sexual exploitation and abuse
requires the collective efforts of all members of the
United Nations and the international community. We
hope that resolution 2272 (2016) creates the intended
momentum to end impunity for sexual exploitation and
abuse by peacekeepers.

