The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.

I thank participants for their statements:
Ms. Mayanja, Special Adviser to the Secretary-General
on Gender Issues and Advancement of Women; Mr. Le
Roy, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations; Ms. Alberdi, Executive Director of the
United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM); and Ms. Taylor, Coordinator of the NGO
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security.

Eight years ago, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1325 (2000), which laid the foundation for
cooperation by the international community in this
field. We are pleased to see that, thanks to the joint
efforts by various intergovernmental organizations,
regional and subregional organizations, Member States
and civil society, the role of women in the prevention
of conflicts, peace talks, peacekeeping operations and
post-conflict reconstruction has been strengthened, and
the concepts of gender equality and the empowerment
of women have taken hold.

However, we must recognize the reality that as
the characteristics of conflicts change and various
complex factors become interwoven, resolution 1325
(2000) has yet to be fully implemented. In certain
conflict situations, enormous suffering and pain
continue to be inflicted on women. Unable to protect
their personal security, women can hardly take an
effective part in peace processes or political life. We
attach great importance to this question and wish to
stress the following three points.

First, the Security Council has a unique role to
play in the question of women, peace and security and
should strengthen its coordination and cooperation
with other organs of the United Nations. As the organ
that bears the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
Security Council should step up its efforts for the
prevention and resolution of conflicts so that the root
causes of women's suffering in war can be removed
and their rights and interest protected to the greatest
extent possible. As the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council and UNIFEM. have their
respective mandates and roles for promoting the rights
and interests of women, the Security Council should
strengthen its coordination and cooperation with them
and work together in addressing the relevant issues.

Secondly, efforts should be made to facilitate
women's participation in every stage of peace
processes so that a solid foundation can be created for
consolidating the peace process and achieving lasting
peace. We hope that the parties concerned will continue
to work and to create an enabling environment for
women's full participation and in-depth involvement.
In recent years, the Secretariat has taken quite a
number of positive measures to increase the number of
female staff members and women appointed to senior
posts. We expect to see more efforts in this direction in
the future.

Thirdly, civil society should continue to be
encouraged and supported in taking part in the
protection of women. Many colleagues from

non-governmental organizations work under difficult
conditions in the field to protect the rights and interests
of women. Their commendable work deserves our
appreciation. China supports them in their continuing
efforts to play a constructive role in the protection of
women in armed conflict and encourages them to
engage with and make recommendations to other
organs of the United Nations, especially those that are
directly concerned with women's issues.

At the initiative of the delegation of the United
Kingdom, the Security Council will adopt a
presidential statement at the conclusion of this open
debate, in which the Secretary-General will be
requested to submit a report on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) by next October. We support
that request.

It needs to be pointed out that only a few months
ago the Council adopted resolution 1820 (2008), in
which the Secretary-General is requested to submit a
report on combating sexual violence. We hope that the
Secretariat will enhance internal coordination and
make the best possible use of the relevant information
available to it, so as to submit a report of high quality
to the Security Council.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to Her Excellency
Ms. Natalya Petkevich, Deputy Head of the
Administration of the President of the Republic of
Belarus.

