Mr. Wittig (Germany): Let me first of all thank
you, Mr. President, for giving today's subject such a
prominent and fitting place on the Security Council's
agenda this month.

Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of the European Union
later in the debate.

As a member of the Group of Friends of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000), Germany attaches
great importance indeed to the issue of women and
peace and security. We therefore commend the
Secretary-General for his very comprehensive and
substantial report (S/2010/498), especially his clear
and action-oriented recommendations on the
implementation of the resolution. We fully share his
analysis with regard to the gaps that still exist and the
need to introduce indicators and an adequate
monitoring mechanism. That will enable us not only to
measure progress, but also to ensure that all aspects of
resolution 1325 (2000) are adequately addressed.

The protection of women and their participation
in all parts of society are two sides of the same coin.
Resolution 1325 (2000) clearly stipulates that women
must be seen as active players whose contributions in
all aspects of peacebuilding and peacekeeping
processes are absolutely essential for the reconstruction
of societies and in achieving sustainable peace and
development.

Empowering women is important in security
sector reform, as well as in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes. Germany
therefore also welcomes the action plan contained in
the Secretary-General's report on resolution 1889
(2009) (S/2010/466), including the call for increased
financing for gender equality and women's
empowerment in countries emerging from conflict.

It is time to move towards more concrete action.
What can Member States and the United Nations as a
whole do?
Starting with my own country, the German
Government will shortly present its third
implementation report on resolution 1325 (2000) to
Parliament. While striving for the full and timely
implementation of the entire resolution, looking ahead,
priority will be given to, first, increased participation
of women in national, regional and international
institutions and mechanisms, particularly in higher
positions; secondly, to financial and technical support
for United Nations gender-awareness-raising
campaigns; thirdly, a gender perspective during and
after the negotiation of peace agreements; and fourthly,
the special needs of women combatants in
demobilization and reintegration processes.

To achieve progress in those areas, Germany will
set up a list of national and international priority
initiatives. We will also continue to support
international organizations and non-governmental
organizations in promoting women's empowerment.

We are of the opinion that partnerships between
Member States and the United Nations are crucial. The
United Nations police standardized training curriculum
on investigating and preventing sexual and gender-
based violence, organized by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and funded by my country, is
but one example. In several seminars, women police
officers from all parts of the world can come together,
share their experiences and work out a concept of how
to better prevent abhorrent crimes of that nature from
happening in the future. Besides actions being
undertaken by Member States, the United Nations as a
whole has an important role to play in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

As in other areas, delivering as one should form
the leitmotiv for United Nations action. All relevant
United Nations entities should work together closely in
order to guarantee that the available resources are
effectively channelled and measured against the
indicators proposed in the Secretary-General's report.
The setting up of an efficient monitoring system that
measures progress achieved for women on the ground
is also essential. In this context, Germany welcomes
the creation of the new gender entity UN Women,
which should play a leading role in this regard. The
new Under-Secretary-General, Ms. Bachelet, whom we
warmly congratulate, has our fullest support for the
challenging task lying ahead of her.
10-60385
I am confident that with the realization of all the
commitments made today, we can and, we hope, will
achieve real progress in meeting the challenges ahead
of us.

