Ms. Wallstriim (Sweden): I thank you, Mr. President,
for your kind words about Marten.

I am honoured to be back at the United Nations and
to speak on the same topic but in a different capacity. I
am now today in one person Danish, Finnish, Icelandic,
Norwegian and Swedish, so I speak on behalf of all the
Nordic countries.

I wish to thank the International Committee of the
Red Cross and the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security. The role and influence of civil
society in preventing conflict and building peace are
essential and must be supported.

For more than 150 years, the international community
has been in agreement that warfare should be made
less inhumane through the rules and principles of
international humanitarian law. Civilians should be
protected in armed conflict, and we need to prevent
and to respond to mass atrocity crimes in accordance
with the responsibility to protect. But those rules and
principles are challenged and sometimes even ignored.
Civilians are particularly exposed in today's complex
and often protracted conflicts, as we have seen in the
Middle East and in West and Central Africa. That is
also the case in Syria and Iraq, for instance, where
hospitals and schools are being made the actual targets
of warfare. That must stop. The laws of war were
written during a time when only men were defined
as combatants and the responsibilities of women were
seen as far distant from the battlefield. A stronger
gender perspective needs to be applied to international
humanitarian law.
Women, and especially girls, are particularly
exposed to violence in conflict. Violence against women
affects one third of all women globally. The violence
is often amplified in areas affected by conflict. As we
see in many parts of the world today, extremism and
terrorism are prominent features of conflict situations,
constituting new kinds of threats to women's rights and
lives and causing flight and displacement. We need to
prevent and combat such violations of women's and

girls' fundamental human rights.

Gender inequalities lie at the heart of the issue.
Progress on gender equality and women's rights is
a goal in its own right, but it also remains a critical
factor in achieving poverty reduction and sustainable
development. Gender equality helps to prevent armed
conflicts and sexual violence in armed conflicts. We
must therefore firmly address the root causes of gender
inequality. That can be done by changing laws, norms,
practices and attitudes in societies that are denying
women's and girls' human rights. It can also be done by
enacting laws, including on equal rights to inheritance,
and by adopting policies that ensure women's political
and economic empowerment and secure sexual and
reproductive health and rights and improve women's
security and guarantee the right to quality education
for all women and girls.

The fight against impunity for sexual and gender-
based violence is also crucial, as I know from a
previous position I held. Each State has a duty and a
responsibility to investigate and prosecute such crimes.
It is primarily at the domestic level that solutions to
the impunity gap must be found. The role of the
International Criminal Court is complementary, but
nevertheless crucial in ensuring that accountability
is achieved. We therefore welcome and support the
undertakings, and in particular the special policy, ofthe
Chief Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
in order to more efficiently investigate and prosecute
sexual and gender-based violence crimes within the
jurisdiction of the Court. We recall the unique capacity
of Justice Rapid Response, in close cooperation with
UN-Women, to address situations where expertise is
needed for investigating such crimes.

Women are not only victims, but first and foremost
actors and agents of change. Sustainable peace and
security can never be achieved if half the population is
excluded. In excluding women, we are also excluding
the contribution of those sectors of society that are
considered as feminine or to be women's duties. Those
often include raising children, education, health care
and taking care of the elderly. When those sectors,
which are vital to the long-term success of nations,
are not adequately represented in decision-making, it
is to the detriment of peace and security. We need the
participation of both women and men in formal and
informal processes, in mediation, peace negotiations
and in humanitarian and peace-building efforts to bring
in new angles, solutions and perspectives to problems.

This year provides an unique opportunity to assess
and accelerate the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda. Several critical reviews
are under way ~ the review of peace operations, the
review of the peacebuilding architecture, the review
of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and
the 2015 high-level review of resolution 1325 (2000).
In order to ensure coherence, all those reviews, and
especially their recommendations and outcomes, should
take into account the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) objectives in a more coordinated manner. To
promote the women and peace and security agenda is
not an isolated issue, it is a major part of the peace and
security agenda.

There has been an increase in the number of
mandates of United Nations missions that include
references to women and peace and security, but that is
not enough. All mandates should be based on a gender-
sensitive conflict analysis in order to also be tailored
to the security needs and to ensuring the participation
of women and girls. Gender issues should be part
of reporting requirements, and all United Nations
missions should have a gender adviser at the strategic
level, supplied with resources relevant to his or her
tasks. Leadership is critical in ensuring progress on
this agenda, at the highest levels of the United Nations
as in Member States, and I am glad to hear that come
out of this discussion.

Lastly, to underline the importance of the post-
2015 development agenda, the Nordic countries support
goal 5, on gender equality, and goal 16, on freedom
from violence and peaceful societies, proposed by the
Open Working Group on Sustainable Development.
These goals together include targets concerning the
prevention of all kinds of violence, including violence
against women and girls. We believe that the post-2015
development agenda represents a unique opportunity
to address violence against women, including sexual
violence, on a fundamental level. It is a chance to make
real progress.

