Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I wish to
thank you, Madam President, for organizing this debate.
I would also like to warmly thank for their briefings
the Executive Director of UN-Women, Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka; the Assistant Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Edmond Mulet; the
Special Rapporteur on the human rights of internally
displaced persons, Mr. Chaloka Beyani; and Ms. Suaad
Allami, a defender of human rights in Iraq. Their
commitment is a source of inspiration and has won
admiration from us all.

The topic of women in conflict is a high priority
for France, as demonstrated by the presence among us
of a large delegation of French senators. I would like to
welcome and to thank them for their active commitment
to this issue.

In addressing the challenges posed by today's
topic, we must be demanding and ambitious. The
high-level review of sanctions, which is drawing to a
close, the high-level review of peacekeeping missions,
which is beginning, and the high-level review for
resolution 1325 (2000), which has been announced,
are all opportunities to advance the women and peace
and security agenda. It is a cross-cutting priority that
concerns nearly 80 per cent of Council resolutions, and
therefore deserves the same attention as other topics
related to peace and security. Women - and we cannot
overstress this - are key players in the maintenance
of peace and security, not just for the Council but also
through peace negotiations or within peacekeeping
operations. We will continue to emphasize that to the
United Nations mediators, especially with respect to
Syria. In that context, I wish to welcome the adoption
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support of the gender strategy for
2014-2018, as well as the activities of UN-Women in
that regard. I also welcome the adoption of an ambitious
presidential statement (S/PRST/2014/21), thanks to the
efforts of the United Kingdom.

The attention paid by the United Nations to women's
issues should also be felt on the ground, including in
countries in conflict. We too often hear that, in times of
crisis or emergencies, security issues take precedence
over those for women. However, there can be no
security and peace without the security and protection
of women, in particular the most vulnerable - those
who are forcibly displaced. Violence and human rights
violations committed against women refugees or
displaced women cannot be considered inevitable as
collateral damage to conflict. That is unacceptable.
Those violations are too numerous, frequent and
intolerable to be minimized or to take a back seat in the
Council's concerns.

The upheavals of the global security environment
with the rise of violent extremism and terrorism and
the implosion of States or health challenges, like Ebola,
have contributed to an unprecedented level of forced
displacement - unprecedented since the Second
World War. Around 32,000 persons were internally
displaced every day in 2013. Three quarters of them
were women and children. In Syria and Iraq, the year
2013 was characterized by a dramatic increase in
violations - rapes, forced early marriages, prostitution
and forced labour were daily occurrences in the lives of
women and girls in regions controlled by Daesh. The
actions of human rights advocates, such as those of
Ms. Suaad Allami in Iraq, become even more critical.

In Syria, the persecution of women by the regime,
the bombing of civilian areas by the Syrian army
and the multiple restrictions placed on the most basic
economic and social rights endanger the survival of
whole families and cause 2.5 million refugees to take
to the road, over three quarters of whom are women
and children. Women who have fled are all the more
vulnerable to various forms of exploitation, sex
trafficking, domestic violence and poverty. Access
to gynaecological and health care becomes very
difficult. To try to meet the needs of women in the
region, since 2013 France has been supporting local
non-governmental organization projects to provide aid
to Syrian women who are displaced within Syria or
have sought refuge in neighbouring countries, including
psychological or medical support for victims of sexual
violence. We regret, once again, that the French draft
resolution that would have referred those crimes to the
International Criminal Court was not adopted.
In the Central African Republic, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Sudan and South Sudan,
massive displacements of populations have led to the
increased vulnerability of women and girls to sexual
violence and all forms of violence committed by
armed forces and groups. Deploying a gender adviser
for the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) represents a step forward in the fight
against sexual violence. France, which has mobilized
along those lines for MINUSCA, requests that all
resolutions establishing or extending peacekeeping
operations include relevant provisions for the protection
and participation of women. We must also ensure that
missions report on violations in their reports, as we
recall the case ofAfrican Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur in the Sudan.

The armed forces and groups in countries in conflict
are a daily threat to women and girls who are refugees
or have been displaced. In that context, the entry into
force in December of the Arms Trade Treaty is a crucial
step. France calls for the full implementation of the
Arms Trade Treaty, including the provision on gender,
so as to better take into account the risk of the use of
arms against women and children.

It is essential that the rights of refugee and
displaced women be guaranteed in all phases of their
displacement, whether in camps or outside them.
Unfortunately, various services remain unattainable
for refugees and displaced women and children.
Furthermore, severe insecurity in some camps, for
example in South Sudan, prevents women from
accessing basic services such as water and food, while
other services remain inaccessible.

In terms of access to education, too often the
path to school is too dangerous for girls, who are
therefore fewer than boys in attending school in times
of conflict. As for access to health services, few
displaced or refugee women have the right to sexual
and reproductive health services. In that context, we
welcome the work of the United Nations Population
Fund in providing reproductive health services to more
than 67,000 people in Syria. Finally, it is crucial that
refugee and displaced women have access to justice,
which, as we know, remains the lynchpin of any post-
conflict stabilization effort.

National Governments bear the primary
responsibility for prosecuting and punishing
perpetrators of sexual violence. However, when States
fail in that responsibility the International Criminal
Court (ICC) must play its role. The Court has been
seized of cases in Darfur, the Central African Republic,
Mali and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. During
the open debate of 23 October that was organized by the
Argentine presidency (see S/PV.7285) the importance
of effective follow-up to the Court's decisions was
underscored.

France welcomes the regular exchanges between the
Court and the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict. We encourage
deeper exchanges and urge the reports of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to take fully
into account judicial developments.

France will continue to mobilize to combat
impunity in cases of perpetrators of violence against
women through the ICC and national tribunals and
through the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda as a cross-cutting priority of the
Council. That is our joint responsibility. The Council
can count on France to remain on the front line of that
fight.

