Ms. Bird (Australia): It is distressing that, in the
twenty-first century, the scourge of human trafficking
and slavery not only remains one of the gravest dangers
facing women and girls in conflict zones around the
world, but that it is on the rise. As highlighted in
the Secretary-General's report (S/2016/361), a key
driver behind that horrifying trend is the increase in
extremist movements and their use of both trafficking
and sexual violence as a tactic of terrorism in locations
such as Syria, Iraq and Nigeria. For that reason,
Australia welcomes the focus on gender equality in the
United Nations Plan of Action on Preventing Violent
Extremism. We urge the Security Council and Member
States to take practical steps to implement the Plan
and to counter the use of sexual violence as a tactic
of terrorism.

The Secretary-General's report provides useful
recommendations on how that can be achieved.
Australia fully supports efforts by the United Nations
and the international community to engage with all
parties to armed conflict with a view to securing
concrete commitments aimed at addressing conflict-
related sexual violence. We also see a need to improve
the Council's early-warning and prevention capacity
on conflict-related sexual violence in its monitoring of
conflict situations.

Recent incidents of sexual exploitation and abuse by
peacekeepers undermine the very fabric of the United
Nations peacekeeping system. Together with Member
States, the United Nations must continue to implement
comprehensive reforms to prevent them.

Ending violence against women is a priority of
the Australian Government. It is part of our foreign
policy and aid programme. Tackling human trafficking
and slavery is an important means of ending violence
against women. Central to Australia's efforts is our
international strategy to combat human trafficking
and slavery, launched in March. Under the strategy,
Australia is working with partners in the Asia-Pacific
region to strengthen justice responses to human
trafficking and slavery. Our approach focuses on four
pillars, namely, prevention and deterrence, detection
and investigation, prosecution and compliance and
victim support and protection.

In formulating a concerted global response to the
growing menace of human trafficking in situations of
conflict, we must ensure that the voices of the survivors
themselves are heard.

In conclusion, let me thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this debate. Let me also thank Special
Representative Bangura for her tireless efforts. We
welcome the opportunity provided by this debate for
all Member States to reaffirm their commitment to the
elimination of sexual violence in conflict.

