Mr. Kim Bonghyun (Republic of Korea): Allow
me to open my statement by thanking the Vietnamese
presidency of the Security Council for the concept
paper distributed for this open debate (S/2009/490).
My appreciation goes also to the Secretary-General for
his excellent report (S/2009/465), which provides a
comprehensive outlook on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), as well as sound suggestions
for specific actions to take.

We welcome the adoption of resolution 1889
(2009) this morning, which reiterates the commitment
of the Security Council to the full implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and other important relevant
resolutions, including resolutions 1820 (2008) and
1888 (2009).

As the Secretary-General's report states, there has
been progress in some areas of the implementation of
the resolution over the past year. For example, major
strides have been made in developing national action
plans. The cooperation and collaboration among
various partners - including United Nations entities
such as the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
the United Nations Population Fund, the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the Office
of the Special Adviser on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women, the International Research
and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women
and the United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM) - in developing national action plans in
various post-conflict areas is commendable. Some
best-practice examples, such as the Liberian case, can
guide the development of future action plans.

That is certainly a positive element, but the report
also illustrates a number of persisting difficulties in the
implementation of the resolution. Let me focus on
three key points.

The first concerns sexual violence. We are all
aware of how serious the situation is and how difficult
it can be to reverse the extent and impact of sexual
violence. In that regard, my delegation welcomes
resolution 1888 (2009), adopted just five days ago,
which identifies specific steps that the United Nations
and Member States should take to prevent or respond
to sexual violence. We expect that the appointment of a
special representative of the Secretary-General and the
rapid deployment of an expert team will make
significant contributions to our efforts to end sexual
violence.

The second point concerns the persistent lack of
participation by women throughout the peace process,
which is a core element of resolution 1325 (2000). As
the Secretary-General's report expresses, a persistent
cause of concern is that women continue to be virtually
absent from the peace table and to be severely
underrepresented as third-party mediators in most
conflict-affected countries. It should be duly noted that
since 1992, only 2.4 per cent of signatories to peace
agreements were women and that no woman has ever
been appointed as a chief mediator.

The Republic of Korea urges Member States and
the Untied Nations to take more vigorous initiatives to
ensure that women are engaged in all levels of
decision-making. In that regard, we commend
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon's response to the call
in resolution 1325 (2000) to increase the number of
women in senior positions within the United Nations,
especially in peacekeeping operations. It is
encouraging to see three women heads of mission, six
women deputies in the field and five female under-
secretaries-general and assistant secretaries-general in
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. We
encourage the Secretary-General to further strengthen
this positive trend, and we hope that his efforts are
emulated in peace negotiations and reconstruction
processes at the country level by ensuring the full
participation of women.

The third point concerns a deficit in post-conflict
funding for women's needs. As stated in the concept
paper, UNIFEM's review of almost 17,000 projects in
consolidated and flash appeals for 23 post-conflict
countries over three years indicates that less than 3 per
cent of projects submitted for funding explicitly target
gender issues. Additionally, only 8 per cent of
proposed budgets for post-conflict situation need
assessments included specific elements addressing
women's needs. As a way to address that gap, my
delegation urges the United Nations system to further
integrate the gender perspective in designing and
implementing assistance programmes.

One area in which United Nations entities can
immediately do more is the utilization of quick-impact
projects. These are intended to meet urgent community
needs in post-conflict areas but are generally
underimplemented in many mission stationing fields,
not to mention the fact that the gender perspective is
rarely integrated into those projects under
implementation. Since one of the main features of the
quick-impact projects is to encourage a gender- and
age-based approach, United Nations missions and
UNDP have the potential to fully activate quick-impact
projects to meet the urgent needs of women.

My delegation believes that the effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) largely
depends on the overall capacity of the United Nations
system to pursue gender equality and women's
empowerment. In that regard, strengthening the gender
architecture is a key element. We are very much
looking forward to the early establishment of a
composite entity, which will be a driving force in
creating an environment for the effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in support of
the efforts of the Security Council.

In conclusion, the Republic of Korea shares the
expectations for the upcoming tenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) in 2010. We
anticipate that the anniversary will provide a new
opportunity for all stakeholders to strengthen efforts to
fully implement resolution 1325 (2000) to achieve real
and lasting changes in the lives of women and girls.

