Mr. Adi (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me, first of all, to thank Ms. Michelle Bachelet
for presenting the report of the Secretary-General on
women and peace and security (S/2012/732). We would
like to tell her how much we appreciate her work since
she assumed her post.

The Syrian Arab Republic has sought to develop
in a qualitative fashion the lives of women, as well
as to advance their status, based on international
commitments and in line with the principles of our
national Constitution. In so doing, we confirm the
implementation of our commitment. In that regard,
pursuant to the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women, the Syrian
Arab Republic has presented its second and third
periodic reports on its implementation of the provisions
of the Convention.

Unfortunately, in the wake of the events taking place
in my country today, armed terrorist groups supported,
financed and armed by regional and international Arab
sides, are seeking to push my country backwards and
negate the social progress that Syria had achieved in
terms of gender equality. Individuals or elements in
those armed groups - be they Takfirist, Wahabists
or Salafists - are seeking to sow psychological panic
within society by turning back time to the Dark Ages,
particularly with regard to the role of women in Syrian
society. As a result, working women now are fearful in
going to work, and girls are afraid to go to school or
university.

The armed groups are continuing to violate women's
rights in Syria and are hampering the evacuation of
injured and sick people, including women, children
and disabled persons, to areas where refuge is being
offered, as was the case in the city of Homs, where
representatives of the International Committee of the
Red Cross were present. Furthermore, those armed
groups have committed numerous types of sexual
violence, targeting women and girls. All such incidents
have been documented and reported to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict.

We also deplore the fact that some people are
exploiting the difficult situation that Syrian female
refugees are finding themselves in in camps in
neighbouring countries - marrying Syrian women
under the pretext that they are going to help them escape
their difficult situation through what has come to be
crudely called sexual jihad. That is in addition to the
sexual violence and abuse that have been perpetrated
against those women, in violation of all international
human rights agreements.

Despite all of that, Syria is continuing to deal with
the challenges it faces as it seeks, specifically, to liberate
the occupied Syrian territories in the Golan Heights by
promoting efforts to reach a just and comprehensive
peace based on the resolutions of international
legitimacy in order to bring an end to the suffering of
civilian Syrians resulting from Israeli occupation, in
particular, Syrian women. In that regard, my delegation
reiterates its call to the Secretary-General to include
in his reports references to the challenges, harrowing
reality and types of violence that Arab women are
having to face in occupied Palestine and in the occupied
Syrian Golan Heights.

Syrian women in occupied Golan have not been
spared repeated detention. Since the Israeli occupation
in 1967, nearly 2,500 Syrian citizens have been
detained in Israeli prisons, including women and
children. Women who live in the occupied Golan region
do not have the right to return to their country of origin;
even those who are sick and require humanitarian or
emergency attention are not allowed to cross the border
except with a permit.

We hope that Ms. Bachelet and UN-Women will
undertake to provide the necessary assistance to Syrians
to achieve gender equality and to empower women to
help find an end to the bloodshed by cooperating with
the Syrian Government, first and foremost, and by
continuing to exert pressure on external parties in order
to prevent them from spreading bloodshed and conflict
within the country and getting them to put an end to
their terroristic interference and their violations of
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
We would also call on them to play an active role in
terms of protecting the rights of Syrian women and
advancing their status in the Israeli-occupied Syrian
Golan.

Finally, we would call particular attention to
the threats stemming from the unilateral economic
measures that have been imposed against my country
by international entities in violation of international
legitimacy, which are negating its economic and social
development and hampering the active exercise by the
Syrian people of their full rights, especially their right
to development.

