The President (spoke in French): I will now
address the Council in my capacity as the
representative of Togo.

I would like first to join previous speakers in
thanking the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2012/33) on conflict-related sexual violence. I
would also like to thank Ms. Margot Wallstrom for her
praiseworthy work on the issue and Mr. Herve Ladsous
for the useful efforts that the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) continues to make in
this sphere. I would further like to thank to the
representative of the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security for her organization's cutting-edge
work to combat violence against women and girls.

United Nations efforts to eradicate sexual
violence in armed conflict deserve recognition, as they
make an important contribution to restoring peace and
security in countries in conflict and to the essential
process of reconciliation. Indeed, the suffering inflicted
on women and girls in armed conflict and post-conflict
situations remains a source of serious concern insofar
as it undermines the process of reconciliation. Sexual
violence is manifested in rape, sexual slavery,
prostitution, pregnancy, forced sterilization and any
other form of sexual violence of comparable
seriousness. Such acts, committed in conflict or
post-conflict situations or in other crisis situations,
constitute serious violations of human rights and are all
the more deplorable for their impact on people who are
already vulnerable.

My country welcomed the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), which defines the role of women in
conflict prevention, conflict management and
peacebuilding. The national action plans that Member
States are called upon to draw up pursuant to that
resolution seem to be the most effective means for
attaining the goals of the resolution.
In that spirit, Togo has drafted an action plan to
combat all forms of violence against women. My
country has established nationwide support centres for
women victims of violence. For 10 years now, my
country has also participated in 16 days of campaigning
organized from 25 November to 10 December every
year. As a troop-contributing country to United Nations
peacekeeping operations, Togo has also created a
predeployment centre where military and police
personnel in training are made aware of the strict
prohibition of all forms of sexual violence.

In addition to those measures, which are aimed at
preventing violence against women in conflict, my
country reiterates the urgent need to put an end to
impunity if we are to ensure that every society in the
thrall of conflict, wherever it may be, draws lessons
from the atrocities committed against civilians and
prevents such atrocities from being repeated. In that
regard, Togo welcomes the steps taken by the
Secretary-General to ensure that the zero-tolerance
policy regarding exploitation and sexual violence in
United Nations peacekeeping operations, in conformity
with paragraph 7 of resolution 1820 (2008), does not
remain an empty term.

My country also supports the main initiatives
launched by the United Nations to combat sexual
violence in times of conflict, as set out in the report.
These efforts include scenario-based predeployment
training modules on preventing and addressing
conflict-related sexual violence; analysis of early
warning signs of sexual Violence in times of conflict,
with the aim of integrating that analysis into existing
and emerging early warning and prevention systems to
facilitate a rapid response; and addressing conflict-
related sexual violence in ceasefire and peace
agreements.

To combat and especially to deter the perpetration
of such acts, Togo believes that the countries
concerned must build an arsenal of justice, such as
national or hybrid criminal courts and tribunals,
turning, if necessary to the International Criminal
Court, with scrupulous respect for the principle of
complementarity, which maintains the primacy of
national jurisdictions.
My country also believes that the affected
countries could resort to extrajudicial mechanisms and
methods of reconciliation, that is, to truth, justice and
reconciliation commissions and roundtables. These

mechanisms can help not only to solidify the principle
of the individual responsibility of perpetrators of
serious crimes, but also to promote peace, truth,
reconciliation and the rights of victims.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate Togo's support
for the presidential statement to be adopted at the
conclusion of this debate. My country wishes to renew
its thanks to the United States delegation for its work
in that regard.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

I remind speakers that they are asked to limit
their statements to a maximum of four minutes so that
the Council may complete its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate their texts and to deliver a
condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.

I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Didier
Reynders, Deputy Prime Minister, Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Foreign Trade and European Affairs of
Belgium.

