Mr. Hermida Castillo (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): We offer our condolences to the family of
Ambassador Andrey Karlov and the Government and
the people of Russia.

Allow me to congratulate Spain on so efficiently
presiding over the Security Council during the month
of December. At the same time, we would like to
thank you, Sir, for convening this meeting on such
an important topic. We agree with the President's
concept note (S/2016/ 1031, annex), which reiterates the
importance and need for the United Nations to redouble
its efforts to eliminate trafficking in persons in conflict
situations.

However, our approach and contribution to the
debate are focused on the prevention of trafficking
in persons in all circumstances. It should be fought
even when it takes place in non-conflict situations.
Trafficking in persons is a global problem that affects
more than 29 million children, women and men who
are subjected to sexual exploitation, forced labour,
domestic servitude and organ harvesting. It is in itselfa
violation of human rights. It is a most abominable crime
that destroys the essence of people, their life, freedom
and integrity. It turns human beings into commodities,
leading to the degradation of the dignity and physical
and mental health of people, leaving indelible imprints
on the social fabric.

Our people, who have experienced the scourge of
war at first hand, today live in peace and reconciliation,
led by Commander Daniel Ortega, who is working
with determination to eliminate trafficking in persons.
Being a small country with limited resources, we are
making our contribution to the international community
in maintaining a firm position of vigilance and in
comprehensively addressing the topic within a legal and
normative framework. We have a nation-wide coalition
to detect, prevent, protect and rehabilitate victims of
human trafficking at the national level and to ensure
that the perpetrators of such crimes are effectively
punished. In January 2015, we adopted Law No. 896
against trafficking in persons, which determines the
aims and modalities of the crime, the protected legal
goods and the criminal classification of the crime. That
instrument is based on prevention, offering individual
recommendations for people and their families.

Our Government is also working with other countries
in our area through a regional system that facilitates
the rescue of victims with a view to strengthening
prevention as well. However, international financial
and technical cooperation are always crucial for us to
be able to combat such scourge. If we want to put an
end to trafficking in persons in conflict situations, we
must begin by looking at the root cause of the conflict.
No country in the international community can claim
the right to use or threaten to use force in international
relations. That form of exceptionalism not only does
not resolve conflicts, it fuels them, just as we have seen
in recent years. Conflicts are resolved through dialogue
and political negotiation, and the United Nations, based
on the Charter of the United Nations, must assume its
responsibility and be the main organization to ensure
global peace.

Nicaragua - a small country that bases its policies
on Christian values, socialist principles and solidarity
within this complex global context - has been working
purposefully in the various regional and international
forums to promote policies of peace, unity and
understanding among nations, promoting politically
negotiated solutions to conflicts and the right of our
people to achieve their sustainable development and
well-being. Our country continues to focus its efforts
on strengthening the family unit and education,
important factors in efforts to forge strong societies
that are committed to working, maintaining their well-
being and developing themselves. Our Government will
continue to bolster its policies to combat the scourge
before us and protect our societies from it.
