Ms. Ndhlovu (South Africa): The full text of my
intervention will be distributed and I will confine my
intervention to a few paragraphs.

It gives me great pleasure to see you, Sir,
presiding over the Council at this, our third open
debate on the impact of armed conflict on women and
girls and the role of women in peace-building.

My delegation would wish to express our
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
contribution to the debate and for his report on women,
peace and security, contained in document
S/2002/1154. In addition, the contributions to this
report and presentations on this important topic by the
Special Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of
Women, Ms. Angela King; the Executive Director of
the United Nations Development Fund for Women, Ms.
Noeleen Heyzer; and the Inter-Agency Task Force on
Women, Peace and Security should be commended.

My delegation fully associates itself with the
statement delivered by the representative of Austria on
behalf of the Human Security Network.

In Africa, enhanced efforts are being made to
achieve peace, democracy and development. With the
launch of the African Union and its new institutions,
such as the Peace and Security Council and the African
Peer Review Mechanism, African leaders have
acknowledged the need to strengthen the mechanisms
necessary to prevent, manage and resolve conflicts and
to ensure the accountability and transparency of
African Governments.

South Africa, in addition, has embarked on peace-
brokering efforts to find durable solutions to the human
suffering of citizens, in particular women and girls,
highlighted by the interventions of President Thabo
Mbeki in his capacity as Chairperson of the African
Union. As an African State, South Africa plays its
modest role in the Great Lakes region, particularly in
Burundi. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
peace process is advancing at an accelerated pace with
our facilitation of the Pretoria Agreement of 30 July
2002 between Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. As required by the Pretoria Agreement,
South Africa is working with the United Nations to
monitor and guarantee the implementation thereof.

The African Union acknowledges that special
attention should be paid to women in view of their role
in and potential contribution to the peace process. It is
against this background that the African Women
Committee for Peace and Development was established
in 1998 by the Organization of African Unity, in
collaboration with the United Nations Economic
Commission for Africa, to ensure the participation of
women in decision-making and related initiatives. The
Committee also serves as an advisory body to the
Chairperson of the African Union on issues relating to
gender, peace, security, stability and development in
Africa, and works closely with the Union's Mechanism
for Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution.
As an example, the African Union, the African
Women Committee for Peace and Development and
associated organizations organized a solidarity mission
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo in December
2001 to support the women in their preparations for
effective participation in the inter-Congolese dialogue,
hosted in South Africa early in 2002.

As we enter the new millennium, we are mindful
that, while there is much hope for the regeneration of
our continent in the context of the African Union and
the New Partnership for Africa's Development, Africa
has a lot of work to do. One of the most critical of
these challenges is to bring an end to the civil wars and
conflicts that have ravaged our continent. We should
aspire to having a genuine integration of all peoples,
and more especially women, into the new era of peace,
reconstruction and development on the continent.
However, this is easy to say and much more difficult to
implement.

This is also a time when women and girls face
danger. In conflict situations, women and girls become
the targets of renewed gender-based violence, in their
homes and in the streets. Another time of danger faced
by women is the transition period from war to peace,
when the demobilization of armies and the
demilitarization of personnel take place. At a time of
tension, roles are defined by the masculinity of war,
with little emphasis on the human rights of women and
girls. That approach is not easily resolved during
periods of ceasefire and transition, especially if the
conflict has been brutal.

The goals outlined in the New Partnership for
Africa's Development (NEPAD) are consistent with the
United Nations Millennium Development Goals. For
example, both prioritized combating HIV/AIDS and
promoting girls' education and, if successfully
implemented through strategies such as NEPAD, they
would be powerful examples of successes to follow in
Africa. The empowerment and the education of women
and girls enable them to become part of the future of
their countries. They have the potential to elevate girls
later in their careers and personal lives, enabling them
to advocate for the elimination of all forms of violence
against women and girls, particularly in situations of
armed conflict, and to play a role in peace-building
efforts.

In that regard, during the past two years, the
United Nations Division for the Advancement of
Women organized seminars in the subregion to enhance
women's capacities and skills for participation in
negotiations and peace-building in Africa. That was a
fruitful venture, as our women reported that they have
long been seeking guidance and special expertise to
enable them to make critical interventions within their
specific countries in order to prevent and manage
conflicts.

The gender dimensions of peace processes and
conflict resolution cannot be overlooked. Women play
a critical role in addressing peace and security issues.
A conscious effort is needed by Member States to
ensure that women's negotiation skills are utilized. It is
necessary to recognize that the objective of this debate
is to work towards a society in which everyone has a
role to play in creating new democratic institutions.
That means insisting that there is a new partnership
between men and women for peace, security and
development. That partnership should be mainstreamed
at all levels of society and in Government or State
institutions. It is also a partnership with non-
governmental organizations and civil society to
advocate the importance of the role that women play in
times of conflict.

In conclusion, it is abundantly clear that the
Security Council and, indeed, all relevant organs of the
United Nations and Member States must join in a
cooperative venture to face the challenges of armed
conflict and global security.

Women's voices and their influence in peace,
security, democracy, training and development, at the
national and international levels, will prove to benefit
all.

The report of the Secretary-General is testimony
to our collective and unwavering resolve to implement
resolution 1325 (2000). My delegation believes that the
21 actions highlighted in the report will serve as a
useful guide for eliminating the untold suffering of
women and girls caught up in armed conflict and in
ensuring the active participation of women in peace
processes.

Women deserve to be victors with men in
building peace and security.

