Mr. Grainger (United Kingdom): The
representative of France will shortly be making a full
statement on behalf of the European Union, which the
United Kingdom supports. I will therefore limit myself
to a few additional points.

Sir Jeremy Greenstock, the British Permanent
Representative, has repeatedly said that a careful
consideration of the needs and rights of ordinary
people should be at the heart of the Security Council's
activities on conflict. We need to remember that
civilians, so often the tragic victims of conflict, are
individuals in specific circumstances.

The human toll of conflict hits women and girls
hardest. They are exploited and targeted, often
deliberately, as a strategic weapon. They form the
majority of refugee populations and of the internally
displaced. And they continue to be at risk even after
the conflict, as the international human rights and
humanitarian standards that should guarantee their
security are all too rarely implemented.

We cannot treat this situation purely as a
symptom of conflict. It is also a cause. Because of
women's unique position in the social fabric, these
threats continue to damage the long-term prospects for
peace and security. This is the challenge that the
Security Council faces. Much of what needs to be done
will have to be incorporated into our regular work, as
we examine individual country situations. But let us
use this debate, and the draft resolution that will
eventually be adopted, as an opportunity to push
forward the agenda. We need to focus on concrete
deliverables in areas where we can really make a
difference.

We should concentrate in particular on three
themes.

First, how do we make sure that the rights and
particular concerns of women and girls are properly
considered and acted on in the Council's everyday
work?

We need the right sort of information to know
what the problem is and the right sort of analysis to
make our judgements. This is particularly the case
when considering concrete operational issues, such as
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes, where women and girls may have
different needs from those of male combatants.

One way of doing this would be to encourage the
Secretary-General to incorporate analysis on gender
issues in his regular reporting to the Council on
country-specific issues. The Brahimi report
recommends that an information and strategic analysis
secretariat be established to improve the United
Nations capacity to gather and analyse information. We
support this recommendation and hope that gender
expertise will be incorporated in this secretariat.

Secondly, what can we do to mainstream gender
within the objectives and organizational structure of
peacekeeping operations? Where the Secretary-General
has recommended that specific gender concerns should
be addressed in peacekeeping mandates, we should
incorporate them into the heart of our decisions.
Gender expertise should be included in peacekeeping
operations and their staff mandated and provided with
the resources to address women's particular concerns.
Peacekeeping operations should also work closely with
non-governmental organizations and civil society on
the ground in these areas.

We need to develop greater sensitivity to the
impact of peacekeeping operations on local
populations. At yesterday's Arria-format meeting, we
heard some dreadful tales of abuses of women's rights
committed by the peacekeepers that are meant to
provide stability and protection. That is why the United
Kingdom and Canada have jointly financed work, in
collaboration with the Lester Pearson Peacekeeping
Training Centre, to produce training materials on
gender for peacekeepers. We hope that this work will
be of use to as wide a spectrum of troop-contributing
countries as possible. We also encourage the Secretary-
General to provide training on the rights and particular
needs of women and girls to civilian staff serving in
peacekeeping operations.
My third point is that we should not fall into the
trap of seeing women and girls only as the victims of
armed conflict. They can also play key roles in
unlocking the door to peace. The full representation of
women's groups at all levels of peace negotiations is
vital to building sustainable peace and security. With
this in mind, the United Kingdom is embarking on an
ongoing programme of support for the United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) to help it to
build its capacity to act as a catalyst for women's
participation in peace processes. This excellent
programme will involve a review of activities by
women's civil society and the development of an
information repository and local field-based activities.
We are proud to be able to help.

The United Kingdom is very pleased that
Namibia has organized this timely debate today. We
look forward to listening to the views of non-members,
just as we welcomed the spirited discussion that took
place with non-governmental organizations at
yesterday's Arria-formula meeting. We particularly
welcome the role of Angela King and of UNIFEM. in
providing support and advice in this process. However,
we should not forget that it is the responsibility of all
those involved in peace and security to ensure that
gender considerations are mainstreamed into United
Nations activities.

The next step is to negotiate a resolution that
makes a difference. We should focus it on the areas
where results can be achieved and concentrate on
delivering a step change in the way the Council
addresses the special needs of women and girls. The
United Kingdom stands ready to play its full part in
driving this important agenda forward.

