Mr. Donaghue (Ireland): Ireland aligns itself with
the statement made by the observer of the European
Union.

We warmly welcome today's landmark resolution
of the Security Council (resolution 2122 (2013)), a
resolution that can fairly be described as representing
the high water mark so far in terms of advancing the
agenda relating to women and peace and security.
Although - or maybe because - the links between
women and peace and security are so well established
and that set of issues is now a well-developed part of
the Security Council's broader work programme, there
is a clear need for a more consistent and systematic
application of resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent
resolutions on the subject.

Ireland is a founding member of the ACT
(accountability, coherence and transparency) group,
which is pressing for the Security Council to be more
accountable, more coherent and more transparent in its
working methods. I assume that the enhanced focus on
women and peace and security in today's resolution will
mean improvements in both the quantity and quality of
briefing that will be provided to the Council on those
issues.

What distinguishes today's resolution from others
is that it represents a pivot away from a narrow focus
on women as victims and towards the more positive
and liberating agenda of women's participation and
women's leadership. Welcome attention is paid to the
active role that women and women's groups can play
in transforming conflict, insecurity and fragility. That
aspect has been insufficiently highlighted. It is often
overshadowed by the appalling suffering inflicted
on women through, for example, sexual Violence in
conflict.

We should, however, recognize the profoundly
positive contribution to be made to conflict resolution
by the empowerment of women, allied to the treatment
of women and men on equal terms. Peace is more
effectively secured when women are involved. Peace
initiatives that have strong participation by women
tend to be more resilient than those that do not. There
is no denying the moral imperative for equal treatment
between women and men.

At its core, the women and peace and security
agenda presents an ambitious, even a radical, challenge.
It calls on us to fundamentally revise the role of women
within society. It requires men to reflect on their own
roles and abandon traditional mindsets.

Fortunately, as the report of the Secretary-
General of 4 September (S/2013/525) acknowledges,
times of transition and flux can present opportunities
to strengthen women's leadership, empowerment
and rights in the process of restoring the rule of law
and governance systems. As his report indicates, the
participation of women in peace negotiations and
donor conferences has increased over the past year.
Active support for such participation, which is being
provided by gender experts and women's civil society
organizations, is growing, and some peace agreements
have included gender-sensitive language. That is
encouraging. Yet the progress being made is hard
fought and uneven.
One of the most eloquent champions of women's
rights in the world today is Mary Robinson, a former
President of Ireland and the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region. The
"Framework of Hope" that she has set out for progress
in that region highlights the empowerment of women
as a factor of critical importance. It is based on a vision
of reaching beyond traditional political leaders to
energize civil society, especially women's groups. The
Bujumbura declaration of 11 July 2013 was a product of
that approach.

It is clear that real transformative progress will
be possible only when national political leaders in
conflict-affected societies, almost all of the them men
at present, adopt the women and peace and security
agenda as their own, and when more male voices are
heard and more male champions stand up. We need to
expand understanding of the enormous contribution
that women can make in meeting peace and security
challenges. We need to incentivize national and local
male leaders so that they commit to making the concrete
progress needed to realize that potential.

