Mr. Riecken (Austria): It is an honour for Austria
to speak today in its capacity as current Chair of the
Human Security Network and therefore on behalf of
the following countries: Chile, Costa Rica, Greece,
Ireland, Jordan, Mali, Norway, Panama, Switzerland,
Thailand, Slovenia, South Africa as an observer, and
my own country Austria.

Let me first of all thank all speakers for their
briefings and commend them for their important work.
We also welcome the adoption of presidential statement
S/PRST/2014/21 earlier today.

I would like to express our strong appreciation for
the focus of today's debate on refugee and displaced
women and girls. The vast majority of displaced
persons are women and girls who often face increased
insecurity in their lives, health, rights and livelihoods
and are particularly vulnerable to gender-based
violence and sexual exploitation. While we note that
significant progress has been made, especially at the
normative level, we are deeply concerned that the
progress has been hampered by a proliferation of new
crises with outbreaks of violence and unprecedented
levels of displacement, particularly affecting women
and girls. Moreover, we are witnessing armed groups
and violent extremist groups targeting women and girls
in particular.

Our group is deeply concerned about the use
of systematic and widespread sexual violence as a
tool of intimidation, retribution and social control,
as well as the continued use of sexual violence as a
means of displacing populations. We urge all parties
to immediately cease such atrocities and to hold
perpetrators to account. We also call upon the members
of the Security Council to use all means at its disposal
to address sexual violence in armed conflicts, including
making referrals to the International Criminal Court
and other relevant actions. We welcome the clear global,
regional and national commitments taken to tackle that.

We also welcome the recommendations in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2014/693), including
those on steps that can be taken by the Security Council
to reinforce and implement the prevention framework
outlined in resolution 2106 (2013). We recognize
especially the need to pay increased attention to
improved protection and accountability for the full range
of gender-related human rights violations. We support
the efforts to strengthen early warning and early action
ability to prevent and respond to serious violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law.

I wish to highlight in particular that women's
empowerment and participation are essential to any
prevention and protection response. We need to
strengthen our efforts to ensure that women in situations
of displacement have access to resources, services,
financial independence and decision-making processes.
We need to develop tailor-made services for displaced
women, foster gender-sensitive needs assessments and
the collection of sex- and age-disaggregated data and
to make progress in linking relief, rehabilitation and
development.

To improve the situation of women and girls, we
also need to make better use of international legal and
policy instruments. In that respect, we welcome the
upcoming entry into force of the Arms Trade Treaty,
which mandates exporting States parties explicitly to
take into account the risk of serious acts of gender-
based violence or violence against women and children.

Strengthening civil society, including grass-roots
women's organizations and networks that provide
assistance to victims and survivors of sexual violence
in conflict, can enable the restoration of dignity and
respect and provide the necessary skills, treatment and
care to empower individuals to protect themselves and
defend their rights.

The Human Security Network would like to
reiterate the importance of women's participation in
all stages of conflict resolution processes. We strongly
support the deployment of women protection advisers
and the designation of gender focal points in the
United Nations peacekeeping and political missions,
and believe that their positions should be provided for
within the missions' budgets.

To conclude, let me highlight the importance we
place on reviewing our progress on women and peace
and security next year in the context of the twentieth
anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action. In particular, on today's anniversary, we
are looking forward to the high-level review in 2015
to assess progress at the global, regional and national
levels in implementing resolution 1325 (2000) and
especially to the renewed momentum we will gather to
further strengthen and implement all our commitments
on women and peace and security. The global study
on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) is an
important step in that direction and we look forward to
the results of that important study.

We must all strive to improve the protection
of women and girls in situations of conflict or
displacement, and the Human Security Network will
continue to contribute to that shared goal.

Finally, in my national capacity, I would like to
add that as a contribution to UN-Women's campaign in
the lead-up to the twentieth anniversary of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action, as well as to the
global study on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), Austria will host an international symposium
in Vienna early next month. The symposium's
results will be published in a policy paper intended
to sum up real-life expertise in conflict prevention,
analysis, resolution and peacebuilding, and to provide
recommendations on how to address the most pressing
issues.

