Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank Her Excellency
Ms. Margot Wallstrom, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Sweden, for convening today's meeting. It is a pleasure
to have you with us again, Madam President.

I would also like to warmly thank Deputy
Secretary-General Amina Mohammed and the African
Union Special Envoy for Women, Peace and Security,
Ms. Bineta Diop, for their insightful briefings on
their joint mission to the countries of the Sahel. I
join others in commending all three women for their
inspirational leadership.

We are heartened by increasing cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union
(AU) in supporting Africa's steady pursuit of peace,
stability and sustainable development. We encourage
further strengthening of that cooperation, while
underscoring the important role of women in reaching
those objectives. The recent high-level joint visit
was another significant step to promote the women
and peace and security agenda and advance gender
empowerment. Such collaborative efforts must continue
so as to achieve the goals of the Joint United Nations-
AU Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace and
Security and reach the targets of 2030 Agenda and
Agenda 2063.

Turning to the implementation of the women and
peace and security commitments in the Sahel, we
commend the joint efforts of the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel and of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
to support the participation of women in conflict
prevention, including through the ECOWAS 2017-2020
action plan for women, peace and security. We also
see the benefits of their convening, last April, a high-
level conference on women, violence and terrorism in
West Africa and the Sahel, which resulted in a call to
action to increase women's participation in preventing
violent extremism. Our delegation praises the African
Union for progressively gender mainstreaming within
the African Peace and Security Architecture and
greatly appreciates the efforts of the African Women
Leaders Network, which was launched last year by
the AU Commission, UN-Women and Germany to
enhance the leadership of women in the transformation
of Africa. We also acknowledge the important role of
women's organizations in improving women's access
to leadership and participation in peace processes
and encourage Member States to strengthen their
engagement with women's and youth groups.

It nevertheless remains imperative that a conscious
effort be made to bridge the gap between spoken
commitments and actual actions. We need to ensure
a protective environment that will enhance women's
protection and security, and provide access to justice
and services for survivors of conflict-related sexual
violence. We also emphasize the importance of a
gender perspective across all components of operations
of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel,
as set out in resolution 2391 (2017). Much remains to
be done in fulfilling United Nations recommendations
regarding the inclusion of women in peace talks to
resolve the Sahel crisis, while ensuring a 30 per cent
quota for women in decision-making and politics in the
region and allocating 15 per cent of national budgets
for development and peacebuilding to promote gender
equality in the Sahel.

There is also an urgent need to focus on the
structural drivers of instability and the root causes
of the conflict that disproportionately affect women
by reducing poverty, strengthening local governance,
providing basic services, creating better opportunities
for education and employment and mitigating the
impact of climate change. The close link between
security and development is very important not only
in one specific country, but also in the region and the
world as a whole. We therefore welcome the recent
launch of the revitalized strategic plan for the Sahel on
the sidelines of the AU Summit in Nouakchott, which
targets six key areas, including the empowerment of
women. We strongly support other subregional and
comprehensive approaches aimed at building resilience
and increasing peace and development in the region,
such as the Alliance for the Sahel initiative.

We welcomed United Nations reform on
repositioning the development system to foster greater
cooperation among various United States agencies
on the ground. Today we must go further and ensure
greater cooperation at the regional level to advance the
development agenda in a comprehensive and effective
manner. However, financing the women and peace and
security agenda remains a concern. We must therefore
provide the funds needed to ensure that peacekeeping
and political missions are provided with sufficient gender
expertise, authority and capacity. That funding gap can
partially be overcome by more substantive reforms,
streamlined and better-coordinated strategies within
the United Nations system and improved cooperation
with other partners in the region and globally. Enhanced
data-collection and reporting are also very important
for the success of the women and peace and security
agenda. What is required is an increased availability
of timely and accurate national gender-disaggregated
data and reports on progress towards implementing and
monitoring those commitments.

In conclusion, I reiterate that Kazakhstan will
always stand for the full contribution of women in all
phases of mediation, conflict resolution, post-conflict
recovery and long-term development through the joint
efforts of the United Nations and the African Union.

