Ms. O'Neill (Canada): I beg your indulgence,
Mr. President, because today I will deliver two separate
statements. The first statement is on behalf of 56
Member States representing all five regional groups of
the United Nations, including South Africa, I note as a
means of currying favour.

The group of countries thanks today's briefers for
sharing their insights and experiences. We also thank
members of the Security Council for their efforts to
address more systematically women's human rights,
gender equality and the gendered impact of conflict.

We commend South Africa for holding this open
debate on the important theme of the full and effective
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda. As the Secretary-General's most recent report
(S/2019/800) on this item makes clear, implementation
has made strides but persistent gaps and challenges
remain, making implementation far from complete.
The group emphasizes that meaningful action on
women and peace and security requires committing to
the full and effective implementation of all elements
of the women and peace and security agenda and
recognizing their interrelated, inseparable and mutually
reinforcing nature.
The group welcomes the recommendations and
suggested actions described in the Secretary-General's
report as a means to close gaps. We emphasize the
importance of the ongoing monitoring and tracking of
progress. The group would like to highlight the vital
role played by civil society in all aspects of the agenda,
including the monitoring of implementation.

Women remain continuously underrepresented
and excluded from peace and security efforts,
including peace negotiations. The group stresses that
women's full, equal and meaningful participation
must be in place in all aspects of peace and security,
including all formal and informal decision-making
processes at all levels. That must be safeguarded and is
non-negotiable. We underscore the Secretary-General's
emphasis on enhancing support and resources for
women's meaningful participation in peace and
security processes.

Political violence targeting women continues to be of
grave concern, inhibiting women's ability to participate
in public life and decision-making processes. The
deliberate targeting of women peacebuilders and women
human rights defenders remains a major concern. The
group condemns in the strongest possible terms acts that
constitute Violations and abuses of international human
rights law and violations of international humanitarian
law and hinder the achievement of full gender equality,
peace and sustainable development.

Ensuring women's full and meaningful participation
in the security sector, including in peacekeeping
operations, is another area where progress must
still be made. While there have been some positive
developments, progress is too slow. The group welcomes
innovative measures taken to increase the full and
meaningful participation of women in peacekeeping
operations, including the uniformed gender parity
strategy 201872028. The group also underlines the key
role that mission leadership must play in integrating
gender perspectives across all mission components.
This must be a top priority for the United Nations
leadership, troop- and police-contributing countries
and all Member States.

Devastatingly, sexual and gender-based violence
remains prevalent in situations of armed conflict
worldwide. It continues to be a tactic of war and
terror and must be addressed as a key security issue.
The group calls for further strengthening of justice
and accountability measures to address sexual and
gender-based violence in conflict. Recognizing the
importance of providing timely assistance to survivors
of sexual Violence, the group urges United Nations
entities and donors to provide non-discriminatory
and comprehensive health services, including sexual
and reproductive health, psychosocial, legal and
livelihood support and other multisectoral services for
survivors. In addition, we call on the Security Council
to incorporate sexual and gender-based Violence as
a criterion for sanctions and to assess the gendered
impacts of sanctions.

In closing, as other speakers have noted, 2020
will be a landmark year for the women and peace and
security agenda, with the twentieth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000) championed by Namibia. Now
is not the time to be complacent with the status quo,
but rather to be more ambitious and to address the gaps
for further implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda in its entirety. The Group calls on
all United Nations entities, the Security Council, all
Member States and all other stakeholders to use this
opportunity to move from words to action and to ensure
the full and effective implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda.

I would now like to switch to French and say a few
words in my national capacity as the representative
of Canada.

(Spoke in French)

I would like to thank South Africa for having
submitted resolution 2493 (2019) which was adopted
today. As the President of the Council remarked this
morning, it is nice to have a return to consensus. We
salute South Africa's emphasis on full implementation.
Like several others, we would like to have heard stronger
language with regard to women human rights defenders,
civil society and sexual and reproductive-health law.
To achieve real results, what does implementation
look like? For Canada, it is a question of transforming
current methods of collaboration.

(spoke in English)

The first of three ways Canada is doing that is
through partnership. The women and peace and security
agenda demands that we break out of institutional and
social silos. Within Canada, for instance, our national
action plan is a partnership among the nine ministries
and agencies, including many with primarily domestic
mandates. We recognize that peace and security are not

just foreign policy or defence issues. Women around
the world face intersecting forms of Violence and
discrimination, including in Canada, and particularly
among indigenous women, girls and two-spirit people.
Partnerships based on mutual respect with other
countries are equally important. In 2020, Canada will
co-chair the Women, Peace and Security Focal Points
Network with Uruguay, building on the excellent
work of the current Chair, Namibia. Through the Elsie
Initiative on Women in Peace Operations, Canada
partners with Ghana, Zambia and Senegal to assess
and address barriers and to design bold interventions
to make a difference for women in police and military
institutions. Canada's Chief of Defence staff is also
now chairing a women, peace and security-focused
United Nations network of his counterparts and invites
all Chiefs of Defence staff to join.

It could not be clearer - no country and no region
has a monopoly on good ideas. By working with
partners, we look forward to the day when, instead of
saying we need to do more, we can say we did it and
it worked.

The second way that Canada is transforming how
we work is by funding those who need it most. The
hard work of implementation is done by women's rights
organizations that are underresourced. Movements
need funding. We create barriers to implementation
when we demand that transformational work happen on
short funding cycles and sparse budgets. That is why
Canada doubled its commitment to the Women's Peace
and Humanitarian Fund. It is why earlier this year
we launched the Equality Fund to bring in partners,
including the private sector, to provide unprecedented
levels of sustainable resources to women's organizations
and movements. And that is why we made a three-year
$650 million commitment to closing the gaps in support
for sexual and reproductive health.

Sexual and reproductive health is not a bargaining
chip. We cannot use women's lives and their bodily
autonomy as language to be negotiated away. Sexual
and reproductive health and rights is core to the agenda
and must continue to be as we recommit our efforts to
full implementation.

Finally, we must be intentional about inclusion.
Where are the young people, the indigenous women,
the LGBTQI communities, among others? Frankly
speaking, the price of exclusion is too costly for us to
continue with the status quo. The Security Council
consistently says that women deserve a seat at the
table and yet there are crises around the world where
women are shut out from decisions that affect their
lives. For long enough, we have demanded that women
justify their participation, that they provide the data
and explain their special contributions. It is time to put
the burden of justification on those who continue to
exclude half the population.

Civil society is a true leader in making
implementation inclusive. Its groups are not just
stakeholders but equal partners and are the ones
showing us, in practice, how to push back on the push
back. In this spirit, Canada formalized our relationship
with civil society through our national action plan and
continue to look to them to hold us accountable. In the
light of today's resolution, we especially thank the NGO
Working Group for bringing the remarkable Alaa Salah
and, through her, the voices of Sudanese women to the
Council and for the Group's leadership in pushing us to
sustain our shared vision of the agenda and reminding
us that our gains are still precious.

If elected to the Security Council in 2021, Canada
will continue to champion the full women and peace
and security agenda and work both inside and outside
this Chamber to make the transformational aspirations
of the agenda a reality. We must do that work now, and
we must do it together.

