Mr. Johnsson: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having given the Inter-Parliamentary
Union the opportunity to address the Security Council
on this very important issue.

Before making my statement, I would like to
convey to the Council the greetings of Mr. Pier
Ferdinando Casini, Speaker of the Italian Chamber of
Deputies, who has just been elected President of our
organization for a three-year term and who will be
coming to New York early next week for the annual
parliamentary hearing at the United Nations.

Women and children suffer the most severe
consequences of conflicts that they themselves do not
instigate. All of us, therefore, have a responsibility to
work in support of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000). At a recent IPU Assembly, members of
parliament reviewed the situation and drew up an
impressive list of actions that they can and do promote
in parliaments and elsewhere in support of that
resolution.

Fittingly, the IPU - as the world organization of
parliaments - addresses the issue of women's
participation in peace processes from a parliamentary
perspective. Parliaments have a fundamental role to
play in peace and reconciliation processes and in the
implementation of peace agreements. The very
existence of a strong and effective parliament is itself
an essential component of any solution to conflict and
in the building of peace.

Women must be full and equal participants in
political processes. This is not only a question of
rights - of equality in society - but also an issue of
substance. Surveys we have undertaken clearly
demonstrate the fact that many women have a keen
awareness of social issues that many men lack. They
have a better understanding of specific gender issues,
particularly violations of the rights of women during
conflict, which need to be addressed in peace
processes.

Hence, these peace processes can be truly
effective and efficient only to the extent that both
women and men participate in them. Yet this is
certainly not the case today. In parliaments, for
example, women make up only, on average, 16 per cent
of the membership.
It is therefore encouraging that the presence of
women members in parliament in many post-conflict
countries has shown a tendency to increase markedly
after the conflict, invariably resulting in figures for
women members of parliament that are well above the
world average. The majority of those countries rank
among the top 30 in the world.

Rwanda's proportion has climbed from 17 per
cent before the conflict to 49 per cent today. It has the
highest relative score of any country. Burundi surged
from 9 percent to 30 per cent today and went on to
elect a woman as Speaker of Parliament. Mozambique
more than doubled, from 16 per cent to 35 per cent.
Sierra Leone was at 1 per cent before the conflict
started; today, 14 per cent of parliamentarians are
women.

What sets these countries apart? We believe it is
the fact that they have approached the peace process as
an opportunity to instigate real change.

Countries like Rwanda and Burundi have given
gender equality issues special attention and
consideration from the very beginning of the peace
process. They have actually written these issues into
their constitutions. They have established transitional
national assemblies with greater participation by
women and have introduced quotas at the institutional
level. They have made sure that women receive
leadership training to run for election. The results
speak volumes as to what countries should do when
experiencing similar situations.

The IPU is present in many post-conflict
countries. Our efforts include working with women,
helping them to develop their leadership skills and
facilitating their work, both as candidates and
subsequently as members of parliament.

We also seek to ensure that the institution of
parliament is able to address gender issues, and we do
so by raising awareness of these issues among women
and men both.

Ensuring effective oversight is one key function
of parliament, and it includes oversight of the security
forces. There are many ways in which parliament can
and should exercise its oversight function in the field
of security, and we are now working with many
parliaments to assist them in introducing a gender
perspective on security policy.

We are also assisting parliaments in analysing the
national budget from a gender perspective. This is
particularly valuable when consolidating peace and
making sure that the national budget is allocated in a
manner that allows for the implementation of peace
agreements, including those components that may be of
particular importance to women.

The lessons we have learned from our fieldwork,
from parliamentary diplomacy and from our political
debates is that we must treat these peace processes as a
continuum extending far beyond the final conclusion of
an agreement.

We must take a long-term approach to ensure that
peace is consolidated and not subjected to renewed
threats. We must also ensure that gender issues are
addressed from the very beginning of the peace process
and that women are included among those who
negotiate peace agreements. We have seen the value of
transitional assemblies as a vehicle for improvement
and, of course, an elected parliament is essential. It is
important that the gender composition of such
assemblies be discussed early on as well.

There is a need to focus on these institutions, to
give them the means they require to become effective,
to sensitize men to gender issues, and to sustain this
effort over a long period of time.

Let me conclude these remarks by reminding
members of the Security Council of the declaration that
150 speakers of parliament adopted here at the United
Nations last month. In that declaration, they pledge
their support to the United Nations and United Nations
reform. They called for a strategic partnership between
the organization that I represent here today, the IPU,
and the United Nations, with more substantive
interaction and coordination between the two
organizations.

Specifically, they encourage the United Nations
to avail itself more frequently of the political and
technical expertise that the IPU, together with its
member parliaments, can provide, particularly in areas
relating to post-conflict institution-building. The
creation of a new Peacebuilding Commission at the
United Nations offers an important opportunity to do
so. We look forward to working closely with the
United Nations in turning this vision into reality.

