Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I want to begin by commending the Russian presidency
for organizing this debate. We need only look around
the Chamber to see the high number of delegations
of Member States that are joining us today, and look
further up to see all the representatives of civil society,
to realize that there is a very powerful commitment on
the part of the international community as a whole to
the women and peace and security agenda, because, as
the Secretary-General so eloquently stated, this is not a
favour, but simply something we must do.

Exactly one year ago, I was in the same seat that
Ambassador Churkin is sitting in now and presiding
over a similar debate (see S/PV.7533). On that occasion,
113 States, showed their determination to agree to
specific and tangible commitments related to the
women and peace and security agenda.

But, before I move on, I would like to express
my thanks to the Secretary-General for his ongoing
commitment, throughout his two mandates, to the
women and peace and security agenda. I would also
like to thank the Executive Director of UN-Women, my
good friend Phumzile, and of course, Ms. Rita Lopidia
for their truly exceptional briefings. Without those
contributions, we would never reach our objectives.

At the high-level review of the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), which my country had the honour
of presiding over last year, it was made clear that each
and every one of us have unavoidable responsibilities in
that regard, and that it is up to us all to achieve results.
Power and responsibility must be two faces of the same
coin. I am proud to say that in the two years that Spain
has been a member of the Security Council, one great
and long-standing daily priority has been resolution
1325 (2000). I would like to take this opportunity to
share two fundamental aspects with this forum. I shall
note first what, in our View, has been accomplished in
the past two years, and secondly, some improvements
that my country has made in the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). The Security Council has made
some very important accomplishments in the course of
the last two years.

First, the creation of the Security Council Informal
Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security,
under the joint chairmanship of Spain and the United
Kingdom, is a very innovative mechanism with regard
to working methods. It provides Security Council
members with the concrete information that we need
regarding leadership at the United Nations. It also helps
support efforts to broadly integrate gender perspective
within peacekeeping missions. The experts have held
meetings on Mali, Iraq, whose Ambassador I see here
and with whom we have done exceptional work, the
Central African Republic and Afghanistan.

Secondly, we have managed to help national
administrations to make greater headway in the peace
and security agenda. That is why the President of Spain
announced the creation of a network of national points
of contact for the resolution 1325 (2000). On September
23, Spain's Minister of Foreign Affairs presided over
the launching of the network. The first conference of
the network of national points of contact will be held in
Spain in the first trimester of 2017. We thank Germany,
which will hold a similar conference the following year.
Over 50 States and regional organizations are founding
members of the focal points network. Moreover, as I
have explained previously and in line with resolution
2242 (2015), my country is committed to a series of
obligations that have truly helped advance resolution
1325 (2000) in Spain.

First of all, we have drafted a new national action
plan that is very progressive and will usher in change.

Secondly, we will gradually increase the number
of women deployed in peacekeeping missions. It
is important to recall that as of 1999, women can
ascend to all positions of the armed forces and that
we give women priority so that they can participate
in peacekeeping missions. I see the Colombian
Ambassador here today. She knows full well that we
have surpassed the 20 per cent quota in the contingent
of women that will be deployed to that marvellous
country. Additionally, we believe that as the number
of women that participate in peacekeeping missions
increases, the unfortunate instances of sexual abuse
and exploitation that are, regrettably, still ongoing, will
be more effectively addressed.

Thirdly, we will step up prevention and training
efforts, nationally and with third States, by sharing
our capacities.

Fourthly, we have welcomed the interesting
Canadian initiative to create a network of military and
police advisers with regard to women and peace and
security. We also attended a ministerial conference
of defence ministers in London last month, where we
fully committed to uphold the London communique
adopted there.

Fifthly, we must all make greater efforts in
financing. We have earmarked €1 million of the 2016
budget to support exceptional instruments, such as
the Global Acceleration Instrument for Women and
Peace and Security and Humanitarian Action, and
to strengthen certain capabilities, particularly the
gender units within the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations or the Department of Political Affairs.

Lastly, in the humanitarian sphere, Spain has
allocated €1.7 million to specific projects that will
be part of the agenda, notably in Palestine, Syria and
Jordan. Additionally, during the World Humanitarian
Summit, my country committed, among other goals, to
set up a gender marker for 100 per cent of humanitarian
financing in 2018.

The agenda requires real commitment. We have the
tools and we have the resolutions. Now we need to show
that there is genuine political will to implement them.
That is why we hope that the effective participation of
women will be a priority during the next Secretary-
General's mandate. I have heard him speak, I know
him, and I am sure that it will be so, but resolutions
1325 (2000) and 2242 (2015) represent a cause that
affects us all. It is indeed a just cause, but above all it

is necessary if we are to truly contribute to building a
peace with a solid foundation.

