Mrs. Kocyigit Grba (Turkey): At the outset, I
would like to express our appreciation to the South
African presidency for convening the annual Security
Council open debate focusing on the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda. I
would also like to thank the presidency of the United
Kingdom for the resumption of the open debate today.
Our appreciation also goes to the Secretary-General
for his latest annual report (S/2019/800), which
provides a valuable assessment on the implementation
of the relevant resolutions, as well as pertinent
recommendations to further advance the women and
peace and security agenda.

As we prepare to mark the twentieth anniversary
of resolution 1325 (2000), which laid the foundation
for the women and peace and security agenda, we
need to reflect on our achievements and address the
remaining gaps and challenges in realizing our overall
objective in a unified manner. In that understanding,
Turkey co-sponsored resolution 2493 (2019) adopted on
29 October.

Turkey has placed gender equality at the heart of
its foreign policy and therefore considers the increased
use of the women and peace and security agenda
across all its four pillars as a critical tool for conflict
prevention and resolution, as well as for peacebuilding
and sustaining peace. Through resolution 1325 (2000)
and subsequent related Security Council resolutions, a
solid normative framework has been established to that
end. We also welcomed the adoption of resolution 2467
(2019), on sexual violence in conflict, in April and see
it as a further concrete enhancement of the framework.

We are pleased to see that these resolutions have
encouraged the United Nations system and Member
States to step up their efforts and develop programmes
to increase women's participation as leaders in the
military and law enforcement and as peacebuilders
in treaty and peace agreement negotiations. There
has also been deeper awareness of and more serious
attention afforded to the asymmetric impact of conflict
on women and their vulnerability.

In that context, Turkey considers the work of the
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict
and the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace
and Security, as well as the development of the
Secretary-General's uniformed gender parity strategy
2018-2028, as important steps towards strengthening
the role of women in maintaining peace and security.

Turkey remains committed to contributing to the
advancement of the women and peace and security
agenda by taking into account the specific protection
needs of women as a result of armed conflicts. We
continue to provide assistance and psychosocial
support for women and girls affected by armed conflict
in our region. As such, Turkey deploys multifaceted
services to offer dignified living conditions to more
than 3.5 million Syrians who have taken refuge in
Turkey, fleeing the conflict in Syria. Of those people,
1.6 million are women.

Women's health centres established by the
Turkish Ministry of Family, in cooperation with the
Ministry of Health and the United Nations Population
Fund, offer health training, comprehensive support
and empowerment programmes for those women
and girls. Since 2014, the programme has delivered
multidimensional support to almost 400,000 refugees
in and outside temporary refugee centres. For the years
2020 and 2021, we will further strengthen the service
capacity and expand the coverage of that project.

While we work hard to mitigate the countless
negative effects of displacement on women affected
by armed conflict, we regret that earlier in this open
debate, this platform was abused to disseminate
falsehoods about my country's limited cross-border
counter-terrorism operation. Turkey's views on that
issue were amply presented to the Security Council
on 24 October (see S/PV.8645). We flatly reject and
condemn any misrepresentation of Turkey's counter-
terrorism efforts. It is clear that we do not have any
moral lessons to learn from those who have refrained
from doing their part in shouldering responsibilities
related to the refugee crisis.

Despite measurable progress, much work remains
to be done to fully translate the women and peace and
security agenda into action. That requires additional
concerted efforts by not only Member States, but
also United Nations entities, as well as regional
organizations and civil society. It is imperative to
directly address the root causes of conflicts, including
through the promotion of gender equality and the
greater and meaningful participation of women in
all forms of mediation, conflict prevention, United
Nations peace operations, post-conflict recovery and
peacebuilding processes.

Needless to say, further efforts are required to
see more women assume positions of leadership at the
negotiating table, thereby enhancing their engagement
in political and economic decision-making. As we look
forward to the twentieth anniversary of resolution 2325
(2000), Turkey stands ready to play its role.

