Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): I thank the leadership
of Germany for convening today's debate. Let me
also commend the briefers for their informative and
important contributions. I would also like to take this
opportunity to condemn the recent terrorist attack in
Sri Lanka, in which one of our young citizens lost his
precious life along with approximately 300 other people.
We stand in unity with the Government and the people
of Sri Lanka and express our deepest condolences to the
families of those who lost their lives. We demand that
the perpetrators of that heinous act be swiftly brought
to justice.

We welcome today's adoption of resolution 2467
(2019), which we co-sponsored. Ten years ago, through
resolutions 1820 (2008) and 1888 (2009), respectively,
the Security Council designated sexual Violence in
conflict as a tool of war and called on the Secretary-
General to work with United Nations personnel on the
ground and national Governments in strengthening
the rule of law in terms of preventing sexual Violence.
However, the findings in the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2019/280) that was presented today confirm
the trends that sexual violence continues as a part of
the broader strategy of conflict and accountability
remains elusive. We found the recommendations in
the Secretary-General's report quite objective and
pragmatic and they clearly require the urgent attention
of the Security Council.

Our role in spearheading the women and peace
and security agenda and the landmark resolution 1325
(2000) on women and peace and security underlines our
commitment to create consensus across the extreme
vulnerability of women during conflict and to address
those vulnerabilities.

Our women experienced widespread and systematic
sexual violence and abuse as a tactic of war during our
war of liberation in 1971. That horrific experience has
come back to haunt us with the Rohingya humanitarian
crisis. The majority ofthe 730,000 Rohingyas who have
fled atrocities in Myanmar's Rakhine state since August
2017 are women and children. Those Rohingya women
and girls in the camps in Cox's Bazar were victims of
horrific sexual abuse by the Myanmar forces, which is
attested to by United Nations agencies and international
humanitarian activists. In that connection, we deeply
appreciate the good work that Special Representative
Ms. Pramila Patten and her Office to bring before the
world what the Rohingya women suffered before they
fled and while fleeing Rakhine state.

According to Save the Children, in 2018 alone an
estimated 40,000 Rohingya babies were born in the
camps. Many of them are unwanted, even by their
mothers, and we all can imagine why. Their recognition
and compensation and ensuring a better future for them
in their country of origin are issues that the international
community should carefully consider.

As part of the solution to the problem of sexual
violence in conflict and post-conflict situations, we
should deliver on our promises and commitments.
At the national level, to increase support to national
authorities, we can strengthen national laws and
investigation mechanisms and provide protection to
victims. In addition, we should ensure victims' rights
to sexual and reproductive health care and reparations.
In Bangladesh, as a top troop-contributing country,
we have ensured raising awareness about sexual
exploitation and abuse and predeployment training for
all our peacekeepers. The Prime Minister has time and
again pronounced her zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse. We have also implemented the
guidelines of the Supreme Court by establishing women-
only committees in workplaces to hear complaints
against discrimination and sexual violence against
women and girls. The authorities are moving ahead
with the national plan of action on women and peace
and security with the help of UN-Women. Capacity-
building at the local and national levels is an essential
part in that regard. In that context, the signing of the
framework of cooperation between the Government
and the Office of the Special Representative offers a
conduit for dedicated support measures.

The culture of impunity, as experienced in the
case of conflict-related sexual violence, perpetuates
the vicious cycle. Without bringing an end to it,
justice cannot be fully achieved. In cases when
the State is unwilling to ensure accountability and
justice for such crimes, the international community,
particularly the Security Council, cannot avoid its
responsibility. The case of Rohingya women is a
glaring case in point. While the whole world is asking
for a resolution of the crisis through the voluntary, safe
and dignified return of the Rohingyas to their place
of origin, bringing the perpetrators to justice will be
a critical confidence-building measure to incentivize
repatriation, which we do not see happening. Can we
expect the Rohingyas, particularly the women and girls
who have been subject to unspeakable sexual Violence,
to be willing to return without any guarantee that the
same fate would not befall them?

We appreciate the idea of a survivor-centred
approach in dealing with victims of sexual Violence.
We are well aware of the difficulties that Rohingya
women and children face in the camps. From our modest
resource bases, we provide the Rohingya women and
girls with as much specialized care as possible. We
ensure the availability of sexual and reproductive
health services, including obstetric, prenatal and post-
natal care to the Rohingya women. We are working to
identify and address policy and systemic barriers to
support services and ensure that refugee camps are
safe for women and girls. We have mobilized adequate
law enforcement personnel and humanitarian actors on
the ground. Yet one must understand the realities of
managing the largest camps in the world. The hope of
return and a better future tends to become uncertain,
the challenges become manifold and more complicated
and desperation creeps in, particularly when the stay
becomes prolonged. Certainly, the most effective
way to keep all that at bay is a safe, voluntary and
dignified return.

It is hypocritical to condemn the human rights
violations and express horror at the new violence, while
not taking strong measures to ensure the accountability
of the State and individuals who are responsible for
such crimes. Member States committed to conflict
prevention and sustaining peace cannot turn a blind eye
to State-sanctioned persecution of and discrimination
against ethnic minorities or other human rights
violations, including sexual violence. We also urge
civil society organizations, human rights groups and
other rights groups to come forward in that regard.

While we reaffirm our commitment to preventing
sexual violence in conflict and in peaceful situation,
we should not rest until we have done our part to ensure
the punishment of those who commit and execute such
heinous and inhuman acts against women and girls.

