Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to start by
thanking Germany for convening today's meeting and
taking up this very important topic.

The full and meaningful participation of women in
all stages of the peace process has become today an
essential part of sustaining peace, including successful
peace operations. The Security Council has recognized
its importance repeatedly, in resolution 1325 (2000)
and subsequent resolutions. Japan has pursued that goal
under the leadership of Prime Minister Abe.

The participants in the fifth World Assembly for
Women, hosted by Japan last month, reaffirmed the
significance of the greater participation of women
in peacekeeping missions and host countries, the
military, police and justice sectors. The recruitment
of talented and motivated women is key to improving
the performance of any organization, including United
Nations peace operations.

Japan welcomes the efforts undertaken by the
Secretariat, including the new Uniformed Gender
Parity Strategy, to increase uniformed women
personnel. Member States can boost such efforts in
two ways. First, troop-contributing countries (TCCS)
and police-contributing countries (PCCs) can ensure
the full and meaningful participation of women in their
national military and police, which would greatly help
increase the number of uniformed women in United
Nations peace operations. After all, how can TCCs
and PCCs help United Nations field missions meet the
uniformed gender parity strategy targets if they do not
meet those targets at home?

Here, I would like to share some of Japan's
experiences. One recent notable achievement has been
the lifting of all restrictions on women's postings in the
Self-Defence Forces, except in two units where maternal
protection is required, based on relevant laws. We have
decided to allow women's participation in infantry,
reconnaissance, engineering, all types of aviation
and even submarine units. That enables talented and
motivated female personnel to pursue careers according
to their interests. That significant policy change was
driven by political leadership. In 2013, at the General
Assembly, Prime Minister Abe called for a society
where women shine (see A/68/PV.12). Since then, he
has urged the Self-Defence Forces to reform themselves
and ensure meaningful participation for women.

A holistic approach is also important, given
that increasing women's presence requires time
and resources to implement multiple solutions,
from changing mindsets to building facilities for
accommodation. In April 2017, the Ministry of Defence
launched an initiative that aims to address all remaining
obstacles hindering women's participation.

The second step Member States can take to help
implement the strategy is to utilize pre-deployment
training targeting female uniformed personnel to help
facilitate their deployment. For instance, the women's
outreach courses of the United Nations Signals
Academy have trained 155 female uniformed personnel
and 19 have already been deployed to missions or are to
be deployed soon. Japan has provided financial support
to those courses, as well as to the female military
officers' course held by UN-Women.

In conclusion, let me mention our ongoing efforts
on the women and peace and security agenda. Japan
revised its national action plan on women, peace and
security in March. In Tokyo in December 2018, Japan
co-hosted, with the Department of Peace Operations,
the first-ever capacity-building training course for
women's protection advisers to address conflict-
related sexual violence. The training will make field
missions more responsive to the specific needs of local
women and girls and more accessible to women in
the community.

We will continue to implement the women and
peace and security agenda and facilitate women's
participation at all levels of United Nations peace
operations, including by appointing talented female
officers to peacekeeping missions and dispatching
female trainers to capacity-building programmes.

