Mr. Jinga (Romania): It seems to me that
something has changed in the Chamber - there is more
light. Allow me, first of all, to commend Germany for
organizing this debate. I am very confident that, under
your presidency, Sir, the Security Council will continue
to build on this important topic.

Romania associates itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union. I would
now like to make a few remarks in my national capacity.

Women peacekeepers play a special role that is
indispensable in laying the foundations of sustainable
peace in conflict zones. It has been proven that the
presence of women in United Nations peacekeeping
missions has a positive effect on the local population.
In fact, women and children are the most vulnerable
in terms of becoming victims of violence. It is a fact
that, for male peacekeepers, it is difficult to overcome
social and cultural boundaries required to build trust
with them. That is precisely where female peacekeepers
have to fill the gap by providing victims and local
communities with a more reliable sense of security
and trust. From our perspective, that ability should be
considered a vital component of any peace operation.

In that regard, we have a proven successful example
from Afghanistan, where Romania provided female
engagement teams and managed to interact regularly
with local women, thereby building trust and confidence
in, I would say, a very complex environment.

Moreover, there is a clear need for more women
in command positions, which is critical to ensure the
United Nations Blue Helmets deliver on their tasks.
Let me share with the Council one relevant national
example. We are proud that one woman - a Romanian
police officer - received the International Female
Police Peacekeeper title in 2015.

During Romania's chairmanship of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) in 2018, listening to
the voices of women was high on our agenda. In that
regard, the topic of financing the gender dimension of
peacebuilding was included in the PBC annual session
devoted to empowering youth and women as agents
of peacebuilding and sustaining peace in the Sahel
region. In addition, during the working visits I paid
last year to the Sahel region and West Africa, I met
with women civil society groups and women leaders.
I also had the privilege to understand, in depth, that
women must be included in all peace processes and that
their participation at all levels of society is essential for
peace to last.

Member States are taking concrete steps towards
improving female representation in United Nations
peace operations. I would like to take this opportunity
to express our full support for one of the most recent
developments undertaken by Canada and the United
Nations in launching the Elsie Initiative for Women
in Peace Operations and setting up the Elsie Fund
to support the initiative. We also warmly welcome
Germany's launch today ofa global female peacekeepers
network initiative.

At the same time, Romania strongly supports the
efforts carried out by the Secretary-General through
his Action for Peacekeeping initiative and acts to
implement resolution 1325 (2000), as well as the
women and peace and security agenda, especially by
continuing to integrate the gender perspective in our
decision-making processes. We equally welcome the
Secretary-General's strategy on gender parity for the
period 2018-2028, which recognizes the importance
of women's participation in peace operations. As a
result, Romania has already surpassed the 16 per cent
objective for 2019. In fact, 17 per cent of Romania's
military observers and staff officers deployed in the
field are women, as compared to an average of 13 per
cent among Member States. We will continue working
to improve this figure.

As one of the endorsing countries of the
Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations, Romania welcomes the
development of the light coordination mechanism
in order to increase partnerships for training and
capacity-building. At the regional level, my country has
established a mobile training team focused on gender
mainstreaming in security and defence. Its first audience
was the Southeastern Europe Defence Initiative, where
our trainers with United Nations experience delivered
a key leadership course at the South-Eastern European
Brigade headquarters.

Moreover, Romania is increasing the number of
security personnel trained to prevent and respond to
sexual and gender-based violence and is supporting
the Office of the Special Coordinator on improving
the United Nations response to sexual exploitation and
abuse with an expert on military law.

Finally, I believe in changing the narrative on the
role of women in peacebuilding and peacekeeping
processes. Men and boys should also be actively
involved. A good example in that respect is the HeForShe
campaign, in which the President of Romania is one of
the 10 champions in advocating gender equality.

