Ms. Marinaki: I have the honour to deliver this
statement on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States. We would like to congratulate Spain on
placing such strong emphasis on women and peace and
security and the agenda in resolution 1325 (2000), and
placing them centre stage in Security Council priorities.
We also very much welcome the personal commitment
of His Excellency Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy Brey
by way of his presence here today.

In the same vein, we would like to commend
the able stewardship of the presidency, together with
the delegation of the United Kingdom, in steering
resolution 2242 (2015) to its ultimate adoption, which
was unanimous. All of us are very much committed to
its implementation.

We also thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for
his personal commitment to the cause of women and
peace and security, and we also pay special tribute to
the exceptional work carried out by UN-Women and
its Executive Director Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka,
and her excellent team, with whom we have enjoyed a
long and successful cooperation.

Lastly, we welcome the three women representatives
of non-governmental organizations, who, by their
candid and sobering recollections of the facts that they
face on the ground, have put the problem into its proper
perspective.

The European Union and its member States have
a long-standing commitment to the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), in both internal and external
actions. As a security, development and political actor,
the EU is heavily involved in supporting conflict
prevention and peace processes and in dealing with
the consequences of conflict. Women and peace and
security issues are a vital element of our external
policies, which range from the 17 civilian and military
missions we currently deploy worldwide to our role
as a foremost global provider of development aid and
humanitarian assistance.

From terrorism to intensified refugee and migrant
flows, it is vital that the symptoms and the root causes
of all global challenges be tackled with firmness and
fairness. With that in mind, it is all the more important
that we understand and embrace the role of women
in conflict resolution and prevention. Women need to
be heard, as every step for women's rights and every
victory on the status quo has been hard-won and, as
Malala Yousafzai pointed out, we realize the importance
of our voice only when we are silenced.

The European Union and the international
community can undoubtedly do more to ensure that
women's voices are heard and acted upon. The high-level
review provides the opportunity to assess progress and
enhance the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda. For that reason, the European Union
has contributed actively to preparations for the global
study. We welcome the work of Ms. Coomaraswamy
and her team, as well as all the efforts reflected in
Secretary-General's report (S/2015/716).

Therefore, the European Union will continue to
ensure that it focuses on the promotion and protection
of the human rights of women and their participation as
positive agents of change, peace and development. We
will make conflict-resolution and peacebuilding more
effective through their protection, while also protecting
women in situations of conflict and preventing them
from becoming victims or perpetrators.

On top of its long-standing, active and continuous
commitment, the European Union intends to do even
more. We pledge to assume substantial financial
commitments, to thoroughly mainstream gender and
to include gender-specific actions in all European
Union financial instruments, and to allocate more
than €100 million over the next seven years to gender
equality and women and girls' empowerment projects.
In the context of our humanitarian assistance, we will
tailor our targeted tools to assess how effectively all
of the European Union's humanitarian actions integrate
gender and age. Of course, we also will continue to
prioritize our cooperation, first with UN-Women
in the framework of our strategic partnership and
under our memorandum of understanding. Secondly,
we will continue to support the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Bangura, and all of
the relevant work aimed at formulating an integrated
approach to preventing and punishing acts of sexual
violence, as well as to bringing justice, services and
reparations to the victims.

The European Union will also encourage the
enhancement of the gender dimension through better
ongoing synergies in the United Nations peace and
security architecture, among the various ongoing
United Nations reviews. We will continue to engage
in close dialogue and actively support all forms of
cooperation with civil society on issues concerning
women in conflict and post-conflict situations, and
to empower women's participation and leadership
in peacebuilding initiatives. We will pay particular
attention to the protection of women human rights
defenders, especially in situations of conflict.

We remain strongly convinced that coordination
among all United Nations Member States with
international and regional organizations is key to the
effective implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda. We also believe in holding
ourselves to the highest possible standards. Therefore,
the European Union pledges to improve the way it
measures the impact of all of its actions in order to
enhance its accountability. In that context, we will
update our indicators for a comprehensive approach to
the implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008) to measure more effectively the impact of our
action. Moreover, we are in the process of completing
a baseline study to measure how we have integrated
gender into the European Union's crisis management
missions and operations.

We must address issues related to women, peace
and security in emerging challenges. The European
Union will actively coordinate its policies on women,
peace and security and on preventing and countering
violent extremism in all of its forms. We condemn all
forms of violence and abuses that women and girls i as
well as men and boys - have been suffering at the
hands of terrorist groups and regimes in conflict zones,
especially when terrorist groups fight their battles on
the bodies of women and girls. We need to promote
the positive role that women can play in countering
terrorism and violent extremism in their families,
communities and societies.

Promoting gender equality is also a priority for
the European Union internally, and we are committed
to leading by example to improve the gender balance
in decision-making positions in our own institutions,
including through a better representation of qualified
female candidates in middle- and senior-management
positions and as heads of European Union delegations
abroad.

At the same time, last month the European Union
High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy created the post of Principal Adviser on gender
and the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on
women and peace and security to mark the European
Union's engagement with international, regional and
national actors on policies and actions relating to
gender and the women and peace and security agenda.
I have the honour to have been appointed to that post,
and my commitment is to enhancing the visibility and
effective prioritization of gender, as well as women,
peace and security, in all of the European Union's
external actions, and to assisting the work of the United
Nations, in close consultation with all United Nations
services and agencies.

Lastly, I would like to conclude by expressing the
European Union's expectation of an ambitious outcome
of the high-level review of resolution 1325 (2000) and
an even faster and more ambitious implementation of
resolution 2242 (2015), which we adopted today.

