Mr. Munir (Pakistan): We thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to express our views on a topic of
great importance to all of us. We feel that the views of
the troop-contributing countries (TCCs) can enrich this
debate and lead to informed decisions.

We appreciate the Secretary-General's resolve
in pursuing a zero-tolerance policy against sexual
exploitation by peacekeepers. Pakistan, as a major
TCC, fully supports zero tolerance towards sexual
exploitation and abuse by peacekeepers. Those deputed
to defend must not be allowed to take advantage of the
vulnerable with impunity. We take our responsibility
as a TCC extremely seriously. We are fully conscious
of the need for punitive actions against perpetrators of
such heinous acts, which tarnish both the image of the
United Nations as well as of the TCC itself, in addition
to tainting the good work of peacekeeping in general.
We have taken strict action against perpetrators in
substantiated cases.

While we agree that one case is one too many
and that there is no justification whatsoever for
such callous behaviour, the report (A/70/729) of the
Secretary-General itself identifies factors that may
have led to an increase in such cases, including the
hurried re-hatting of troops, the lack of predeployment
training on standards of conduct, the excessive length
of deployment of contingents, the living conditions of
troops, including lack of welfare and communications
facilities to stay in touch with their loved ones, and
camps in proximity to, or not properly separated from,
local populations, et cetera. Let me make a few points
on the report and the process that we have and need to
follow from here on.

There should be no ambiguity in the minds of
anyone that as a TCC we are committed to getting
rid of this scourge. We all pay lip service to trilateral
cooperation. It is important to consult TCCs in
the process of developing effective guidelines and
mechanisms to stem this scourge. Collective punitive
action is against the concept of justice and fair play
and merits careful review. In principle, the Member
States and its contingents cannot, and should not, be
held responsible for the criminality of an individual.
Distinctions between accusation and conviction are
important and must be maintained. The focus of the
narrative currently seems to be on allegations. Overly
intrusive and prescriptive calls on Member States to
review their criminal procedures and legislation should
be avoided.

Recommendations related to the compensation
of victims and the establishment of mechanisms for
providing medical and legal assistance are appreciated.
However, the establishment of a trust fund should be
well thought through and implemented prudently.
Preventive steps must be taken along with remedial
measures, while addressing the issues ofbetter planning
and deployment, the rotation of troops and providing
them with better facilities would have a positive impact.

Last but not least, we firmly believe that the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations of the General
Assembly (C-34), which, incidentally, is compiling its
report at this very moment, is the forum in which to
discuss issues relating to the conduct and discipline
of peacekeepers. Recommendations in the Secretary-
General's report need to be discussed and analysed
in the C-34 in a transparent and inclusive manner.
The logic for that was very eloquently stated by the
Permanent Representative of Egypt just now.

Our troops are deployed in dangerous and violent
situations, shedding their blood for the common cause
of promoting international peace and security. Their
contributions should not be sullied by the acts of a few.
Any action by this body that could lead to a generic
blaming of peacekeepers is bound to negatively impact
the morale of the troops on the ground. That, we feel,
should be avoided.

Let me, in conclusion, reiterate our commitment
with regard to the fact that sexual exploitation and abuse
by peacekeepers cannot, and should not, be allowed to
continue.

