Ms. Hutchinson: I thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to address the Security Council as the
NATO Secretary General's Special Representative for
Women, Peace and Security. I am pleased to be able to
contribute to this ongoing dialogue, which is a priority
for the Alliance.

The adoption of the women and peace and security
resolutions and the work of the Council have helped us
reflect on the broader aspects of security, which address

the essential yet often missing influence that women
exert in reshaping the agenda for peace. We understand
the strong correlation between gender equality and a
country's stability. Women's empowerment leads to
more peaceful and inclusive communities and is vital
for conflict prevention. The treatment of women in
any society is a barometer by which we can detect
other forms of oppression, and a rise in violence can
be measured through the decrease of human rights and
shrinking spaces for women's voices.

As a military and political alliance, NATO
recognizes that the security needs of women and men
are different. However, we have sometimes missed the
opportunity to integrate their diverse perspectives. We
are now making sure that all our work adequately reflects
the whole-of-population approach. Sustainable peace
will not be achieved without women's empowerment
and participation.

NATO is strongly committed to advancing the
women and peace and security agenda. This year,
our Heads of State and Government reinforced that
commitment by endorsing a new policy and action
plan on women, peace and security that enjoys the
support of the 29 allies and many of our partners. The
new policy builds on a framework of three guiding
principles: integration, inclusiveness and integrity.
Those principles, aligned with global women and
peace and security commitments, draw from NATO's
common values of individual liberty, democracy,
human rights and obligations under the Charter of the
United Nations.

Our principles reinforce the goal that gender
equality must be integral to all NATO-led activities,
operations and missions. We aim to implement that
agenda by dismantling barriers that stand in the way
of the full participation of women in the Alliance and
national forces, but, more important, we will enhance
the accountability of the women and peace and security
mandate by ensuring that we adopt the highest standards
of professional and personal conduct within both the
civilian and the military staff ofNATO. Our new policy
represents the next step in advancing the agenda within
the Alliance and reaffirms the continuous commitment
of NATO allies and partners to the integration of
gender perspectives and the women and peace and
security priorities. The policy will become an integral
part of everyday business and support our Alliance
in addressing the complex challenges of the twenty-
first century.

Today's global threats are complex and multifaceted
and complicate the security landscape in unprecedented
ways. Therefore, we need to respond adequately
through a holistic approach to security. The link
between security and economic stability is well proven.
Women's economic fragility is reinforced by political
instability. We must do better to support women in
being agents of their own future. NATO is actively
promoting and enhancing engagement with women's
civil society organizations to strengthen the voices of
those most affected by conflict. We have established
the Civil Society Advisory Panel on Women, Peace and
Security, which is an independent coalition of women's
organizations that represent the global constituency
of those most affected by inequality and conflict. The
Panel challenges us to broaden our understanding
of security, promote a more inclusive approach and
address the challenges to defence and security.

The members of the Panel have raised concerns
about the current threats to peace around the world
and highlighted their frustration at the slow progress
of the women and peace and security agenda. We
have listened, we have heard their voices, and we
have responded by making sure that the integration
of gender and the inclusion of women's voices are
mainstreamed throughout NATO's work. That is the
essential factor in the success of peace and security.
Women everywhere highlight the need to understand
and reinforce preventative measures, which include
gender perspectives in early-warning analysis. We
must recognize that violations of women's rights and
women's political and economic isolation are indicators
of potential conflict. The Civil Society Advisory Panel
urges us to make gender more visible within security
responses and provide a clear vision for the future
that relies on coordinated efforts with international
organizations and civil society.

Consistency and coherence across the international
system are critical if we are to advance this agenda.
We must articulate our vision, coordinate our efforts
and demonstrate our collective support while holding
accountable all those responsible for implementing
this mandate. Change requires courage, and courage
demands commitment. The women and peace and
security agenda needs collective action to ensure
tangible progress. We must be courageous in our work,
as we work together to achieve sustainable and lasting
peace not only for women, but for everyone.

