Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Allow
me, at the outset, to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Zainab Bangura, as well
as the representative of civil society, Ms. Hamsatu
Allamin, for their briefings and for their daily
commitment. I am grateful to the Jordanian presidency
for convening this important open debate.

Luxembourg aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union.

Ever since the Security Council recognized,
15 years ago, that women were disproportionately
affected by conflicts and that this had consequences
for reconciliation and peace processes, the response
of the international community has been remarkable
with respect to legal norms. The Council has adopted
at least seven resolutions on the matter, including the
landmark resolution 1820 (2008), while the Declaration
of Commitment to End Sexual Violence in Conflicts,
presented in 2013 during the sixty-eighth session at the
initiative of the United Kingdom, has been endorsed by
more than 150 Member States, including Luxembourg.

However, despite those efforts, the scourge of
sexual violence is far from having been eradicated.
Just the opposite is true. As the Secretary-General's
report (S/2015/203) notes, disquieting new tendencies
have appeared. The emergence of violent extremist
groups such as Daesh and Boko Haram has aggravated
an already difficult situation for women and girls in
the areas concerned. Yesterday we observed the sad
anniversary of the abduction in Chibok, Nigeria, of
hundreds of high school girls, who were subsequently
reduced to slaves by Boko Haram. We condemn in
the strongest possible terms those savage acts, which
have also been documented in two recent reports by
Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch. The
inclusion of such gruups in the annex to the report of
the Secretary-General is amply justified.

What makes resolution 1325 (2000) so noteworthy
is the coherence with which it addresses the situation
of women in the context of conflicts and questions
of peace and security, proposing that prevention
and protection are two sides of the same coin. The
violence to which women and girls are exposed in
times of conflict - in particular sexual violence - is
exacerbated by the structural weaknesses of societies
during times of peace. That is also the reason that we
must pay particular attention to the warning signs of
conflict. In fact, conflicts are generally preceded by a
noticeable rise in human rights Violations and violence
towards women.

Allow me to mention some of the tools that the
Security Council should use, in our view, to protect
civilians from acts of sexual violence.

The Council should continue to integrate the
provisions of its resolutions on women and peace and
security in all its decisions, including resolutions and
presidential statements of regional purview. The Council
should also ensure that sexual violence becomes an
integral criterion for designation within all the relevant
sanctions committees, and those committees should
ensure that the names of presumed perpetrators of acts
of sexual violence are systematically entered on their
lists. Resolution 2206 (2015), adopted on 3 March, is
a positive example in that regard, insofar as it defines
the fact of committing acts of sexual violence against
civilians, especially women and children, as a criterion
for designation to be monitored by the new Canctions
Committee on South Sudan. Finally, the Council should
act with determination to ensure that the presumed
perpetrators of systematic acts of sexual violence and
those in the chain of command should be handed over to
justice, including through referral to the International
Criminal Court those situations in which such acts are
committed. I am thinking particularly of the case of
Syria.

With regard to the concerned Member States,
they must respect international law and fight against
impunity. It is incumbent upon them to show that they
take women's autonomy seriously by integrating them
into negotiations and conflict resolution processes, by
making the issue of sexual Violence an integral part of
peace agreements and by reforming their security and
justice sectors. It is up to the international community
to support those efforts. Only by joining forces will
we succeed in putting an end to conflict-related sexual
violence.

