Mr. Bermudez Alvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me, at the outset, to congratulate
Germany for having convened today's open debate.

Uruguay endorses the statement delivered by the
representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security.

I will focus my statement on Uruguay's experience
as a troop-contributing country and on our actions to
increase the participation ofwomen in peace operations.

Fully cognizant of the valuable contributions that
women make to peacekeeping and peacebuilding, my
country has deployed military observers to oversee
ceasefires, disarmament and access to humanitarian
aid. Moreover, in the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, women contingents have participated in
operations to negotiate the establishment of relations
with armed groups and conducted tasks to prevent and
respond to conflict-related sexual violence and human
rights violations. In these challenging contexts, many
women are deployed as military staff officers, doctors,
dentists, nurses, translators, drivers, radio operators
and soldiers, among many other roles. Indeed, they
excel in performing the most difficultjobs on an equal
footing with men. Moreover, our experience confirms
the unique capacity of female uniformed personnel to
interact with local communities, thereby illustrating
their particular sensitivity and ability to build trust,
particularly when dealing with situations involving
women and children.

Conscious that there is still a long way to go, Uruguay
will continue working to foster greater participation by
women in peacekeeping forces. Major efforts are under
way aimed at supporting and developing joint strategies
and initiatives with the United Nations and with other
Member States, while others focus on the domestic
context. At the international level, Uruguay supports
the Secretary-General's system-wide strategy on
gender parity, along with the efforts of the Department
of Peace Operations through its uniformed gender-
parity strategy initiative, launched in January. Together
with a group of countries, Uruguay co-facilitated the
consultation process on the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative in 2018. Uruguay also joined the Secretary-
General's Circle of Leadership on the prevention of and
response to sexual exploitation and abuse.

With regard to our joint initiatives developed with
other countries, Uruguay organized a preparatory
meeting for the United Nations Peacekeeping Ministerial
with the United Kingdom in Montevideo in December.
During the preparatory meeting, particular emphasis
was placed on training Blue Helmets in topics related to
women and peace and security and on specific training
for female peacekeepers. Moreover, Uruguay joined
the Elsie Initiative for Women in Peace Operations,
launched by Canada. We will also be honoured to join
Canada in co-chairing the Women, Peace and Security
Focal Points Network in 2020, which coincides with the
twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), and in
coordinating actions linked to peacekeeping operations.

Allow me to touch upon some of the initiatives that
my country has carried out domestically, which have
allowed us to progressively improve the participation
of women in our contingents in terms of quantity and
quality. I can confirm that Uruguay is one of the troop-
contributing countries with the highest percentage of
female personnel deployed in peace missions. That
expansion has gone hand in hand with the increasing
presence of women in the Uruguayan armed forces and
police, thanks to the Government's adoption of gender-
equality State policies that have allowed women to
participate in all activities, including those traditionally
performed by men. Today, on the basis of merit, women
freelyjoin the armed forces and police-training schools.

Moreover, Uruguay is seeking to tackle the
challenges faced by female personnel on the ground,
such as performance in difficult operational
environments, and in sociocultural situations in
which the participation of women as negotiators is
rejected or in which their rights are simply not taken
into account. To facilitate the participation of female
staff with young children, our country is analysing the
possibility of relieving such women after three months
of peace-mission deployment.

It should also be noted that challenges often
develop into opportunities. It has become clear that we
could enhance the empowerment of local women, who
follow the example set by female personnel working in
operations on par with and as efficiently as men.

Another initiative that deserves special attention is
predeployment training. The National Peace Operations
Training Institute of Uruguay offers mandatory courses
to all troops to be sent into the field. Women particularly
benefit from that training, which allows them to
tactfully cope in situations that necessitate their action,
especially to prevent and respond to violence against
women and children.

To conclude, I would like to express Uruguay's
appreciation and gratitude to peacekeepers, especially
the women who act with dedication and sacrifice far
from their homes and children, inspired by a strong
vocation to serve in the name of peace.

