Ms. Heyzer: First of all, I would like to say a
very big thank you, Mr. President, for your leadership
in this area, and also a big thank you to all members of
the Security Council. We appreciate all the comments
that you have made on the whole area of women, peace
and security, and all the support that you have given me
for my work at the ground level.

We definitely welcome the opportunity to
strengthen our collaboration, especially at the field
level. In this regard, I would like to acknowledge the
progress that has been made, especially in the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) on
the ground. In fact, our experience has been that
DPKO, in the areas where it has gender advisors, has
been able to leverage the support of women by drawing
on the strength of UNIFEM. Therefore, a very good
example has been in East Timor, where we both
participated in the training of women, and got women
elected on a platform to deal with violence against
women, and also of support to the police in order to
protect women. So we were extremely pleased with
that kind of work at the ground level.

This discussion has been an excellent basis for
the preparation of our October session, and the report
of the Secretary-General and the independent
assessments will touch on many new areas of action
that have been identified. There is a huge expectation.
As many Council members have noted, Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000) is a living document,
something women will pay attention to and build upon.

The women's movement has celebrated the kind
of thoughtfulness and receptivity the Security Council
has given to this whole area of work. I will be in touch
with them to convey the messages discussed here. We
look forward to many of the initiatives discussed by
Chile and Colombia on small arms. I also would like to
share with you the fact that the Minister for Women's
Affairs from Afghanistan will be here tomorrow to visit
us, and there will be a signing of a memorandum of
understanding with UNIFEM. The leadership of
Afghan women shows strongly how the United Nations
system has been working together.

A specific strength of UNIFEM. is working with
women to prepare them for the peace table and train
them to participate in the reconstruction of their
countries. This is true from the Congo to the Manu
River. The strength of the Women's Fund is in building
women's capacity and the different kinds of leadership
that will bring women to the peace table. In
Afghanistan, UNIFEM. was very central to pulling
together an agenda on women that was discussed at the
Loya Jirga.

I would like to stress the link between the
Secretary-General's report and the independent
assessment. There is a division of labour between Ms.
King and the work of UNIFEM. All of us participate in
Ms. King's inter-agency task force. The division of
labour is such that the independent expert assessment
captures the voices of women at the ground level, and
also the work in new areas that would not be captured
by a desk review. That is the connection, but we hope
both studies will become part of the Secretary-
General's report.

I would like to end by saying UNIFEM. is a small
fund, but we have invested $14 million in the area of
women, peace and security. This investment has gone
into four areas of work. One is early warning and
prevention, using women's groups on the ground to
help us. The second area is protection and assistance,
in strong partnership with different agencies such as
the United Nations Fund for Population Activities,
UNICEF and women's groups. The third and largest
area of women's work and the work of UNIFEM. has
been in the area of peace-building, getting women from
the ground and communities to the peace table. The
fourth is gender justice, especially in post-conflict
peace-building. As we move forward, we all realize
that this area is actually the first step. We look forward
to a long-term partnership with the members of the
Security Council, so that implementation will make the
kind of transformation necessary to ensure peace and
security in women's lives.

