Mr. Shava (Zimbabwe): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the 15 States members of the Southern
African Development Community (SADC). Let me
at the outset congratulate Jordan on its assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council and express
our great appreciation for the President's personal
leadership in conducting the business of the Council,
particularly in today's open debate. I would also like
to express our appreciation to today's briefers for their
valuable contributions to the discussion on women and
peace and security in the context of conflict-related
sexual violence.

SADC wishes to associate itself with the statement
delivered by Ambassador Tete Antonio on behalf of the
African Union (AU).

In recent years, the world has witnessed a
multiplicity of conflicts leading to an unprecedented
increase in the scale of Violence against women
and girls. There is growing recognition that newly
emerging unconventional conflicts associated with the
proliferation of militias, armed groups, terrorism and
violent extremism have had a disproportionate impact
on women and children. Conflicts have had devastating
consequences for women, including heightened risk for
human trafficking, sexual violence, forced and early
marriages as well as lack of access to basic services.

The Secretary-General's report on conflict-related
sexual violence (S/2015/203) describes the year 2014
as a one marked by harrowing accounts of sexual
violence in the context of violent extremism. It details
how terrorists use sexual violence to achieve tactical
objectives, dispelling the notion that sexual Violence is
a by-product of conflict.

This month marks the first anniversary of the
kidnapping by Boko Haram of more than 200 young
girls from their school in Chibok in northern Nigeria.
SADC condemns this barbaric act and stands together
with the Government and the people of Nigeria and the
international community in calling for their safe return.

The international community has recognized that
women's participation is vital to achieving sustainable
peace. In this regard, in the year 2000 the Security
Council laid the foundation for the women and peace
and security agenda in the landmark resolution 1325
(2000) and other subsequent supporting resolutions.
Other key reference points include the Beijing Platform
for Action and the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women.

As we mark the fifteenth anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000), SADC recognizes that significant steps
have been taken to address the plight of women and
girls to improve international, regional and national
responses to their protection. However, we wish to
underscore that States have the primary responsibility
to protect women and girls from all forms of gender-
based discrimination and abuse, which are often
aggravated in conflict situations. While international
cooperation and assistance are important, they should
not replace the central role of the State in the protection
of women and girls.

SADC's programmes on women and peace and
security are guided by the region's commitment
to women's rights. The SADC Protocol on Gender
and Development, signed in 2008, encompasses
commitments made in all regional, global and
continental instruments for achieving gender equality.
Articles 20 and 25 of the Protocol provide for the
implementation of a variety of strategies including
enhancing, reviewing, reforming and enforcing laws
aimed at eliminating all forms of gender-based Violence
and trafficking.

At the continental level, tremendous efforts have
been made to ensure the adoption of laws, policies and
programmes to safeguard gender equality and women's
empowerment. The AU's five-year Gender, Peace and
Security Programme, launched on 2 June 2014, is
designed to serve as a framework for the development
of strategies and mechanisms for women's increased
participation in the promotion of peace and security.
The African Union is working closely with the Office
of the United Nations Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict to translate this framework into
a plan of action containing indicators and directives
for implementation that will guide member States in
implementing resolution 1325 (2000).

The AU Special Envoy on Women, Peace and
Security, Ms. Bineta Diop, is mandated to lead the
AU efforts to promote women's roles in preventing
conflict and peacebuilding. At the twenty-fourth AU
Summit, held in Addis Ababa in January, the year 2015
was declared the Year of Women's Empowerment and
Development, in recognition of the Vital role of women
in Africa's development. We recognize that economic
empowerment also reduces women's vulnerability to
violations of their rights.

While considerable progress has been achieved
in establishing the legal and normative framework on
women and peace and security, implementation remains
a challenge. SADC is concerned about continued
gross abuses, sexual exploitation and the abduction of
women in areas of conflict. We urge the international
community to collectively respond effectively to
violations of women's rights in a holistic manner.
This entails addressing the root causes of conflicts
and strengthening national capacities for peace and
reconciliation.

In order to address sexual violence against women
in time of conflict and in post-conflict situations, we
have to work on preventive measures during peacetime.
Gender mainstreaming is a critical factor, as is putting
laws in place that protect women against abuse and
violations of their rights. Equally important is ensuring
that perpetrators of violence against women and girls
are held accountable.

We need to intensify efforts to address the plight
of women and girls in conflict situations to ensure
their effective participation in development. The high-
level review of resolution 1325 (2000) in October will
provide an opportunity to take stock of what has been
achieved and what challenges still lie ahead.

In closing, I would like to reaffirm SADC's
commitment and support to the women and peace and
security agenda.

