Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (Spoke in French):
First of all, my delegation would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this open debate on an
issue of the utmost importance, that of women and
peace and security. I would also like to thank all the
briefers for their statements.

Conflicts have devastating consequences for all
societies. They have a particular impact on women and
girls, who are most often the target of gender-based
violence and the most excluded from political processes
related to peacebuilding and strengthening security.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development has
placed strong emphasis on peace, including conflict
prevention and the elimination of root causes through
Sustainable Development Goal 16, which is to promote
peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable
development for all, provide access to justice for
all and build effective, accountable and inclusive
institutions at all levels for everyone. That universal
Agenda enshrines another goal - Sustainable
Development Goal 5 - that is dedicated to gender
equality through the empowerment of women and
girls and which promotes the mainstreaming of gender
in all the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). In
that sense, the SDGs demonstrate that gender, peace,
security and development are linked, interconnected
and inseparable.

In addition, we are pleased that Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres has made the issues of women's
empowerment and gender equality a priority for his
mandate. Similarly, the Security Council is ensuring
that it incorporates the dimension of women and
peace and security in all international peace issues.
The historic adoption, 18 years ago, of resolution
1325 (2000) represented an acknowledgement of
the role of women in peace and security, not just as
victims but also as agents of change and key players
in the restoration and maintenance of peace, as well
as peacebuilding. The adoption of tat resolution, as
well as those that followed it, sends a strong message
of the international community's firm and ongoing
commitment to help empower women and protect
their rights. Conflict prevention is a central pillar of
the women and peace and security agenda. Resolution
2122 (2013) reaffirmed the role of women at all stages
of conflict, including conflict prevention and resolution
and post-conflict recovery. The resolution filled a gap
in the interpretation of previous relevant resolutions
that addressed only the prevention of gender-based
violence during conflict, rather than the role of women
themselves in the prevention of conflict.

There is therefore a need to take a more
comprehensive and holistic approach that addresses
the root causes of conflict and bolsters the inclusion
of women in decision-making processes. In that
context, achieving true social peace requires sound and
inclusive political, economic and social structures. My
delegation endorses the recommendations contained in
the latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/900)
that promote equal and timely access to basic services,
the elimination of discriminatory laws and practices,
the strengthening of women's political representation,
the consolidation of the rule of law and support for
sustainable economic development. In our recognition
of the contribution of women, their ability to provide
key early warnings, their perspectives on tensions
in social relations, their awareness of threats to
personal, family and community security in the fight
against extremism in local discourses and their role in
mediation, Morocco has undertaken several initiatives
and is actively participating in others.

Those include the Spanish-Moroccan Initiative on
Mediation in the Mediterranean Region, launched in
2012; Morocco's involvement in the network of focal
points on the theme of women and peace and security,
established by Spain in 2016; and Morocco's involvement
in the Mediterranean Women Mediators Network,
launched by Italy in 2017. In addition, on 7 September
2016 in Rabat, Morocco hosted an international
conference on the theme of women and peace and
security, which followed up on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). The conference examined the
issues of the role of women in mediation and conflict
prevention in terms of de-radicalization, as well as
best practices for preventing sexual violence in times
of conflict. Another initiative in Morocco is that of
the employment of hundreds of women as preachers
known as morchidates, in mosques and religious
institutions across the country. Those women highlight
the true teachings of religion, which are based on
tolerance and the acceptance of others and far from
any misinterpretation or radical orientation. They also
provide advice on various issues, including women's
legal rights and family planning.

Another aspect is the regular deployment of
female personnel in contingents of the Royal Moroccan
Armed Forces in the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic and the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO). Moreover, the rapidly deployable
battalion that Morocco has deployed in MONUSCO,
which is currently in its final phase of deployment, has
a specifically women-based unit. Similarly, by the end
of 2018, Morocco intends to meet the target of women
making up 15 per cent of its experts on mission and
military observers.

Allow me to conclude by highlighting the following
points. Women are the most vulnerable and targeted
members of populations in situations of conflict. Their
contribution to peace negotiations is undeniable and
invaluable. Their participation in peace processes
increases the prospects ofconflict resolution, facilitates
the sustainability of peace agreements and promotes
nationalreconciliationand socioeconomicreintegration.

Empowering women in peacebuilding processes
requires collective and coordinated action by all actors of
society. Civil society and women's rights organizations
play a valuable role. They can more quickly identify
threats and tensions, provide an independent analysis of
any given situation and create peacebuilding networks.

In two years, we will celebrate the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).
That will be an opportunity for us all to take stock
of two decades of significant progress towards the
emancipation of women and their participation in
conflict resolution. It will also be an opportunity to
look beyond 2020.

