Mr. Grunditz (Sweden): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Nordic countries - Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Norway and my own country,
Sweden. The Nordic countries thank the Secretary-
General for his report to the Council (S/20l2/33), and
his Special Representative Margot Wallstrom for so
ably leading the United Nations work in this difficult
area. We also thank her, Under-Secretary-General
Ladsous and the representative of the NGO Working
Group, Amina Megheirbi, for their important
statements here today.

The report of the Secretary-General constitutes a
baseline and sets a standard for the Council to obtain
more systematic, detailed and analytical information on
conflict-related sexual violence. That was our hope
when, in December 2010, we welcomed the creation of
the monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements.
Now as we see progress in reporting, it is also time to
improve our response, as Special Representative
Wallstrom stated in her remarks earlier today.

We support the Secretary-General's
recommendation to the Council to increase pressure on
perpetrators through measures by the relevant
sanctions committees. We welcome the further
development of the monitoring, analysis and reporting
mechanism and underline the need to avoid duplication
and to ensure coordination with the monitoring and
reporting mechanism on children and armed conflict
and regular human rights reporting. In that context, we
acknowledge the important work undertaken by both
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Sexual Violence in Conflict and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children in
Armed Conflict.

We are pleased that Special Representative
Wallstrom has been able to address the Council in
country-specific meetings throughout her mandate
when new information emerged. That type of
interaction can allow preventive action to be taken in
reasonable time. Timely, analytical and verified
information allows a better response at all levels.
National Governments and local civil society
organizations can more accurately plan and establish
effective early warning tools, response and protection
mechanisms, as well as services for survivors. United
Nations actors and international non-governmental
organizations that support them can respond quicker
and better.
The Security Council can take targeted and
consistent action against perpetrators to fight impunity,
increase compliance with international law and,
ultimately, prevent such crimes from happening in the
first place. We encourage the Council to explore ways
by which it could enhance and systematize the
consideration of information on serious violations
being brought to it, as well as to use all possible tools
at its disposal to respond.

The Nordic countries have always advocated a
broad approach based on equal rights and the
participation of both women and men as the best
possible prevention tool in the long term. I would like
to draw attention to two sectors where institutional
reforms are particularly important in combating sexual
violence and other serious human rights violations,
namely, the security and justice sectors.

It is essential that every process aimed at security
sector reform include a focus on sexual violence, as
well as the broader security needs of women and girls.
Training and capacity-building of national security
actors should aim at a real shift in attitudes from a
conflict management posture to the provision of
security for citizens and communities, placing the
person in the centre. When assessing security in the
aftermath of a conflict, indicators such as women's
movement between villages and children's school
attendance should be used alongside the more
traditional ones. Proper vetting procedures should be
used to exclude perpetrators of sexual violence or other
human rights violations from all branches of the
security services. More women should be recruited and
trained to serve in the security sector, including in
leading positions. Specialized units for the reporting of
sexual and gender-based violence should be set up, and
the security sector should be placed under democratic
control and supplied with accountability mechanisms,
including accountability to local communities.

In order to incorporate those important aspects in
the preparations for peacekeeping missions, all Nordic
military and police personnel receive training on
resolution 1325 (2000). A joint Nordic Centre for
Gender in Military Operations was established last
month in Stockholm. The aim of the Centre is to raise
the countries' competence in gender issues within
planning, execution and evaluation in military
operations. The Nordic Centre for Gender in Military
Operations will act as a hub for information,
knowledge and experiences. The Centre will

continuously support and cooperate with the United
Nations, the European Union, NATO and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and other relevant actors. On this note, we particularly
welcome the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
continuing work on training, as addressed by Under-
Secretary-General Ladsous earlier today.

There should never be impunity for sexual
violence. We are pleased that the Council has
demonstrated increasing willingness to use
commissions of inquiry and referrals to the
International Criminal Court. International inquiries
and high-profile trials serve an important function but,
as I mentioned a moment ago, national-level legal and
justice sector reforms are at least as important to
combat impunity and prevent and deter sexual violence
in the long term.

The Nordic countries commend the Team of
Experts on the Rule of Law for having in a short time
developed a focused way to support Governments in
this area. Elsewhere innovative practices such as
mobile courts are being used to bring justice closer to
the survivors and communities, serving a double-
function of justice and confidence building. Enhanced
access to justice should also be accompanied by
enhanced reparations for victims. Innovative measures
such as community reparations and the creation of
economic and educational opportunities should be
explored more widely.

Finally, the Nordic countries commend the
Council and the broader United Nations system for
continuing to address conflict-related sexual violence
and to use available means to counter those threats
against international peace and security. We strongly
welcome the soon to be launched guidelines to address
sexual violence in ceasefires and peace agreements.
There can be no real peace unless there is peace and
justice for survivors of sexual violence.

We express again our full support for the work
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Wallstrom.

