Mr. Vershbow: It is more dangerous to be a woman
in a conflict zone than it is to be a soldier. That brutal
fact led the United Nations to adopt resolution 1325
(2000), 15 years ago. What was the resolution's aim?
To inspire a new approach to international security,
where the views and actions of women are every bit as
important as those of men and where their inclusion is
guaranteed.

For too long, the needs and interests of women
have been ignored, both during times of conflict and
when making and keeping the peace. If peace is to be
sustainable, then it must include the voices of women.
We cannot ignore half of the world's population.

The North Atlantic Treaty Organization is proud of
its record in implementing resolution 1325 (2000). Via
our operations in Afghanistan and in the Balkans, we
have made a tangible difference to the lives of women
in conflict and post-conflict countries.
The root of our success to date comes from
embedding a gender perspective deep within our
organization and from keeping things as practical as
possible. NATO is incorporating gender perspectives
into the analysis, planning, execution and evaluation of
all its operations and missions. Our strategic commands
are implementing new guidelines on the prevention and
response to conflict-related sexual and gender-based
violence. We have a wide network of gender advisers.
We are placing gender perspectives at the centre of
defence planning and reporting by our member nations.
Gender is a key principle of our Defence Capacity
Building Initiative with our partners around the world.
With Jordan, we are implementing the first trust fund
on gender training for the Jordanian armed forces.
And in May 2015, we appointed our first ever female
NATO Commander, Brigadier General Giselle Wilz of
the United States Army, at the NATO headquarters in
Sarajevo.

NATO is therefore doing a great deal. But we need

to do more, especially when it comes to promoting equal
participation within NATO itself. We need to increase
the active and meaningful participation of women. To
that end, we pledge to share best practices and valuable
lessons learned with our allies and partners on increasing
female participation at decision-making levels in our
own structures; to accelerate the advancement of women
in our own headquarters by establishing a women's
professional network and mentoring programme; to
actively encourage allies to submit female candidates
for our most senior decision-making positions; to
strengthen our partnership for gender equality with
other international organizations, including the United
Nations, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, the European Union and the African
Union; to finance gender-sensitive research aimed
at identifying drivers of radicalization and violent
extremism; and to develop targeted and evidence-based
responses, including empowering women to safeguard
communities.

We also welcome the broad participation of civil
society in the development, execution and monitoring
of our NATO-Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council Action
Plan on Women, Peace and Security. As a next step,
we pledge to establish a civil society advisory panel to
institutionalize that positive engagement.

The world is changing rapidly. We face a rising
tide of violent extremism and terrorism. And it will be
women, once again, who are most at risk. It is therefore
essential that women be involved at every stage and
every level of our operations and missions. Improving
gender equality within NATO not only improves our
credibility, it is essential to our ability to do our job
right. Gender equality enhances our ability to respond
and to deal with crises. Diversity gives us strength.
Being inclusive will allow us to achieve our common
goal: lasting peace and security.

I thank the Council for the opportunity to speak
here today, and I extend special thanks to the President
of the Government of Spain for his leadership in
presiding over this very important meeting.

