Mr. Powles (New Zealand): May I congratulate
you, Mr. President, on taking the initiative of holding
this timely and relevant open debate, and also join the
previous speaker in congratulating your delegation
generally on its performance during its presidency. I
would also like to recognize the substantial
contribution to this debate made by Ms. King and Ms.
Heyzer this morning.

I have the honour to make this statement on
behalf of the countries of the Pacific Island Forum
represented in New York - namely, Australia, Fiji, the
Federated States of Micronesia, the Marshall Islands,
Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga,
Vanuatu and my own country, New Zealand.

The past few years have seen increasing
recognition of the many roles of women in relation to
peace and security, and the effects on women of armed
conflict. The rights of women, their empowerment and
the maintenance of peace and security are
fundamentally linked. The Beijing Declaration notes
that

"Women's empowerment and their full
participation on the basis of equality in all
spheres of society, including participation in the
decision-making process and access to power, are
fundamental for the achievement of equality,
development and peace". (A/CONF.I77/20/Rev.1, Annex 1, para. 13)

It also recognizes the leading role that women have
played in the peace movement and that women's full
participation in decision-making, conflict prevention
and resolution and all other peace initiatives is
essential to the realization of lasting peace. In other
words, women have both a key interest and a key role
in the maintenance of peace and security.

The Beijing + 5 review reaffirmed the importance
of gender-sensitivity and analysis in assessing the
impact of conflict, in working with those affected by it
and in action to bring about lasting peaceful solutions.

Beijing + 5 also recognized that situations of
armed conflict are inextricably linked to violations of
women's human rights, including through violence
against women. It was noted that such violence was
often of a sexual nature. Our delegations welcome the
recognition of the seriousness of such acts in the
Statute of the International Criminal Court, which
makes certain forms of violence against women war
crimes and crimes against humanity.

The differential impacts of conflict on women,
and the important role women have in peace-building,
have been apparent from experience in the Pacific
region. Women have disproportionately borne the
effects of conflicts in the region, such as the
secessionist crisis that stretched from 1989 to 1998 on
the Papua New Guinea island of Bougainville.
Women's insistence that peaceful means be found to air
grievances and attain a durable peace has been a
constant underlying strength of the Bougainville peace
process.

Women's groups in the Solomon Islands have
played a key role in bringing the parties together and
maintaining the momentum that culminated in the
recent settlement agreed in Australia at Townsville. We
hope they and other members of civil society will
continue to be involved closely in the peace-building
process.

In these countries, as in the aftermath of recent
events in Fiji, women's full participation in peace-
building is essential.

A gender-sensitive approach to peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peace-building is essential and
underlines the importance of ensuring adequate gender
representation in all areas of the United Nations work
dealing with peace and security issues. While the
number of women serving in peace and humanitarian
operations has been growing in recent years, the
number of women employed in professional and policy
positions continues to be low. We urge the Secretary-
General to work to achieve gender equity throughout
the Secretariat, including in the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, and to ensure that sufficient
women officers and gender expertise are included in
United Nations peace processes and operations and
fact-finding missions. In this regard we welcome, as
some others have today, the Brahimi report's
recommendation regarding equitable gender
distribution in the appointment of mission leaders.
Accordingly we hope that Member States will
incorporate a gender perspective into their decisions on
the implementation of the report.

In particular we are concerned by the complete
absence of women envoys or special representatives
and encourage the Secretary-General to urgently
address this imbalance.

I would now like to say a few words on behalf of
my own delegation only.

New Zealand was proud to host the
Commonwealth South Pacific Gender Symposium on
Peace and Politics in June of this year. The participants
noted that women and children suffer the impacts of
violent conflict disproportionately - yet they are often
the ones left to cope with these impacts. The
symposium recognized women's roles as mediators and
leaders for peace and called upon Governments to
increase women's participation in the process of peace-
building. Participants considered it essential that
gender and conflict training be provided for armed
forces and police. New Zealand strongly supports this
proposal and commends the Secretary-General's efforts
to include gender affairs officers in operations such as
the United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET). Through their work, the rights of
women and girls are being promoted in all areas of
UNTAET's activities.

The Commonwealth Symposium also noted the
increase in domestic violence during armed conflict
and the need to address this during and after the
conflict. We are pleased to note that the police training
curriculum developed by UNTAET in East Timor
includes modules on human rights, including women's
human rights, and that recruitment for the East Timor
Police Academy has attracted a substantial and
growing proportion of women. This should help to
ensure gender-sensitive perspectives in the local police
force and attention to women's well-being in situations
of domestic and wider violence.

Women and children also tend to suffer
disproportionately from the imposition of
comprehensive economic sanctions. As we noted
earlier this year, New Zealand supports "smart
sanctions" to reduce the incidence of humanitarian
suffering and mitigate any unintended negative
consequences, particularly on women and children. The
Council should also encourage impact-assessment
studies before, during and after the imposition of
sanctions to ensure that their effects are appropriately
focused and monitored.

In conclusion, the Pacific Islands Forum
delegations appreciate the opportunity to emphasize the
need to integrate a gender perspective into this
Council's work. A dual approach is needed. First,
gender issues must be mainstreamed into all aspects of
United Nations activities for the maintenance of peace
and security. Secondly, women's participation in those
activities must be improved. Today's open debate is a
welcome step towards achieving those goals, and we
hope that the Council will formulate an innovative and
comprehensive programme for progress in these two
very important respects.

