Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I wish once again to
warmly welcome the President of the Government of
Spain to the Security Council and to express to him my
appreciation for his presiding earlier over our meeting
today. His presence here today is a clear indication of
the importance that Spain attaches to this issue. The
focus on the phenomenon of human trafficking in
armed conflict, which highlights a disturbing trend that
warrants strengthened international action, is indeed
commendable and timely.

Allow me to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon and the other briefers for their respective
briefings and steadfast commitment to addressing the
issue of human trafficking in their work. I also wish
to thank Ms. Ameena Saeed Hasan and Ms. Nadia
Murad for their harrowing and powerful testimonies.
Their courage and fortitude in the face of unspeakable
horrors should compel us to act, and demands to be
matched by the strongest resolve from the international
community to ensure that the detestable treatment that
they and others have experienced is not repeated.

Trafficking in persons is abhorrent in any context;
on that there is universal agreement. Human trafficking
entails the extrajudicial judgment that certain groups
of people, whether on the basis of ethnicity, faith,
gender, economic status, age or other random criteria,
are inferior lots and can be used as a means to an end.
Human traffickers strip people of their dignity and
negate the respect inherent to all humankind, thereby
debasing their victims as mere chattel for the profit of
others. Such twisted concepts and beliefs are especially
pernicious in situations of armed conflict, where the
vulnerability of civilian communities renders them
prime targets for such horrendous acts.

Moreover, we are currently witnessing a nightmare
scenario in which non-State armed groups that expose
violent and extremist ideologies are actively engaging
in human trafficking activities to fulfil their distorted
visions of the world. Da'esh and its ilk have shown
that they are capable of immense cruelty through the
prevalant use of sexual violence and the enslavement
and trade of women and girls for recruitment and
financial purposes. In that regard, the practices of
groups such as Da'esh and Boko Haram in perpetuating
sexual violence, including through the trafficking of
women and children, demands heightened and greater
attention and responses from the Council. Malaysia is
therefore pleased to have supported and co-sponsored
resolution 2331 (2016), just adopted. That resolution
marks an important contribution to reinforcing the
existing international framework to combat trafficking
in persons, particularly where that is being used to fuel
terrorist activities. We wish to highlight three aspects
that we believe will make a real difference in tackling
the scourge.

First, as with all transnational crime, strengthening
cooperation and coordination between Member States,
as well as regional and international organizations, is
imperative. In that regard, we call upon Member States
that have yet to subscribe to and implement the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and its additional protocols, which provide the
principal foundation for our concerted action, to do
so. We also encourage Member States to prioritize
ratifications of other international instruments that
complement efforts to eradicate human trafficking
in all its forms, such as the relevant protocols of the
International Labour Organization, the Committee
on the Rights of the Child and the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women, among others.

Given the multifaceted dimensions of trafficking
in persons, including where it is associated with sexual
violence and funding terrorist activities, it is crucial that
the international community mobilize complementary
legal means, where available, to investigate, disrupt
and dismantle trafficking networks. We fully support
the efforts of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and other bodies, as well as bilateral partners, in
providing technical support to Member States to build
law enforcement capacities.

Within the South-East Asian region, our
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
neighbours have demonstrated a unified commitment
to combating and preventing trafficking in persons in
the ASEAN Convention against Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children and its related plan of
action, established in November 2015. We appreciate
the strong support for such regional-level efforts by
East Asia Summit partners, as reflected in the Summit
declarations adopted in September.

Secondly, in maintaining international peace and
security, the Security Council must better utilize its
available tools to monitor trends in human trafficking
in armed conflict, identify perpetrators and hold them
accountable. Information and evidence of acts of
trafficking in persons and sexual violence in conflict
should be made available to the Council and channelled
to the relevant sanctions committees, including the
committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL
(Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities. We support integrating a
focus on trafficking in persons and the use of sexual
violence in armed conflict into the work of the 1267
Monitoring Team and Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, where there are clear linkages
to terrorist activities.

At the same time, the crucial outreach and advocacy
role of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and ofthe Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict must be better leveraged. The
securing of commitments and action plans for parties
to the conflict, so as to end and prevent violations and
abuses associated with trafficking persons, including
sexual violence and recruitment and use of children,
should continue to be pursued. We call for the Council's
continued engagement with those envoys, including
through the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict and the various sanctions committee.

My final point pertains to the need for victims
and survivors of trafficking and sexual violence to
be supported in returning to a secure and stable life.
Women and children subjected to any violations and
abuses, including trafficking and sexual violence
at the hands of Da'esh and similar groups, should be
considered as victims and given access to funding and
assistance. In that respect, community and religious
leaders are pivotal in ensuring the reintegration and
rehabilitation of survivors and eliminating the stigma
that can be associated with the ordeal that they have
been through. In that regard, we support a continued
partnership with civil society to enable survivors and
communities to heal and renew.

I wish to conclude by reaffirming Malaysia's
enduring resolve to combat and eradicate trafficking
in persons, and of our equally strong commitment to
continue working with the international community
until we bring an end to those crimes against humanity.

