Ms. Soreide (Norway): I am speaking on behalf
of the Nordic countries - Denmark, Finland, Iceland,
Sweden and my own country, Norway. I would like to
thank South Africa for initiating today's debate and for
bringing women peacebuilders to this Chamber.

To understand conflicts, we need to understand
how they affect both women and men, and to solve
conflicts, we need to mobilize women. Women and men
have exactly the same right to take part in decisions
concerning their future. As Nobel Peace Prize laureate
Leymah Gbowee has so eloquently said, if women are
not observers to conflict, why should they be observers
to peace? We know that inclusive peace processes have
better odds of creating lasting peace.

The Nordic countries welcome the emphasis in
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/800)
on women's meaningful participation in preventing
conflict and sustaining peace. It is now critical to ensure
a concrete and practical follow-up. We will do our part,
nationally and multilaterally. The launch in September
of the Global Alliance of Regional Women Mediator
Networks was quite a milestone. The Alliance not only
highlights the large number of women with substantial
and varied experience in the field of peace and security,
it also shows their commitment to participating in
and leading such processes. We encourage other
countries to join the Commitment 2025 initiative
on women's inclusion in peace processes, which was
launched during the United Nations high-level week in
September. We also urge the Security Council to ensure
that the situation and roles of women are reflected in its
resolutions and mission mandates.

Inclusion is also about including a variety of
women - rural and urban, young and elderly, differently
abled, indigenous women and women of different sexual
orientations. We are concerned about the widespread
violence and repression that women peacebuilders and
human rights defenders face, as well as the persistent
impunity for such violence. These women's rights
and security are essential to democracy and peace.
Supporting women working on the front lines for peace
is essential. Here I would like to highlight the work of
the International Civil Society Action Network, the
Women's International League for Peace and Freedom
and the Global Network of Women Peacebuilders.

Research continues to link gender-based violence
and gender inequality to the level of a society's
vulnerability to civil war and conflict. More must be
done to eliminate all forms of violence against women
and girls, including conflict-related sexual and gender-
based violence. We must counter attacks on women's
full and equal enjoyment of human rights, ensure
sexual and reproductive health rights and strengthen
services for survivors of sexual violence. We strongly
support the mandate of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
and welcome the International Fund for Survivors of
Conflict-Related Sexual Violence led by Dr. Denis
Mukwege and Ms. Nadia Murad. In my national
capacity as Norway's Foreign Minister, I would like
to announce that we will support the Fund. I would
also like to draw the Council's attention to the recently
launched Women, Peace and Security Index, which
measures women's situations globally in three key
areas - inclusion, justice and security.

Lastly, the handbook on prevention and response
to conflict-related sexual violence for use in United
Nations operations is forthcoming. In fact, it should be
available tomorrow.

We are focusing a lot of our attention on
resolutions. I think we need to focus equally on the
implementation of resolutions. With the support of a
non-governmental organization, the Working Group on
Women, Peace and Security, and others, South Africa
was able to secure language on the full implementation
of former resolutions in resolution 2493 (2019), which
we adopted today. While we want to see stronger
commitments to safeguarding and enabling women
human rights defenders and peacebuilders, their role is
now recognized, as are States' responsibilities towards
them. We were a sponsor of resolution 2493 (2019) and
congratulate South Africa and the Council on reaching
a consensus vote.

In conclusion, the Nordic countries call on the
Security Council to preserve and build on the cross-
regional consensus that has been a trademark of the
women and peace and security agenda. There should
be full agreement around this table on the simple
fact that women's participation is needed to achieve
sustainable peace.

