Mr. De Souza Monteiro (Brazil): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today's important debate
on women and peace and security. Let me also thank
the briefers for their insights and reflections.

The global study conducted by UN-Women in 2015,
put together in the context of the fifteenth anniversary
of resolution 1325 (2000), came to the conclusion
that a peace agreement is 35 per cent more likely
to last at least 15 years if women were a part of the
negotiations. Over the past years, women have achieved
great success in waging peace, every time they were
given the opportunity. There are important lessons to
be learned from the engagement in peace processes
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi,
Guinea-Bissau, Colombia and many other places.
Evidence shows that belligerents often trust women to
be honest brokers in peace processes, in ways that help
bridge divergent Views. In a number of cases, women
peacekeepers are the only ones able to make contact
with the local female population, which provides
United Nations missions with precious information on
how to better protect civilians, as well as on how to
fulfil mission mandates as a whole.

We must also recall that women made an invaluable
contribution during the elaboration of the Charter of
the United Nations, perhaps the most long-standing
peace effort of all time. Brazil takes pride in the fact
that one of the four women delegates who took part in
the San Francisco Conference was a Brazilian biologist
and politician, Bertha Lutz, who signed the Charter on
Brazil's behalf.

In March 2017, following the Council's
recommendations, Brazil joined a growing group of
nations that have adopted a national action plan on
women and peace and security. By adopting our action
plan, which was renewed in 2019 for an additional
four years, we committed to pursuing clear guidelines
in support of the full participation of women in
international peace efforts. Among other commitments
that have translated into policy, the plan has been
instrumental increasing the proportion of women
military and police officers in our contribution to
United Nations peacekeeping. In the same spirit, Brazil
welcomes the priority attached by the Secretariat and
the Department of Peace Operations to that objective,
most notably to the Uniformed Gender Parity Strategy
2018-2028, which is part of the Secretary-General's
Action for Peacekeeping initiative.

As a long-standing troop- and police-contributing
country, Brazil is entirely committed to the success of
that strategy. While we are proud to have taken concrete
steps towards fulfilling the targets for women military
and police officers, we recognize the need to address
the structural challenges resulting from the fact that
only recently have women taken on combatant roles in
our armed forces. Brazil is willing to work closely with
the Department of Peace Operations to find ways to
overcome that challenge together. As an example of its
commitment to increasing the participation of Brazilian
women in peacekeeping operations, Brazil will host
the 2021 United Nations Female Military Officers
Course. It is the first time the course will be offered in
the Americas. Moreover, our integrated peacekeeping
training centre has also been developed and will
soon host a course aimed primarily at non-combatant
military, with a View to preparing more female officers.

Another commitment from Brazil's national
action plan is the inclusion of the women and peace
and security perspective in cooperation projects in
peacebuilding contexts. That guideline has been
essential, for instance, in framing our engagement in
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC). Brazil commends and encourages
efforts to better integrate the women and peace and
security agenda into United Nations peacebuilding
efforts in the field. The adoption of the Peacebuilding
Commission's 2016 gender strategy was a positive step
in that direction, while also making the PBC the first-
ever intergovernmental body to adopt such a document.
We welcome the consideration of the women and peace
and security dimension in the engagement of the PBC
in country configurations, as well as in the elaboration
of programmes financed by the Peacebuilding Fund.

We also fully support calls to enhance the role of
the Peacebuilding Commission in discussions about
women and peace and security. Last June, the PBC
was briefed by Brazilian Commander Marcia Braga,
recipient of the United Nations Military Gender
Advocate of the Year Award for 2019 for her work
in the Central African Republic. As a follow-up to
Commander Braga's briefing, the PBC advised the
Security Council to encourage exchanges by the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic with women
leaders in local communities, as a means to better
understand violations, enhance the Mission's early-
warning capabilities and provide a more tailored
approach to the protection of civilians.

In conclusion, as we approach the twentieth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), the time is right
for deeper reflection on the unmistakable progress the
international community has made on the women and
peace and security agenda over the past two decades.
However, we must also look ahead in order to keep up
the momentum and make even further strides. Going
forward, Brazil would like to see the Peacebuilding
Commission play a greater role in the context of the
twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000). The
women and peace and security agenda has always
provided us with more material for discussion than the
Security Council could possibly process. In the PBC,
on the other hand, we could, for instance, organize a
women and peace and security week aimed at taking
stock of the numerous lessons learned and good
practices emanating from women's engagement in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding.

