Mr. Rivard (Canada): On behalf of the
Government of Canada, I thank the Togolese
presidency for convening today's open debate on
conflict-related sexual violence.
Canada welcomes the Secretary-General's recent
report (S/2012/33) and thanks the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual

Violence in Conflict for her presentation today and her
efforts to strengthen United Nations mechanisms to
prevent and respond to such crimes, including rape and
trafficking of women and girls. Canada encourages the
Security Council to receive regular briefings by the
Special Representative following her visits to countries
on the Council's agenda.

(spoke in French)

Canada strongly supports the Security Council's
recognition of the need to take effective measures to
prevent and respond to conflict-related sexual violence,
including rape as a weapon of war. In this regard,
Canada calls on the Council to ensure the
implementation of increased accountability measures
for these crimes, including monitoring and reporting
arrangements and holding those responsible for sexual
violence to account. It is also important to give
consideration to the health, safety and dignity of
survivors.

Canada welcomes the inclusion of the list of
perpetrators of acts of sexual violence in the annex to
the Secretary-General's report. My country calls on the
Security Council to increase pressure on States to hold
perpetrators of sexual violence to account. Canada also
calls on the Security Council to ensure that its
sanctions committees adopt criteria pertaining to acts
of sexual violence such as rape as a weapon of war,
sexual slavery, enforced prostitution, forced pregnancy,
enforced sterilization or other forms of sexual violence
of comparable gravity.

(spoke in English)

Canada urges the Council to consistently address
conflict-related sexual violence in its work, including
by ensuring that preventing and responding to sexual
violence is part of the mandated tasks of United
Nations peacekeeping operations. In the upcoming
mandate renewals of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya and the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan next month, mandate elements
addressing sexual violence should be strengthened.

Canada supports the efforts of the Team of
Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict and the use of the early warning indicators
that are being piloted for use in select projects,
including operations in South Sudan and in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
