Ms. Radwan (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
I would like to thank you, Sir, for having convened
this important meeting on the protection of civilians,
especially women.

Israel, the occupying Power, cannot speak about
human rights or the protection of civilians, especially
the rights of women, in any form and should not try
to whitewash its infamous record of well-documented
crimes against women and children. How can a Power
conducting an occupation and implementing a policy
of settlement address such issues? My delegation
condemns all of these violations, which run counter to
international law, international humanitarian law and
international human rights law.

What attention was paid to the protection of
civilians during the aggression committed by Israel
recently in Gaza, indiscriminate attacks that resulted
in the killing of more than 2,000 people, most of them
civilians, making no distinction between men, women,
children or the elderly? What about the systematic
policies of demolishing homes, displacing and killing
people, or the consequences of the siege against Gaza
in terms of violating children and women and putting
extreme restrictions on the daily lives of Palestinians
there?

Israel has persistently violated the rights of
Palestinian and Arab women in such a way as to
constitute war crimes. It has committed the epitome of
human rights violations by forcing Palestinian women
to give birth at checkpoints, potentially leading to the
loss of newborn babies.

Israel does not comply with international instruments
protecting the human rights of women in detention,
thus Palestinian women in prison are subjected to the
worst forms of violation. I will not speak at length, as
the record of such violations has been well-documented
by bodies of the United Nations. However, we call on
the Security Council not to remain silent in the face
of these violations but to take action so as to bring the
perpetrators to justice - those who claim democracy
and respect for human rights while exhibiting a flagrant
disregard for human conscience.

