The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Japan.

I join previous speakers and my colleagues in
thanking Special Representative Margot Wallstrom and
Special Adviser Rachel Mayanja for their very helpful
briefings.

First of all, I would like to congratulate
Ms. Wallstrom on her appointment as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, and to express Japan's full
support as she fulfils her heavy responsibilities. Japan
attaches great importance to her mandate to provide
coherent and strategic leadership and advocacy efforts
on this important issue. We wish the Special
Representative to focus particularly on activities
related to the impact on women and girls on the
ground. Therefore, we highly appreciate
Ms. Wallstrom's first visit to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, where she not only met high-level
officials, but also heard the voices of survivors of
sexual violence. However, it is important that her visit
be followed up by necessary measures, including a
possible deployment of a team of experts to strengthen
capacity for ending impunity in the country.

Secondly, we support the five-point priority
agenda set by Ms. Wallstrom. The protection of women
should go hand in hand with empowering them, which
is a concept emphasized in the human security
approach that Japan has been advocating. We hope that
the Special Representative will place a high priority on
women's empowerment by focusing on the needs of
individuals and communities in order to enhance their
resilience and preventive capacity.

Thirdly, it is important to address the gap that
exists in the United Nations system in monitoring and
reporting on sexual violence. We look forward to the
Secretary-General's specific proposal in this regard.
Performance benchmarks should be developed, taking
into account ongoing processes, such as global
indicators in the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), as well as the listing of criteria for parties that
have committed sexual violence against children.

Japan also welcomes Ms. Mayanja's briefing and
timely submission of the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2010/173) on the set of indicators for
tracking implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We
highly commend Ms. Mayanja's leadership and the
work of the Technical Working Group. I would like to
make three brief points on the indicators.

First, we appreciate the efforts of the Secretariat
to develop a comprehensive set of indicators that cover
all areas of resolution 1325 (2000). The 26 indicators
in four areas proposed in the report are interrelated.
Some of the indicators can be implemented without
much delay, but some others require two to five years,
we understand, for technical development reasons
before becoming operational. Therefore, it is important
for the Secretary-General to set out a so-called road
map for making each indicator operational, in
consultation with relevant stakeholders.

Secondly, the Security Council should mobilize
political will on the occasion of the tenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) to approve a
comprehensive set of indicators on that occasion.
Thereafter, the Security Council would request the use
of indicators in country and thematic reports and invite
Member States to use indicators in their efforts to
implement resolution 1325 (2000).

Lastly, there is synergy here. Indicators were
requested by resolution 1889 (2009) at last year's
Council debate on the specific needs of women and
girls in armed conflict and post-conflict situations (see S/PV.6196). Therefore, we believe that the indicators
will serve for early warning in peacebuilding activities
to prevent the recurrence of conflict, and thereby
contribute to the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission.
I resume my functions as the President of the

Security Council.

After consultations among members of the

Council, I have been authorized to make the following
statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the
appointment of Margot Wallstrom as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict and reiterates its
support of her mandate as outlined in resolution
1888 (2009).

"The Security Council welcomes the timely
submission of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/173) requested in resolution 1889 (2009)
and takes note of both the indicators and the
recommendations contained in the report.

"The Security Council notes that indicators
contained in the report would need technical and
conceptual development before they could
become operational.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to continue to consult with the
Security Council, taking into account views
expressed by other relevant stakeholders,
including the broader United Nations
membership, taking into account the need to
further develop indicators contained in his report
(S/2010/l73), and the parallel ongoing work
regarding resolution 1888 (2009), in order to
include a comprehensive set of indicators in his
next report on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) to be submitted to the Security
Council in October 2010, as well as a programme
of work containing roles and responsibilities vis-
a-vis the indicators within the United Nations
system and a time frame to render the indicators
operational.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to continue to ensure that all
country reports to the Security Council provide
information on the impact of situations of armed
conflict on women and girls, their particular
needs in post-conflict situations and obstacles to
attaining those needs.

"The Security Council expresses its
intention to take action on a comprehensive set of
indicators on the occasion of the tenth
anniversary of its resolution 1325 (2000) in
October 2010, for use at the global level to track
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

"The Security Council reiterates its desire to
commemorate the tenth anniversary of its
resolution 1325 (2000)."

This statement will be issued as a document of

the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2010/8.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my

list. In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I now invite Council
members to informal consultations to continue our
discussion.

The meeting rose at 12.10 pm.
