Ms. Nescher-Stuetzel (Liechtenstein): We thank
Uruguay for providing us with the opportunity to
speak on this important issue. And we are grateful
to Deputy Secretary-General Mohammed, Under
Secretary-General Dieng and Ms. Mina Jaf for their
very important and substantial briefings. We would
also like to thank Ms. Bangura for her excellent work
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict over the past five years.
We look forward to working with the new Special
Representative, Ms. Patten.

The most recent report (S/2017/249) by the
Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual violence
gives little hope that the use of sexual violence as a
tactic of war is on the decline. Moreover, it emphasizes
that in most cases the suffering of the survivors does
not stop with the violation itself; stigma and shame
exacerbate their situation further, often leading to
reluctance to report such violations, thereby letting
perpetrators go unpunished.

Accountability is a key ingredient in our joint
efforts to eradicate conflict-related sexual violence.
International criminal justice mechanisms have
significantly advanced the efforts to fight impunity - as
illustrated, for example, by the 1998 Akayesujudgment
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda,
which found that sexual assault constituted an act
of genocide; or the 2016 Bemba judgment of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), where the principle
of command responsibility was invoked to find Bemba
criminally responsible for rape committed by his
subordinates. Those judgments send the clear message
that impunity for sexual violence as a tool of war is not
an option. We commend the Prosecutor of the ICC for
prioritizing sexual and gender-based crimes in many of
her ongoing investigations.

We have to look for other options where the ICC has
no jurisdiction. In the case of Syria, the accountability
mechanism established by the General Assembly
currently offers the only promising path towards
accountability and justice for the Syrian people. Its
terms of reference note the need for dedicated expertise
on sexual violence. We call on all States to continue
their political and financial support for the mechanism.

Women and girls are more likely to become victims
of sexual violence in conflict situations, but men and
boys are also affected. Estimates suggest that one in
three survivors is male. The response to the issue has
been insufficient; psychosocial and medical services
offered to male survivors are limited and transitional
justice mechanisms often adopt a gender-binary
interpretation of sexual violence, identifying women
as victims and men as perpetrators. This denies men
and boys access to reparations and health services. We
commend Spain for adopting gender-inclusive language
in resolution 2331 (2016) on human trafficking in
conflict and encourage others to follow suit.

Resolution 2331 (2016) is of particular importance
to Liechtenstein. It identifies a correlation between
human trafficking, sexual violence, armed conflict,
terrorism and transnational organized crime. It
also reflects some of the ideas resulting from a joint
workshop we held with the United Kingdom and the
United Nations University (UNU) on denouncing
and disrupting trafficking and modern slavery and
protecting its victims. Liechtenstein organized another
workshop with UNU in March of this year, with a
focus on disrupting financial flows associated with
trafficking and modern slavery, which brought together
leaders from the financial sector, as well as Member
States and civil society. The product of the workshop is
scheduled to be presented during the high-level political
forum in July 2017 and the high-level week this fall.

Finally, let me underline that the most efficient
method for ending conflict-related sexual violence
is ensuring that it does not happen in the first place.
Liechtenstein commends Secretary-General Guterres
for his focus on prevention and would like to recall that
more than half of the current membership has signed
the code of conduct regarding Security Council action
against genocide, crimes against humanity and war
crimes, pledging to support timely and decisive action
to prevent or end the commission of atrocity crimes.
We call on the remaining Member States to join our
efforts in ensuring the Security Council delivers on
its mandate as outlined in the Charter of the United
Nations and assumes the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

