Mr. Escalante (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to begin by aligning myself with the
statement made by the representative of Canada on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and
Security. Like others, I thank the German presidency for
convening this open debate. I also thank the Secretary-
General, Major General Lund, Head of Mission, the
United Nations Truce Supervision Organization, and
Ms. Merekaje, Secretary General of South Sudan
Democratic Engagement Monitoring and Observation
Programme, for their briefings.
As we have all said today, women play a
fundamental role in peacekeeping operations. Their
inclusion strengthens the defence of human rights and
leads to better results in peace negotiations. They bring
different perspectives and priorities to prevention,
resolution and peacebuilding processes. Practice has
shown that when women participate in peace talks, they
broaden the debate beyond the interests of the parties
to the conflict and advocate for a more equitable peace.
Unfortunately, women continue to be excluded from
conflict prevention, management and resolution.

The women in peacekeeping agenda, in addition to
increasing their active participation in such processes,
should promote full respect for the human rights of
women and girls, the prevention of sexual and gender-
based violence in conflict, gender equity and the
integration of gender perspectives into all its activities.

El Salvador is committed to peacekeeping
operations and currently almost 9 per cent of the
total number of its armed forces and national civil
police officers serving in the seven peace missions in
which we participate are women. That is a relatively
small number in comparison to other contributors
but it is significant in the context of my country and
has been increasing in recent years. The Salvadoran
women carry out different tasks at various levels, such
as expert helicopter pilots and crews, for example, in
our contingent in Mali, institutional-building work in
Haiti, health activities through specialized doctors or
the recent deployment of our first military observer in
the mission in South Sudan.

Nevertheless, we note that we must continue
to make progress at the national level to meet the
percentage established by the United Nations in terms
of women's participation in peace operations, not only
because the United Nations requires it but also because
we are convinced that it is right. We therefore welcome
the creation of different mechanisms to continue to
increase the participation of Salvadoran women in
peacekeeping operations.

In that regard, we welcome the Canadian
Government's innovative Elsie Initiative on Women
for Peace Operations to step up our efforts for women's
active participation, including by encouraging more
deployments in more flexible formats.

Despite the insistence and the various efforts made
to reach the minimum of 15 per cent of female troops,
the likelihood ofa decrease in the coming years is quite
high, as the Secretary-General points out in his report
of October 2018 (S/2018/900).

My country believes it important to deepen the
analysis of this issue and to re-evaluate the approach
guiding our efforts. Particularly in my country, there are
various challenges to increasing women's participation,
such as cultural, economic and family issues. Many
women police or military officers are also mothers,
wives, widows or carers for the elderly.

While, for structural reasons, men can strike
a balance between participation in peacekeeping
operations and family life, we must find ways in
which women can do the same. Addressing women's
different perceptions, specific situations, experiences
and capacities will help to recognize the real
obstacles to their participation and, as far as possible,
overcome them.

For its part, El Salvador will continue to promote
gender-sensitive structures that foster national
capacities, including empowering women to access
increasingly higher ranks within our armed forces,
as well as in the various multilateral forums in which
we participate, in order to have better guidance in that
regard and, ultimately, better gender parity.

Finally, we would like to highlight our support for
the Secretary-General's gender parity strategy, which
we believe to be essential not only to comply with
quotas for women's participation but also to focus on
seeing women assume different levels of command in
peacekeeping operations.

