Ms. Muthukumarana (Sri Lanka): Let me join
previous speakers in thanking the delegation of Nigeria
for convening today's open debate. I would also like to
thank the Special Representative on Sexual Violence in
Conflict for her statement.

In times of conflict and post-conflict situations,
attention should be paid to all forms of violence against
civilians, but especially to sexual violence. Conflict
often creates family dislocations, shattered livelihoods
and sole breadwinners, with the resulting negative
consequences. Single mothers are often the product of
conflict, and, in some cases, that increases vulnerability
to sexual harassment, exploitation and violence.

The Government of Sri Lanka has implemented a

firm policy on sexual violence and taken firm action

on reported cases of violence against women and girls

during the conflict and the post-conflict periods in my

country. Sri Lanka has deplored all violence against

women and has a well-established policy against

gender-based violence and all forms of sexual abuse.

During the conflict period, from January 2007 to May

2009, seven security forces personnel were reported to

have been involved in five incidents of sexual Violence

in Northern Province. That is out of a total of 125

persons accused in 119 incidents for the entirety of
Northern Province. In the post-conflict period, from
May 2009 to May 2012, 10 security forces personnel
were reported to have been involved in six incidents
of sexual violence in Northern Province. That is out of
a total of 307 persons accused in 256 incidents for the
entire Northern Province. The involvement of security
forces personnel as a percentage of the total accused
stands at 5.6 per cent in the conflict period and 3.3 per
cent in the post-conflict period.

It is interesting to note that the involvement of
security forces personnel as a percentage of the total
incidents of sexual violence is quite low, both in the
conflict and post-conflict periods. In a majority of
the aforementioned cases, the perpetrators have been
close relatives or neighbours of the victim. Against
that backdrop, the Sri Lankan authorities reject the
inferences by certain organizations and reports that the
presence of the military contributes to the insecurity of
women and girls in the former conflict-affected areas.

Legal action has been taken by the Government in
all of the above-mentioned cases in which Sri Lankan
Security Forces personnel were involved. The military
has taken stringent action, including discharging
offenders or imposing other punishments in accordance
with the military and penal codes. Furthermore, charges
have also been filed in normal criminal courts. Along
with the application of the law to personnel in breach
of the law, the Sri Lankan military continues to provide
large-scale human rights training with the assistance of
the International Committee of the Red Cross.

Certain organizations are involved in propagating
false reports against the Sri Lankan military of sexual
violence. A recent report was authored by Ms. Yasmin
Sooka. That report made accusations, often with
disturbing details, without providing sufficient
details, such as to the time, place and the identity of
victims, to enable investigations and prosecutions.
Those accusations were subsequently repeated in
further publications of various organizations, thereby
contributing to forming an opinion that is propagated
without evidence. None of those allegations have been
substantiated by verifiable data in any of the documents.
Significantly, no credible evidence has been directly
brought to the attention of Government authorities
by any of the parties. The Government has not been
provided the evidence - which is claimed to be in the
possession of the authors of these reports - in order to
investigate and respond.

I would like to also point out the other extensive
measures the Government has taken to cater to women
and girls to ensure that their well-being and security is
protected. The Government has established women and
children's police desks staffed by female police officers
in police stations in the Northern and the Eastern
Provinces. Specially trained police officers function at
such desks which provide an enabling and protective
environment for children, women and girls and their
parents to report incidents of abuse and exploitation.

The Government has given special consideration
to uplifting the social and economic status of war
widows. Bilateral assistance has already been obtained
to initiate a self-employment programme for war
widows in Batticaloa in collaboration with the Self
Employed Women's Association, based in India. A
local non-governmental organization, the Parents
of Servicemen Missing in Action and Association of
War-Affected Women, educates soldiers, youth and
community leaders about international standards
relating to war and promotes the economic and social
development of women across conflict lines.

We note that this year report of the Secretary-General
on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2014/1 81) contains
references to the Human Rights Council resolution on
Sri Lanka (A/HRC/25/L.l/Rev.l), accountability and a
comprehensive truth and reconciliation commission.
We are disappointed that such issues, which have no
relevance to that before us, have been dragged into
this report. The contents of the Human Rights Council
resolution have been rejected and disputed by the
Government. We would like to respectfully point out
that the Government established an internal mechanism
for dealing with the causes of conflict and to make
recommendations. The report ofthatbody-the Lessons
Learned and Reconciliation Commission - offers
detailed observations and recommendations based on
the principles of international humanitarian law. The
national action plan developed on the basis of the
recommendations of the Commission is now being
implemented.

My delegation hopes that international discussion of
issues of this nature will facilitate broader appreciation
of the inherent challenges and practical outcomes based
on realities on the ground. States should be consulted
on all aspects of international actions to combat sexual
violence in conflict and post-conflict situations,
including the provision of assistance. In that process,
respect must be maintained for the fundamental
principles of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Member States.

In conclusion, let me reiterate that Sri Lanka will
proactively continue with its efforts to enhance and
develop protection mechanisms with regard to the
protection of women and children.

