Mr. Joyandet (France) (spoke in French): I
welcome the convening, on the initiative of the United
States presidency of the Security Council, of this
public debate on the issue of women and peace and
security, focusing on the fight against sexual violence
in armed conflict. The worldwide fight against this
scourge is a priority.

Sadly, right now the topic is a timely one. During
the events of 28 September in Conakry, Guinea, many
people were killed and women were raped in the streets
of the city. France would like to alert the Council to the
tragic situation that is currently taking place in
Conakry.

The worldwide fight against this scourge is a
priority of France's foreign policy. We are delighted by
the commitment of the United States on this issue, and
I in this regard I hail the personal efforts of Hillary
Clinton.

This new resolution marks a decisive step for the
protection of women in armed conflict, nine years after
the Council's adoption of the groundbreaking
resolution 1325 (2000), and one year after the adoption
of resolution 1820 (2008). It will strengthen the
genuine implementation of those resolution thanks to
its coherent set of provisions.

First of all, the appointment of a special
representative of the Secretary-General to direct the
fight against sexual violence in armed conflict is a
major step forward, aiming to ensure the coherence of
United Nations action with the support of United
Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict. We
hope that this post will be created as soon as possible.
We would like to see the appointment of a person with
experience in the field and real knowledge of the issues
of sexual violence. This person should also be in a
position to be a voice for the voiceless - that is, the
victims of these atrocities. We hope that the Secretary-
General's report to identify possible improvements in
the coherence of United Nations action, which will be
put together over the next three months, will permit the
new special representative to gain time when taking up
the post.

Next, the creation of a team of experts charged
with helping Governments in need will help bolster
national authorities with high-level technical expertise
available from within the United Nations or made
available by nations that so desire.
Within the sphere of peacekeeping operations,
newly inaugurated women's protection advisers, whose
mandate will be to monitor and follow-up on
situations, will complement the actions of gender
counselors. France will take a particular interest in
ensuring the implementation of this measure. It is also
essential that sexual violence be subject to specific
follow-up in the reports on peacekeeping operations
and the in annual report of the Secretary-General,
including information on parties to armed conflict who
commit sexual violence in situations that are on the
Council's agenda, so as to provide more data and
information, which for the moment remains too
fragmentary.

I hope to have convinced everyone of the
coherence of the set of provisions the Council has
established with this new resolution, which include: the
special representative; the Secretary-General's report
to be completed within three months, to strengthen the
effectiveness of the United Nations; the team of
experts to better prevent and deal with sexual violence
in States where it is necessary; strengthening the
contribution of peacekeeping operations through the
creation of the post of women's protection counselors;
and annual reports by the Secretary-General so that the
Council has adequate information, which is an
essential prerequisite for its actions.

Allow me to highlight now France's commitment
to two complementary elements in this plan: the
mechanism for the protection of children in armed
conflict; and the need for the Council to decide to
impose sanctions where necessary to combat impunity.
First of all, we must make use of the possibilities offered
by the Council's Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict. This Group makes it possible to consider
problematic situations, to make recommendations and,
in case of persistent non-compliance with its
recommendations by belligerents, to consider adopting
sanctions by the Council. This is a unique mechanism
whose effectiveness on the ground is real.

I welcome the very significant institutional
progress made by the adoption last month of resolution
1882 (2009), which, inter alia, expanded the
monitoring and reporting mechanism of resolution
1612 (2005) to include sexual violence committed
against children, independent of the question of
whether or not child soldiers are present. While this
mechanism applies to children, it can nevertheless
make a useful contribution to combating sexual
violence against women. Just one figure allows us to
grasp the relevance of such an approach: It is estimated
that 60 per cent of the women raped in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are minors. In this respect,
transparency, cooperation and coordination of efforts
between the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict and the new
special representative of the Secretary-General on
sexual violence and armed conflict will be essential.

We must also accept the idea that without genuine
punishment there can be neither prevention nor
deterrence. Here, France welcomes the work done by
the sanctions committees. Pursuant to the commitment
made in resolution 1820 (2008) the Council must
systematically consider the possibility of including
sexual violence as grounds for sanctions when creating
or reviewing the mandates of these committees. When
the grounds exist, it is up to the experts to cite them.
With this in mind, last March, together with Belgium,
the United Kingdom and the United States, we
supported the inclusion by the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo of four members of the Forces democratiques de
liberation du Rwanda on the list of persons subject to
individual sanctions.

Finally, France is pleased that the fight against
sexual violence was subject to particular attention
during the Security Council's annual visit to Africa in
May. At that time the Security Council successfully
advocated with the authorities of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo for the prosecution of five
officers accused of sexual violence. The Council must
remain mobilized on this issue.

In conclusion I would like to recall that it is our
responsibility to develop programmes to assist victims,
to offer them care and prospects for rehabilitation and
to work to avoid their stigmatization. Meeting their
needs means that they must be systematically consulted
and involved in all phases of the programmes designed
for them. Members may be assured that France fully
associates itself with and will join in the
implementation of specific projects to assist victims of
rape and other sexual violence.

