Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to thank the Bolivian presidency
for having organized this open debate on the women
and peace and security agenda, which, as everyone
knows, is one of France's top priorities. I also thank
the Secretary-General and the Executive Director
of UN-Women for their briefings, their commitment
and their concrete recommendations, which should
guide the Council. Finally, I wish to thank Ms. Randa
Siniora for her powerful statement, which eloquently
demonstrates the extent to which economic and social
hardship and violence against women are both strong
and unacceptable barriers to women's participation in
political and economic decision-making processes.

I welcome the award of the Nobel Peace Prize to
Nadia Murad and Dr. Mukwege and, through them, to
all those who work courageously to promote the rights
of women, sometimes at the risk of their lives. Their
commitment must inspire the Council and encourage
it to accelerate the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda, 18 years after its inclusion
on our agenda. That is a top priority for France.
In that context, it is imperative that sexual violence
be brought to an end. We are at a time when - let us
face facts - sexual violence is used more than ever
as a weapon of war and terrorism tactic. That is why,
during an Arria Formula meeting last Monday together
with the Netherlands, Cote d'Ivoire and Peru, we
continued our process of reflection on ways to promote
the use of individual sanctions as a tool for deterring
sexual violence, and we will translate that process into
sanctions. As all here know, France has supported the
inclusion of a specific criterion on sexual violence in
the sanctions regime concerning the Central African
Republic and the inclusion of gender-related issues in
the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic, which in many respects is a model to follow.
Our mobilization is also essential to bridge the yawning
gap that separates us from women's full participation in
peace processes.

I will first make several observations, which
in our opinion are reasons for us to become actively
engaged, before proposing several courses of action in
the context of the anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000)
in 2020. Indeed, this anniversary is an opportunity that
we must take together to give a new and strong impetus
to the women and peace and security agenda. Let us not
miss this opportunity.

First, I would like to make some observations.
Women's participation and equality between women
and men is not only a moral and political imperative,
but also a key conflict-prevention instrument that
has proved effective and is a factor for lasting peace.
Everyone should know that when there is real equality
between women and men, the risk of conflict is lower.
Everyone should know that when women participate in
political processes, such processes are more sustainable.
And how could peacekeeping operations effectively
protect the entire civilian population without women
being engaged as agents of peace and security at all
levels, in all pillars - military, civilian, political
and economic?

Enabling women to be agents of peace and security
also means guaranteeing their economic, social and
cultural rights. Yet their frequent lack of access to
education, property, employment, appropriate financial
structures and health services makes women more
vulnerable to the consequences of conflicts, of which
they are most often the primary victims.

Last year, the number of peace agreements
incorporating gender-related provisions decreased.
Moreover, women are still far too often excluded from
discussions at any stage of the negotiation process or
confined to discussions that perpetuate stereotypes
about their role in society. It is also sadly indicative
to note, as the Secretary-General so aptly pointed out
this morning, that over the past 25 years only 2 per
cent of mediators and 8 per cent of negotiators have
been women. I would like in that regard to commend
the efforts of the Secretary-General and his team to
achieve parity among his Special Representatives. He
can, of course, count on our full and complete support.

In that context, I would like to reiterate, on behalf
of France, our call to action. We know that the Security
Council has begun to take stock of these issues. But let
us be realistic: it has not been not enough. We can and
must do more and better. Together we must make a real
qualitative leap; this is within our reach. I would like
in particular to welcome the commitment and concrete
recommendations of the Swedish Minister for Foreign
Affairs in this regard.

The Council now includes provisions on women's
rights and participation in more than 70 per cent of its
resolutions and nearly 90 per cent of its presidential
statements. We must reach 100 per cent. Let us
therefore set ourselves this target of 100 per cent. In
the same spirit, it is important that the Council adopt
specific press statements as part of the women and
peace and security agenda. Similarly, we must continue
to systematically invite civil-society leaders, especially
women, to give us an accurate picture of the reality on
the ground.

Security Council field visits must also give full
consideration to meetings with women and to the
challenges that specifically concern them. This was the
case with a meeting we held in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo recently, which to me was one of the most
striking and inspiring during our recent mission to the
country, and I think that in saying so I also speak for the
vast majority of my colleagues. The same must apply
to the highest United Nations representatives in crisis
situations. I would like to welcome in this regard the
joint initiative of the Executive Director of UN-Women
and the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations to travel together to South Sudan.

But we can all see that we must go further. The
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) in 2020 provides
us with a unique opportunity that we must take together.
Follow-up of the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda must be more robust,
and the 76 action plans and 11 regional frameworks
established within that framework must be monitored
more closely so as to better identify problems and
promote good practices. We are ready to work with all
our partners to define the outlines ofa mechanism that
would effectively review these national and regional
processes, as the Secretary-General states in his report
(S/2018/900). Our actions must be consonant with our
goals. We must develop the regional dimension, and we
welcome the ownership of the agenda by regional and
subregional organizations. This is a fundamental point
if we really want to be effective in the long term.

Finally, the United Nations needs to raise the
profile of women's participation in peace processes,
just as it did for the demobilization of child soldiers.
We commend the efforts of the Secretary-General and
the Executive Director of UN-Women in this area,
and we are at their disposal to continue the process of
reflection together.

France will remain fully committed to women's
rights, both within the Security Council and in all
other relevant bodies. The President of the Republic,
Emmanuel Macron, has made equality between women
and men the great cause of his five-year term and a
top priority of the French Group of Seven presidency
next year. The women and peace and security agenda
will be an important element of this priority. France is
currently developing its third national plan of action for
the women and peace and security agenda, which will
be presented in the first quarter of 2019, and France will
once again make that agenda a priority of its presidency
of the Security Council in March 2019.

As part of its second national plan of action, France
has provided direct support in several areas of conflict.
In Syria, for instance, France funded an initiative
to provide emergency medical assistance to protect
women in a conflict where they are too often targeted,
in particular through assistance in terms of sexual and
reproductive health or psychological support services
designed to improve the living conditions of women,
especially those giving birth in very difficult conditions.
In Libya, France has supported training workshops
for young entrepreneurs in Misrata, 50 per cent of
whom were women, with the aim of strengthening the
Libyan economic fabric by assisting young Libyan
entrepreneurs and start-ups.

Our third national plan of action will resolutely
pursue France's commitments in the framework of
the inclusion of women in peace processes and State
reconstruction. The close involvement of civil society in
the elaboration of the plan, its concrete implementation
in France and abroad and the assessment ofits results is,
of course, vital. The challenge of the women and peace
and security agenda, in addition to its implementation,
lies in ensuring that genuine ownership is taken at all
levels of society by the actors involved in issues of
peacekeeping and the rebuilding of peace and security.

In conclusion, I would like to say that France's
deep conviction is that, at a time when multilateralism
is being criticized and put to the test, women have a key
role to play in giving new impetus to multilateralism, in
which France believes more strongly than ever. Parity
and diversity are at the heart of the DNA of the United
Nations and must therefore be at the heart of our actions.

Simone de Beauvoir wrote that "the present is not
a potential past; it is the moment of choice and action".
So, dear friends, let us get to work.

