Mr. Hannesson (Iceland): Allow me, first, to
express the satisfaction of my delegation, as a non-
member of the Council, at being able to discuss the
issue of women and peace and security in an open
meeting on the fifth anniversary of the adoption of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000). We thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting. We
wish, in particular, to thank the special panellists who
spoke to the Council earlier and added valuable points
of view to our deliberations.

At the outset, my Government would like to
express its gratitude to the Secretary-General for his
report on women and peace and security, contained in

document S/2005/636.

Resolution 1325 (2000) was a groundbreaking
step forward in reaffirming the importance of the equal
participation and the direct involvement of women in
conflict prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding,
as many have said before me. By its adoption, it was
finally recognized that women have an important role
to play in peace processes and in achieving sustainable
peace in conflict regions. That landmark resolution is a
challenge to us all, for it requires a fundamental change
in procedure, delivery, attitudes and habits.

Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
considerable attention has been paid to its
implementation within the United Nations. That has
been appropriate as we focus on ensuring the
mainstreaming of a gender perspective throughout the
work of the Organization. We believe that in order to
reach the Millennium Development Goals, it is
important that a gender perspective be integrated into
all strategies and programmes.

In that context, Iceland warmly welcomes the
United Nations action plan for implementing resolution
1325 (2000) across the United Nations system, which
has been presented to the Security Council in the report
of the Secretary-General. The system-wide action plan
is an important tool for better coordination and for
building on the synergies of the United Nations system.
With the adoption of the action plan, the United
Nations is creating a good precedent which should
encourage Member States to mainstream the gender
perspective in their own policies. We also hope that the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding
Support Office which our leaders decided to establish
will demonstrate a strong commitment to the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

Women in war and women who have survived
war must enjoy protection and justice, and women
must be full agents in the shaping and rebuilding of
their communities in the aftermath of war. Therefore,
we must ensure that the provisions of resolution 1325
(2000) are realized and that women can fully and
equally participate at all levels of decision-making
with regard to conflict prevention and peacebuilding. It
is our duty to continue our work towards the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) at the
national, regional and international levels.

The Icelandic authorities have put emphasis on
supporting the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). Indeed, an important part of Iceland's
development cooperation is directed towards
facilitating a smooth transition from conflict situations,
with special emphasis on women and their role in
peacebuilding. Here, Iceland's support to the United
Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) is
especially worth highlighting. Iceland's contribution to
UNIFEM. has more than doubled this year. And for the
past few years, the Icelandic Crisis Response Unit has
seconded a gender expert to UNIFEM. in Kosovo.

Finally, I would like to underline that Iceland
strongly condemns the sexual exploitation and sexual
abuse committed by United Nations peacekeeping
personnel, and we fully support the Secretary-General
in his determination to uproot such behaviour. Such
abuse undermines our peace efforts and the credibility
of the United Nations. Efforts must be redoubled, and
preventive education in this field must be a continuous
feature of the training of the United Nations
peacekeepers.

