Ms. Jones (United States of America): I thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for this important
meeting. I would also like to thank Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka, Mr. Edmond Mulet, Mr. Chaloka
Beyani and Ms. Suaad Allami for their briefings, their
dedication to the peace and security of women around
the world, and their courage. We also welcome the
adoption today of the presidential statement contained
in document S/PRST/2014/2l.

The issue of women and peace and security has

captured our attention anew as violent extremist groups
such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
conduct targeted attacks against women and girls daily
in Iraq and Syria. That terrorist group brazenly takes
credit for the abduction, enslavement, rape, forced
marriage and sale of several thousand Yazidi and other
minority women and girls, rationalizing that abhorrent
treatment by claiming falsely and outrageously that such
acts are sanctioned by religion. ISIL tortured and then
publicly executed Iraqi human rights defender Samira
Salih al-Nuaimi for bravely speaking out against the
group, even in the face of repeated threats to her life.
Just last week, another Syrian woman was stoned to
death. We strongly condemn the treatment of women
and children as spoils of war and their subjection to
horrific physical and sexual violence, intimidation and
deprivation of liberty.

For the United States, focusing on the issue of
women and peace and security through the lens of
forced displacement is particularly appropriate. Forced
displacement has reached an unprecedented level.
Some 51.2 million people, 80 per cent of them women
and children, were displaced by the end of 2013. This
crisis cannot be solved without holistically addressing
and integrating the four women and peace and security
pillars - protection, participation, conflict prevention
and relief and recovery - into the work of the Council
as we seek to fulfil our mandate to foster peace and
security.

I should like to focus on three elements:
participation, access to health and education, and
economic opportunity and the rule of law.

Participation means more than just voting or going
to school. We need more women leaders at the national
and local levels represented throughout various sectors
of society - women like Claudia Paz y Paz, the first
woman Attorney General of Guatemala, or women like
those in the Second Peshmerga Battalion, an all-female
battalion fighting on the front lines against ISIL. Major
General Kristin Lund was the first woman appointed
to command a United Nations peacekeeping force,
the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus,
bringing the United Nations closer to its goal this year
of including more women in peacekeeping missions
and leadership positions.
The participation of women as political leaders is
Vital, yet the percentage of female parliament members
globally remains static at below 22 per cent. There are
some bright spots. Nearly 3,000 women candidates ran
in Iraqi elections this year - the greatest number ever
to do so there. But as the Secretary-General's report
(S/2014/693) points out, election-related violence
against women remains a serious concern, as does
women's freedom of political participation. There was
a horrifying string of sexual assaults on women during
Egypt's inaugural celebrations for its new president,
including a mass attack on a 19-year-old student, who
was stripped in Cairo's Tahrir Square. In the Horn of
Africa, deadly attacks on parliamentarians in Somalia,
including women, must stop.

We have seen that the meaningful participation
of women and girls in decision-making, programme
design and implementation, and leadership is critical
in humanitarian crises. Just as important is the sense
of empowerment that women experience because they
are given a role in decision-making on issues that
affect lives. In Nepal, local women's organizations
built responsive programmes by consulting Bhutanese
refugee women with disabilities on effective gender-
based violence programmes. That led to the creation of
vocational training classes that better suited their needs
and significantly improved their lives.

But to participate and show leadership, women need
to be healthy and educated. As noted in the Secretary-
General's report, maternal mortality rates in conflict
and post-conflict countries are 60 per cent higher than
the global rates. Access to health and education services
is even more essential for displaced communities. That
includes women such as those in the Yarmouk refugee
camp in Syria, who face desperate conditions and
limited access to food, safe water and medical supplies.
Less than two weeks ago, the International Committee
of the Red Cross was able to deliver medical aid to
Yarmouk for the first time in a year. The hospital there
is no longer able to provide the emergency medical
treatment required for women and newborns. There has
been an increase in miscarriages due to food shortages
and poor nutrition for pregnant women and due to the
collapse of prenatal care under the siege.

Education can mitigate the effects of conflict and
provide the basis for long-term economic growth and
stability. Education services for women and girls in
conflict-affected settings are essential. The United
States is working to increase equal access to education
in crisis and conflict environments for 15 million
learners by 2015. For example, in the Darfuri refugee
camps in Chad, we are ensuring that secondary
education programmes are accessible to boys and girls
alike.

At the same time, we need to continue to strive
to break multigenerational cycles of poverty and we
must therefore focus on equipping young girls with the
tools necessary to escape need. The United States is
taking action. On 9 October, we announced an initial
funding of $29 million for the SPRING Initiative, a
partnership with the United Kingdom Government
and the Nike Foundation aimed at accelerating the
economic empowerment of girls. The Initiative will
help businesses bring to market products that enable
girls to learn, earn, invest and save, thereby improving
the lives of up to 200,000 girls over the next five years
and, we hope, millions more by 2030.

If women are to play their rightful role in every
society and culture, equal protection under the
law through institutional and structural reforms is
essential. That means making sure that women know
their rights and have real and practical access to justice
and that those who target women are held to account in
credible and transparent processes. That is true not just
with respect to violence and abuse. In some societies,
women often become family breadwinners but lack the
same rights and freedoms as male heads of household.
At a time when the world is becoming increasingly
aware of radicalized young people joining violent
extremist groups, that imbalance must be addressed.
Young people who have grown up with strong female
role models and outside of poverty are less likely to
embrace extremism.

One way to address such challenges is to bolster
funding for projects that support women's empowerment.
Such investments can support crisis recovery and
stability by enabling women to contribute economically
to their families and their communities. We urge Member
States to invest seriously in those efforts, particularly
in programmes that support female-led households in
displacement and post-conflict settings. In a similar
vein, unequal citizenship laws make women and their
children more vulnerable. While many Member States,
in line with resolution 2122 (2013), are reforming laws
that discriminate against women in nationality matters,
at least 25 countries maintain laws that do not allow
women to confer nationality on their children.

To conclude, we have done a lot, since the Council
adopted resolution 1325 (2000) 14 years ago, to advance
the role of women in peace and security. I mentioned
some of the areas in which we still need to make
progress to protect women and girls and to empower
them to reach their full potential. This is a vital and
cross-cutting issue in all of the Council's work. Against
that backdrop, the United States welcomes the 2015
high-level review of resolution 1325 (2000) as an
opportunity to assess current programming, identify
implementation gaps and address emerging problems.
Considering that the review will run concurrently with
our own national action plan review in 2015, we hope
that the processes will complement and support each
other, reminding us how far we have come and of how
much remains to be done.

As Secretary Kerry said at a summit on the
Preventing Sexual Violence Initiative in London in
June, no society will know peace if it leaves half its
population behind. Women's voices are a critical part
of coming to terms with the past by investing in a
shared future that rejects conflict and promotes dignity.
Countless women have been subjected to rape and
sexual violence as tactics of war. Now we must enlist
all women and empower them as agents of peace.

