Mr. Ruidiaz Perez (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I wish to express in this Chamber the
Chilean Government's condolences to the people and
the Government of Sri Lanka for the cruel terrorist
attacks carried out in the country in recent days, as well
as our strong condemnation of those crimes.

We appreciate Germany's initiative to convene this
open debate and the leadership of Minister Heiko Maas.
My delegation would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for presenting his report (S/2019/280), the
speakers whom we heard this morning and Ms. Pramila
Patten for her work as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.

Chile reiterates its commitment to implementing
resolutions on sexual and gender-based violence in
conflict and against the impunity of those crimes, as
well as the Secretary-General's initiatives in favour of
gender equality and his zero-tolerance policy regarding
sexual abuse.

Women and peace and security constitutes one
of the priority pillars of Chile's foreign policy. We
have therefore promoted stronger regional and global
cooperation in establishing public policies that
guarantee women the full exercise of their rights,
which triggers cultural and structural changes that lead
to inclusive societies in which the empowerment of
women and the prevention of sexual violence should be
at the centre of the international response.

A wider dissemination of measures for prevention,
protection, rehabilitation and reintegration is needed to
ensure a full understanding of the seriousness of sexual
and gender-based violence. Reporting such crimes
must also be promoted and protected to effectively
combat their impunity. We value the work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, as
well as the deployment of women's protection advisers
in United Nations missions, which has contributed,
among others, to improving the access and quality of
available information.

Achieving justice is essential for victims to achieve
some degree of spiritual and material reparation. In
that regard, we emphasize the work of the International
Criminal Court - an instrument that complements
the work of national courts and mixed courts in
transforming the culture of impunity into one of
deterrence. The imprescriptibility of such crimes is
also fundamental to fighting against their impunity and
for achieving just reparation.

Education programmes at all levels are also
necessary for prevention, especially in the armed
forces. In that regard, Chile's second national plan
has heightened training and education on gender
perspectives, sexual violence and human rights of
women in peacekeeping operations, both for police and
military institutions and for civilian personnel who
participate either in those institutions or in conflict and
post-conflict resolution processes.

Chile is currently committed to developing its third
national action plan for the period 2020-2022 with a
view to strengthening the role of women in negotiation,
mediation, construction and peacebuilding. Monitoring,
evaluation and accountability will also be incorporated
with respect to its objectives, as well as the budgetary
allocations necessary for its adequate implementation.
Its sphere of competence will cover natural catastrophes,
humanitarian aid and the displacement of people. We
are actively collaborating with civil society and other
institutions in its development.

In line with the vision that we have set out, the
challenges of the third-generation national plan
include increasing the participation of women in peace
operations and in leadership and decision-making
positions, as well as ensuring the presence of gender
advisers in those operations.

