The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give
the floor to the representative of Norway. Ms. Skz'ire
(Norway): I am making this statement on behalf of
Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Sweden and my own
country, Norway.

We thank Bolivia for initiating this open debate and
welcome the annual report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/900).

We are no closer to peace. Women's security and
rights are still threatened, specifically targeted by
violent extremists. Women refugees are exposed to
violence. Women's rights defenders are increasingly
vulnerable. Sexual violence is endemic. This year's
Nobel Peace Prize laureates expose human suffering
that tears people apart and undermines peace and show
us how to respond. Let us.

It has become decidedly harder to ignore women
in peace and security efforts. The Secretary-General's
strong leadership is crucial, as evidenced by the
United Nations system-wide gender parity strategy;
the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and
Security; the Women, Peace and Security National
Focal Points Network; the Group of Friends of Women,
Peace and Security; networks, including the Women's
Military Network; and the increasing number of
national action plans and strategies to implement
them effectively.

We benefit greatly from the consistent work of
civil society, including the NGO Working Group on
Women, Peace and Security and organizations like
the International Civil Society Action Network, the
Women's International League for Peace and Freedom,
and the Global Network of Women Peacebuilders, local
women's groups and others. In South Sudan, Yemen,
Afghanistan, Colombia, Syria and Liberia, women
have found ways to engage. Their efforts increasingly
coincide with those of the United Nations and regional
organizations, as innovative inclusion mechanisms
evolve, including subcommissions, situation rooms,
women's advisory boards, and the Women's Peace and
Humanitarian Fund.

We would like to congratulate Ethiopia on its
recently elected Madam President Sahle-Work Zewde.
There is progress, but, as we approach the twentieth
anniversary ofresolution 1325 (2000), we aspire to more.
Women fill more leadership positions in the United
Nations and elsewhere, but are still underrepresented
at all levels of peacekeeping. We must connect the
peace mediation tracks better and ensure that inclusion
mechanisms complement, rather than replace, efforts to
include women on the formal track. We must enhance
conflict analysis with a gender perspective and support
the gender mainstreaming of peace operations.
Our support for United Nations reform, UN-Women,
the Department of Political Affairs and the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations is part of our response, as
are the women mediator networks. Regional networks
of women mediators are in New York now to explore
opportunities for further cooperation. We must prepare
the ground for inclusive processes even in initial peace
talks and focus as much on women's inclusion and
rights in the implementation of peace agreements as in
the negotiation phase.

A gender adviser position should be established
in all operational headquarters, while leaders bear the
ultimate responsibility to deliver. The United Nations
high-level seminar on gender and inclusive mediation
processes builds leaders' competence and capacity.
Men must champion this cause as eagerly as women.
We founded the Nordic Centre for Gender in Military
Operations to engage with military actors in their work
related to women, peace and security.

We are your consistent partners, Mr. President,
for a common, peaceful and secure future. Promoting
women's participation is not a gesture to women; it is a
question of effectively and sustainably preventing and
resolving conflicts.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Albania.


