Sheikha Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I
would first like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
October, and to thank the Permanent Representative
of Australia for his leadership of the Council last
month. I am also grateful the Secretary-General
and the Executive Director of UN Women for their
contributions this morning.

Thirteen years after the adoption of the historic
resolution 1325 (2000), the culmination of a long
process concerning women and international peace and
security, the Security Council is still considering the
issue. Our debates, however, reveal shortcomings in the
area of the rights of women, which are being terribly
violated, particularly in the Arab world. The Security
Council has established several criteria for women's
contributions to settling conflicts and their role in
conflict and post-conflict situations. Those criteria
should be implemented, in conformity with Security
Council provisions, in order to achieve the goals of
women's participation in conflict resolution and the
reconstruction of society in the aftermath of conflict.
Women should be integrated into peace negotiations and
into social reconstruction. Their participation at every
level is still incomplete. Their access to transitional
justice systems must be facilitated, including in
relation to crimes committed in conflict, especially
since women and children are victims of particular
types of crime and subject to discrimination, and they
face social and cultural impediments that hinder their
access to justice mechanisms.

The State of Qatar understands the importance
of the rule of law and of strengthening women's
participation and promoting women's and girls' rights
in post-conflict reconstruction and conflict resolution.
Their participation should be strengthened in order
to enable them to function in the political arena,
particularly through a collection of initiatives enabling
their comprehensive inclusion.

We cannot talk about women and peace and security
without discussing the causes of their vulnerability.
There are several aspects of this that should be
strengthened, first and foremost through laws that
protect women in conflict without discrimination. We
should call on all parties concerned to take measures
to protect women and girls against gender-based and
sexual violence in times of conflict.

We are very concerned about the situation of
women in armed conflict. Because of violations of their
human rights, women shoulder the heaviest burden of
conflict. In Palestine, they suffer the unjust effects
of the Israeli occupation, which affects the entire
population in the occupied territories, particularly in
Gaza. It is women who have to deal with the difficulties
resulting from Israeli practices and the blockade. The
mobility of Palestinian women continues to be hindered
by checkpoints, and women are subjected to practices
that contravene all international and moral principles.

In Syria, women are being targeted for violence
more than others. Under orders from the regime, acts
of physical and psychological violence, rape, sexual
violence, degradation and torture have been committed
by members ofthe Syrian armed forces against their own
families. Those are all war crimes and crimes against
humanity. The Syrian regime bears full responsibility
for sexual exploitation and trafficking in women; it
is a regime that has killed thousands, making women
into widows and children into orphans, and displacing
people within the country and beyond its borders.

