Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): We are pleased at Uruguay's assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month.

We have taken note of the report of the Secretary-
General under consideration (S/2017/249), which
contains information submitted by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict.

While it is true that we support every effort to
put an end to all forms of sexual violence in armed
conflict and to bring the perpetrators and instigators
to account, we believe that at the same time, we should
be very cautious and objective in considering this very
dangerous humanitarian issue, which has reached
alarming levels in several parts of the world. The
perpetrators of such crimes must be brought to justice.

The Special Representative of the Secretary-General
indicated in her report that it was based on the reports of
the Independent International Commission of Inquiry.
I should reiterate that my country has rejected the work
and reports of the Commission since its establishment.
Its work has been exceedingly politicized and totally
unprofessional. We are therefore concerned about the
fact that the Special Representative is basing her points
on reports and information from a body that has no
credibility or humane principles. She should rather be
basing her conclusions on investigations conducted by
her own office.
In her secret report submitted to the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and
associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities, the Special Representative gave long, detailed
descriptions of the flagrant acts of sexual violence
committed by Da'esh, the Al-Nusra Front and their
affiliates against Syrian and Iraqi women. In her
current report, however, she says that none of those
groups have committed flagrant crimes against Syrian
women, whether of abduction, rape, violence, torture
and the separation of mothers from their children. She
confines herself to timid mentions of their restrictions
on women's access to work and education. She has
gone far outside her remit - identifying acts of
sexual violence in conflict. In fact, in some of the
paragraphs of the report she mentions Syrian women's
participation in political life. This leads one to ask
why - if the Office of the Special Representative is
unable to conduct investigations into sexual violence
perpetrated by armed terrorist groups against Syrian
women on Syrian territory, which do fall under her
mandate - she is going beyond that mandate to discuss
other topics, which increase her workload. She is also
promoting the non-consensual resolution 71/248, which
also goes beyond her remit.

Syrians in areas controlled by terrorist armed
groups are targets for the worst kinds of sexual violence
and slavery. Women and girls have been abducted
and forced into marriage with terrorists, including
foreigners. That is why we once again urge the Office of
the Special Representative to shine a light on the fate of
hundreds of women and girls who have been abducted by
elements of the terrorist group Jaysh Al-Islam to Adha
in the suburbs of Damascus and exhibited in iron cages
in Douma. We also call on the Special Representative
to support the Syrian Government in seeing justice
done for the women who have been abducted, enslaved
or killed in Latakia, in the north, and those who have
been killed in cold blood in Zara and Hama. All those
crimes have been reported to the Office of the Special
Representative and the Security Council, and we
therefore call for more support in investigating what
happened to these victims of takfiri terrorism.

The report ignores the suffering of the Syrian
women and girls living in refugee camps in neighbouring
countries, despite the fact that their situation has
always been an issue discussed in the previous reports,
since it involves violations that have been documented
in United Nations resolutions and internationally. We
had hoped that the report would mention the flagrant
violations that Syrian women in camps in Jordan and
Turkey have suffered, particularly the systematic rapes
committed by Da'esh bandits who shelter behind a
facade of legitimacy.

All of this indicates structural gaps. The
Government of Syria has already officially submitted
and documented all of its structural gaps to the Office
of the Special Representative, who has regrettably
ignored all its requests. We do not know why, but we
hope that she will submit concrete proposals aimed
at ending sexual violence against women and using
her influence with the countries sponsoring armed
terrorists, all of which we are familiar with, to put an
end to the terrible crimes committed by these terrorist
groups. We do not expect her to submit secret reports
to the 1267 Committee that only expand her mandate
in a way that interferes with countries' internal affairs.
We are ready to cooperate with the Office of the
Special Representative and to be informed of every
name and incident that she has received in order to
open investigations and punish the perpetrators of any
crimes in a framework of cooperation and dialogue, so
that she can fulfil her worthy mandate as effectively
as possible.

The people responsible for violence directed
against Syrian women and girls in Syria, Jordan and
Turkey come from the same countries that announce
in Security Council meetings that they want to do
everything to protect Syrians while giving money, aid
and support to terrorist groups and foreign terrorists
who come to Syria in order to commit the worst possible
acts of violence against Syrians.

