Mr. Vrailas: On behalf of the European Union
and its member States, the acceding country Croatia;
the candidate countries Turkey, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Iceland
and Serbia; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania
and Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as the Republic of
Moldova, Georgia and Ukraine, align themselves with
this statement.

I thank the delegation of Rwanda for organizing
and hosting this important debate today, as well as
the Secretary-General, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
Zainab Hawa Bangura, and the representative of the
NGO Working Group for their statements.

The latest report of the Secretary-General to the
Council (S/2013/l49) reaffirms the pervasiveness of
sexual violence and its interconnection with various
aspects of the maintenance of peace and security. We
note, in that regard, the attention drawn to the nexus
between sexual violence and the illicit extraction of
natural resources, the forcible displacement of civilian
populations and the inadequacy of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and security sector
reform efforts.

The recently adopted United Nations Arms Trade
Treaty states that the risk of conventional arms being
used to commit or facilitate serious acts of gender-
based violence needs to be taken into account by its
State parties. That reaffirms that sexual violence needs,
from the start, to be considered as part of all actions
to ensure international peace and security in order for
them to be effective.
Sexual violence has, in addition to its devastating
impact on survivors, a broad and long-lasting effect on
communities and on States as a whole for generations,
not least through the plight ofthe children born as a result
of rape. Sexual violence continues to be perpetrated as
a tactic of war, including against men and boys and in
the context of detention and interrogation, on which
further information is needed.

Sexual violence in conflict remains prevalent, yet
universally under-reported. That is, inter alia, the result
of threats faced by those who come forward to report
such crimes. We underline the need to take all measures
necessary to protect survivors, witnesses, humanitarian
workers, medical personnel, human rights defenders
and journalists who contribute to aiding survivors and
collect information on sexual violence. The European
Union's guidelines on human rights defenders devote
particular attention to vulnerable human rights
defenders, including women human rights defenders
and those working on conflict issues.

We welcome the call of the United Nations
Commission on the Status of Women, in its most
recent conclusions from its March session, to ensure
that, in armed conflict and post-conflict situations,
the prevention of and response to all forms of violence
against women and girls, including sexual and gender-
based violence, are effectively addressed, including
through the investigation, prosecution and punishment
of perpetrators, so as to end impunity, lift barriers to
women's access to justice, establish complaint and
reporting mechanisms and provide support to victims
and survivors and affordable and accessible health-
care services, including sexual and reproductive
health as well as reintegration measures. We support
the availability of reparations as a form of transitional
gender justice. We underline the need for national
ownership, leadership and responsibility in addressing
sexual violence.

The prosecution of crimes of sexual violence is
an important deterrent to future crimes. Ensuring
accountability and punishing the perpetrators of the
most serious crimes against women and girls under
national and international law, as well as holding
alleged perpetrators of those crimes accountable under
national or international justice, remain essential. We
note the significant advancement in international law
made by the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), which includes sexual violence in the
definition of crimes within its mandate, in particular
as a crime against humanity. The ICC continues to be
an important mechanism in combating sexual violence
in conflict.

We support the continued application of targeted
and graduated measures by the relevant Security
Council Sanctions Committees aimed at perpetrators of
sexual violence in conflict, as well as other measures
at the Council's disposal, including referrals to the
ICC, mandating commissions of inquiry and further
steps towards ensuring systematic monitoring of
commitments by parties to conflict under its resolution
1960 (2010).

We welcome the report (S/2012/732) of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of the
Council's resolutions on women and peace and security
and the recommendations contained therein. We note
positively the further establishment of the monitoring,
analysis and reporting arrangements on conflict-related
sexual violence. We also welcome the continued and
systematic deployment of women's protection advisers.
The European Union supports the swift deployment of
human rights observers in Mali by the African Union
and the United Nations and provides financial support
for the deployment of independent human rights
observers. The European Union training mission in
Mali will include training on gender and human rights.

We strongly condemn the systematic and
widespread use of sexual violence, referred to in
the report, which is used to punish, intimidate and
subjugate women and girls in Mali, as well as the use
of rape as a tactic of war in rebel-controlled zones. The
report also refers to two distinct trends regarding sexual

violence identified by the independent international
commission of inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic in
its reports: the occurrence of sexual violence during
house searches and at checkpoints and the perpetration
of rape and torture in the context of detention. We also
note the two major patterns of sexual violence detected
by the Secretary-General in the Democratic Republic
of Congo - systematic targeting by armed groups of
civilians so as to control areas rich in natural resources,
and retaliation against communities, often on the basis
of the real or perceived ethnicity of the survivors, for
supposed political and economic gain.

The European Union continues to implement its
dedicated policy on women, peace and security adopted
in 2008. The European Union support to various
initiatives related to women, peace and security amounts
to approximately €200 million a year. The European
Union is envisaging increased funding for prevention
and response efforts, such as programming to combat
gender-based violence, including sexual violence,
from the first phase of conflict and in humanitarian
emergencies.

The European Union now has gender advisors
and/or human rights focal points in each of its crisis
management missions and operations throughout the
world. We continue our work on specific training
modules on human rights and gender in crisis
management, while ensuring a focus on sexual violence
in armed conflicts. We continue to work closely with
UN-Women and support initiatives to ensure greater
participation by women in peacebuilding and post-
conflict planning.

The European Union and its member States highly
appreciate the work of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
and the United Nations Team of Experts on the Rule
of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, including
its coordination with other international entities such
as Justice Rapid Response and the Preventing Sexual
Violence Initiative, as well as the recent commitments
of the Group of Eight to do more to address impunity for
sexual violence in conflict, including the endorsement
of the development of an international protocol on the
investigation and documentation of sexual violence in
conflict. We continue to support its efforts, as well as
those of the United Nations system, Member States
and all actors involved in preventing and responding to
conflict-related sexual violence.

