Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand
appreciates the opportunity to participate in and mark
the anniversary of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000) and thanks those involved, particularly Uganda,
for organizing this debate.

Throughout those 10 years of conflict, peace,
destruction, reconstruction and change, women and
girls have been the most affected, although I think we
would also say that in those 10 years there have also
been some significant advances. Some women and girls
have benefited from greater involvement in peace
processes, greater representation in key decision-
making positions and a stronger focus on the
prevention of violence. There have been major
institutional achievements. For example, New Zealand
strongly supported the establishment of UN Women,
with Michelle Bachelet at its head, and we look to that
organization to demonstrate leadership, including on
this issue.

The past 10 years have also demonstrated that
much still needs to be done. Rape is still used as a tool
of war, as was recently and horrifically demonstrated
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Women are
still excluded from or not adequately represented in
peace processes, their rights are curtailed and, all too
often, they lack or are denied access to humanitarian
and development assistance. Full implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) is needed to address those
deficiencies.
New Zealand agrees with the Secretary-General's
conclusion that the main factor impeding full
implementation is the lack of a clearly framed, single,
coordinated approach, complemented by meaningful
indicators to track progress. There are many concrete
ways to develop such a framework. In addition to those
already mentioned by the Minister of International
Cooperation of Canada on behalf of the Friends of
Women, Peace and Security, I will highlight just two
that New Zealand considers particularly important.

First, because implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) is difficult to measure, we call on the Council to
endorse and utilize the indicators outlined in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2010/498). Some still
require development, but that is best achieved through
implementation, tracking and continued close
engagement with civil society. And, by themselves, the
indicators are not enough; the information they yield
must then be analysed and incorporated into the
Council's work. Given its expertise, UN Women will
be well placed to lead this analysis, but it must also be
able to interact regularly and directly with the Security
Council.

Secondly, while there have been excellent policy
developments on resolution 1325 (2000), they have
rarely been translated into action on the ground. To
ensure more action, the Security Council could better
incorporate 1325 issues into its daily work, for
example, when it discusses country situations,
peacekeeping mandates or sanctions, or when it holds
Arria Formula meetings. Further, an effective
leadership system within the Council could be
developed to ensure that 1325 issues are regularly
integrated into the Council's work. Given the churn of
non-permanent members, that responsibility could be
jointly shared by a permanent and a non-permanent
Council member. Better integration of 1325 issues does
not just feel or sound good: it makes practical sense.
Involving women in peace processes, stopping sexual
and gender-based violence and guaranteeing the
protection of women's rights will better ensure a
lasting peace, which will, in turn, improve the
Council's ability to maintain international peace and
security.

Member States also have responsibilities for the
implementation of 1325 (2000) nationally and within
their regions. Women constitute up to 30 per cent of
New Zealand's contribution to United Nations and
United Nations-mandated peace missions - among the
highest rates in the world. The New Zealand Defence
Force pursues a diversity strategy that values the full
integration of women, including at senior levels.

New Zealand's region is the Pacific, where
women are playing critical roles in brokering and
maintaining peace in places such as Bougainville,
Solomon Islands, Fiji and Timor-Leste. Despite their
important role, however, women remain marginalized
from formal negotiations, are seriously
underrepresented in national decision-making
processes and are still vulnerable to domestic violence.
As well as raising awareness of resolution 1325 (2000)
in the Pacific, New Zealand's aid programme identifies
women and girls as a priority group for attention,
supports initiatives to mitigate the exposure of women
and girls to violence and specifically includes the need
to support the full implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). Elsewhere, New Zealand's Provincial
Reconstruction Team in Bamyan, Afghanistan, has
several initiatives to ensure the full participation of
women in our Provincial Reconstruction Team and in
the Afghan National Security Forces which the Team
supports. Likewise, in Timor-Leste, New Zealand is
working with the National Police Force on projects to
address high rates of gender-based violence.

But, like others, New Zealand can still do more,
and it agrees that commitments are required to ensure
the advancement of the 1325 agenda. We therefore
commit to developing a national plan of action on
resolution 1325 (2000). We commit to mainstreaming
issues faced by women with disabilities in our
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We commit
to increasing the number of women in the higher ranks
of our Defence Force and becoming more effective in
retaining women in the Force throughout their careers.
And we commit to working with others in the
Pacific - countries and civil society - to ensure that
resolution 1325 (2000) is better implemented.

We call on others to also make similar concrete
commitments, including on the needs of women with
disabilities: commitments which, when combined with
a more effective approach by the Council, will ensure
full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

That, in turn, will mean that, as Governments
come and go and as conflicts break out and abate,
women and girls are protected and can fully participate
in the promotion and maintenance of peace and
security.
