Mr. Pedersen (Norway): I am delivering this
statement on behalf of Denmark, Finland, Iceland,
Sweden and my own country, Norway.

The persisting impunity for perpetrators of sexual
violence is intolerable. The numbing stigma must
be dealt with. When people flee to safety, we should
make it our priority to ensure that they are not exposed
to new abuse. The problem of sexual violence must
be addressed in ceasefire agreements. It must be on
the table in peace negotiations, part of our analysis
in humanitarian efforts and at the forefront in our
peacekeeping operations.

We must deal with inconsistencies. Rape is often
treated as a burden that the woman must bear by herself,
while a gun wound is a matter of national security. Yet
sexual violence undermines the societies that we are
striving to stabilize and rebuild. It destroys the future,
as well as the present, for many more than those directly
affected. That fact should serve to mobilize our whole
peace and security architecture. If we are serious about
sustaining peace, we must ensure that prevention is not
just a priority but the main priority. And when we have
been unable to prevent abuse, our approach must be
focused on those who have suffered the crime. We must
fight the stigma, investigate and prosecute.

Our response to conflict-related sexual violence
must be firm and all-encompassing. Impunity
is unacceptable, and perpetrators must be held
accountable. The International Criminal Court plays a
central role at the international level in the fight against
impunity, but the capacities of national authorities must
also be strengthened. States have a primary duty to
prevent, investigate and prosecute sexual violence.

We value the work of the United Nations Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence
in Conflict and the unique capacity of Justice Rapid
Response, in cooperation with UN-Women, which
provide the needed expertise for investigating sexual
and gender-based violence. We support the Call to
Action on Protection from Gender-based Violence in
Emergencies, led by Sweden, and appreciate the work
of civil society, which remains key.

Also, United Nations peacekeeping operations
must have the capacity to prevent and respond to
conflict-related sexual violence and other human
rights violations in communities where they operate.
Female peacekeepers play an especially crucial role,
and increasing the number of women serving in peace
operations is therefore also vital from that perspective.
We deploy many women police and are striving
to increase the number of women in our military
contingents, because we want the best, irrespective of
gender. A diverse team delivers better. We train our
military and police personnel before deployment and
in-mission on sexual and gender-based violence, and
support the African Union and African countries in
their efforts in this area.

The Nordic Centre for Gender in Military
Operations is a resource, as is Sweden's handbook for
gender mainstreaming in operations. In cooperation
with key partners, Norway recently started to develop
a handbook for military staff in United Nations
operations on preventing and responding to sexual
violence in conflict. We thank the Secretary-General
for his leadership in working to ensure that the zero-
tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse
in United Nations peacekeeping operations, and we
hope it will become a reality. The Nordic network of
women mediators is evolving, and more such networks
are forming. We must draw on their experience
and competence.

The need for gender competence and inter-regional
exchange is growing as people are on the move
and facing new vulnerabilities as they seek new
opportunities. It should spur us all to act more
strategically and forcefully.

