Mr. Bhattarai (Nepal): First, I would like to
compliment the President and his great country, Spain,
for organizing this important debate on women and
peace and security on the fifteenth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). I also want to
thank the Secretary-General for his statement, and the
briefers for their insights.

Nepal has been closely engaged in the Council's
work on women and peace and security from its
inception, and has remained true to its commitments
to the cause, both at home and globally. Nepal has
been implementing resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008) through a dedicated national action plan and
with appropriate mechanisms at the local, district,
and national levels. As the first such effort in South
Asia, our action plan was the product of a transparent,
inclusive and nationwide consultations process. It is
now a central instrument articulating the country's
programmes on women and peace and security.

Nepal recognizes the close link between United
Nations peacekeeping operations and resolution 1325
(2000) and subsequent related resolutions. As a leading
and consistent troop- and police-contributor, Nepal
is committed to increasing the number of women in
its army and police forces, deploying more women to
peacekeeping, and integrating the protection of women
and girls from sexual violence into predeployment
training courses. The tools and training developed
with the national action plan partners for the army,
police and other Government stakeholders have proved
useful. The security agencies are implementing a zero-
tolerance policy against gender-based discrimination
within their institutions, using tools such as gender-
behaviour directives and directives regarding women in
the military. We welcome the Secretary-General's zero-
tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse. It
resonates with the action plan on gender-based Violence
that Nepal has been implementing since 2010.

Our Prime Minister's Office has a dedicated unit
for addressing sexual and gender-based violence, which
provides protection to victims and brings perpetrators
to justice. In over 50 districts now, women and girls
service centres investigate and address such incidents.
The Gender Equality Act of 2006, together with the
amendment of 56 laws identified as being gender-
discriminatory, has expedited meaningful reforms in
the country. Under our laws, sexual Violence is a serious
crime against human rights. Rape and violence against
women are serious offenses against the State. Polygamy,
child marriage, forced marriage, sexual harassment in
the workplace, as well as sexual and domestic violence,
are punishable by law. Nepal was careful to ensure
that its peace process was gender-inclusive. Women
comprised 33 per cent of district peace committees, set
up to address local post-conflict issues by, inter alia,
providing relief to victims of conflict. The current
transitional justice mechanism investigates conflict-era
cases and addresses the needs of the victims.

After eight years of consultations, an inclusive
and democratic Constitution, written by elected
representatives, was promulgated in Nepal last month.
It has brought our home-grown peace process to its
logical conclusion and has ushered in an era of promise
for peace, progress and prosperity. The Constitution is
extraordinarily progressive, especially in empowering
women through representation. At least one third of
the members of the federal Parliament must be women.
No two persons of the same gender or community
may, at any given time, occupy the elected offices of
President and Vice-President. Similarly, the offices of
either the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker of the Lower
House and the Chair or the Vice-Chair of the Upper
House must be held by women. That spirit, which is
reflected in the Constitution, will be instrumental
in our efforts to undertake further steps towards the
greater empowerment and participation of women.
The Constitution has institutionalized many of our
achievements in the past and inspires many more.

Much still remains to be done, though. Despite
formidable challenges, including the devastation caused
by earthquakes earlier this year, we are committed to
integrating the national action plan into our mainstream
development plan, in the context of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. We also want to further
localize the action plan for the benefit of the people on
the ground. Likewise, we are committed to ensuring
that all victims of sexual violence have access to justice
as well as to relief benefits and support services. We
also want to emphasize gender mainstreaming in
our recovery, relief and rehabilitation efforts so as to
align the implementation of national action plans with
the gender-specific recommendations of the various
treaty bodies and mechanisms and to engage more men
and boys in our campaign to oppose Violence against
women at all times.

To conclude, in Nepal we are convinced that much
can be accomplished with our own efforts and with the
support of the international community. With sustained
and enhanced levels of joint funding and other means of
implementation in place, Nepal will continue to make
meaningful progress.

