Mr. Hannesson (Iceland): Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) lays down the ground rules for
women to play a central role in conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and peace-building. The key issue now is
implementation. Like those who preceded us, we
welcome the decision by the presidency to hold this
open debate to mark the resolution's third anniversary.
Such debates remain necessary, considering how far we
are from full implementation.

By adopting the resolution, the Security Council
acknowledged that women have a role to play, whether
it concerns conflict prevention, peace negotiations,
peacekeeping or reconstruction.

The United Nations involvement in such
processes and its promotion of gender equality is a key
element to establish peace and security in conflict
regions. The Security Council should put the same
effort into ensuring the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) as it puts into all its other resolutions. The
effectiveness of the United Nations and its
international authority ultimately rest on the extent to
which it is seen to implement its own decisions.

Iceland has consistently supported gender
equality and the advancement of women. Resolution
1325 (2000) is an important element of the United
Nations agenda in that field.

The Icelandic Government has, for the past three
years, been financing the post of a gender expert at the
United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM) office in Kosovo, where UNIFEM. has been
playing an important role in advancing gender equality.
The Icelandic Government stresses the importance of
hiring both men and women for the Icelandic
peacekeeping unit.

We welcome the appointment of an interim
Gender Adviser to the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations. We hope that the permanent position of
Senior Gender Adviser will be filled shortly. Staff
working directly on gender issues must be included in
all peacekeeping operations and afforded effective
authority to ensure compliance at all levels. We also
encourage the Secretary-General, as a matter of
priority, to appoint more women as special
representatives and envoys, as called for in resolution
1325 (2000).

Iceland was the tenth State to ratify the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC). The
entry-into-force of the Statute and the establishment of
the Court represent a major breakthrough for the
protection of human rights, including those of women.
It recognizes, inter alia, the specific impact of armed
conflict on women by criminalizing sexual and gender
violence and puts an end to impunity through ensuring
effective investigation and prosecution of those crimes
by the Court. It also addresses another very important
subject that is reflected in resolution 1325 (2000): by
being the most gender-balanced bench of all
international judicial institutions, the ICC provides an
excellent example of how to ensure the increased
representation of women at all decision-making levels.

