Mrs. Chartsuwan (Thailand): Let me begin by
commending the Government of the United Kingdom
for its role in ensuring that the Security Council will
consider how to further apply itself and how to join in
system-wide efforts to combat this abhorrent crime.

The issue of trafficking in persons, modern slavery
and forced labour is high on Thailand's national agenda,
as successive Governments have recognized that human
trafficking erodes human security and poses a serious
threat to both Thailand and the international community.
Domestically, Thailand has exerted immense efforts to
strengthen domestic legislation to close legal loopholes
and worked fiercely to ensure effective prosecution. In
order to extend our protection and prevention efforts,
we have also engaged the private sector and civil
society in increasing transparency in the supply chains
of businesses, particularly in the fishing sector.

At the international level, Thailand has placed
great emphasis on bilateral, regional and international
cooperation to eradicate human trafficking, forced
labour and the transnational organized criminal
networks that prey on the vulnerable. We were therefore
encouraged to see the Council adopt resolution 2331
(2016) three months ago, and today we are again
encouraged to hear the Council discuss how it can
support international efforts to combat trafficking in
persons more effectively.

From Thailand's standpoint, first, peacekeeping
and all other personnel deployed in conflict and post-
conf1ict areas must be properly trained to identify
the victims of and those vulnerable to trafficking.
They must be have an understanding of the threats
and security challenges that arise from transnational
organized criminal networks. They must know the
immediate, practical and legal protections that are
available. They must be able to respond to the needs of
victims and to those vulnerable groups.

Secondly, data and trends on trafficking in persons
in conflict situations must be collected, monitored and
assessed to inform policy and concerted action against
armed groups and criminal networks. Such data has to
be evaluated within the broader trends of trafficking in
persons globally. Only then will we be ably to truly see
a comprehensive picture of the problem and address it
in a comprehensive and effective manner. It also has to
form a key part of the consideration of actions that the
Council takes on conflict and post-conflict situations.
Thirdly, we also have to take a serious look at
strengthening inter-agency coordination within the
United Nations system on the issue of trafficking in
persons. That can be done through connecting the
Inter-Agency Coordination Group against Trafficking
in Persons with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and regional organizations, or through more
focused briefings at the Council that engages agencies
such as the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
or the International Organization for Migration.
Whatever option is chosen, now is the time to pursue it.

To be effective in its anti-trafficking efforts, the
international community needs to take a common,
consistent and coordinated stance on the issue with the
engagement of the entire United Nations system and,
moreover, the crucial support of the Security Council.

