Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I wish to congratulate
Nigeria on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. Malaysia welcomes its initiative
in convening an open debate on this important issue.
Malaysia also wishes to align itself with the statement
to be delivered by the representative of Viet Nam on
behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.

Violence against women is one of the most
widespread violations of human rights and most
broadly discussed topics. It is utterly deplorable that
one in three women and girls experiences violence in
her lifetime. Violence against women, especially sexual
violence, has massive repercussions. The incidence of
sexual violence in conflict, in particular, often has
grave consequences for the security of women and
girls during peacetime. Malaysia joins other Member
States in strongly condemning sexual violence against
women and girls, men and boys. My delegation remains
concerned that sexual violence is almost universally
under-reported. We must reverse this trend. We need
to urgently address the factors and underlying reasons
for the continued acts of sexual violence committed
against women and girls and the emerging incidence of
sexual violence perpetrated against men and boys.

Ending impunity is crucial to our quest to put an end
to sexual violence in conflict. We must move urgently
to replace the prevailing culture of impunity with one
that promotes the rule of law, justice and accountability.
We welcome the ongoing work of the United Nations
and other stakeholders, including the Team of Experts
on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict,
which focuses its efforts on strengthening the capacity
of national rule of law and justice actors. We agree
with the Secretary-General's recommendation and call
on countries to draw upon the expertise of the Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence
in Conflict, as we believe that its engagement with
relevant Governments would strengthen the latter's
institutional safeguards against impunity for conflict-
related sexual violence.

Underlining the importance of ending sexual
violence, Malaysia joined many others in endorsing the
Declaration of Commitment to End Sexual Violence in
Conflict, which makes clear the collective view on the
need for greater action to address the issue. Malaysia
also welcomes the recent adoption of the Agreed
Conclusion of the 58th Session of the Commission on
the Status of Women, strongly condemning all forms
of violence against women and girls. It is crucial that
we now focus our collective efforts on converting those
political commitments into concrete actions.

My delegation supports the zero-tolerance policy
on sexual exploitation and abuse in all peacekeeping
operations. We believe that it is fundamental to ensuring
that the rights and dignity of women are safeguarded.
Malaysia, in this regard, welcomes the delivery of
scenario-based training for peacekeepers in several
training centres to improve their operational readiness
to react swiftly to sexual violence. We commend the
work of United Nations Action against Sexual Violence
in Conflict in rolling out a framework of early-warning
indicators to help enhance prevention capabilities in
mission settings.

My delegation believes that this issue requires
continued vigilance on the part of the Security Council.
We are therefore pleased to note the progress made in
the implementation of the monitoring, analysis and
reporting arrangements as mandated by resolution
1960 (2010) to promote increased and timely action to
prevent and respond to sexual violence in conflict and
post-conflict situations.

We have made strides in addressing sexual violence
in conflict, but we can and must do more to put an end
to this scourge. Malaysia therefore reaffirms its strong
commitment to efforts to address sexual violence in
conflict and post-conflict situations. We will continue
to work with others to advance the agenda and ensure
the participation of women is mainstreamed in activities
towards securing peace and security.

