Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank the
United States presidency for organizing today's meeting
on a subject as important as it is topical - trafficking
in situations of conflict.

I also thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson;
Mr. Yuri Fedotov, Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime; and Mr. Nick
Grono, Chief Executive Officer of the Freedom Fund,
for their briefings, and Ms. Nadia Murad Basee Taha
for her very moving testimony.

Trafficking in human beings is an extremely
lucrative organized criminal activity that generates
profits estimated at tens of billions of United States
dollars a year. Millions of the people subject to
trafficking, including women and children, are often
sexually abused. There is no question that human
trafficking is the new slavery of the twenty-first
century against which humankind must now engage in
a ruthless struggle.

In some regions of the world, particularly in the
Middle East and Africa, thousands of men, women and
children are victims of trafficking. Terrorist groups,
including the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, Boko
Haram, the Lord's Resistance Army and many others
resort to various forms of exploitation, including sexual
exploitation, forced labour or bondage, slavery or
related practices, forced servitude or organ trafficking
and other abominable crimes requiring urgent solutions.

Chad vigorously condemns all such criminal
practices. Recognizing the close ties between terrorism
and transnational organized crime, including human
trafficking, Chad initiated and ensured the adoption
last December of resolution 2195 (2014), whose relevant
provisions address the issue before the Council today.
To that end, we recall that the resolution, inter alia,
requests Member States to ratify as soon as possible
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime of 2000, also known as the Palermo
Convention, and its additional Protocols. In that regard,
Chad urges Member States to further pool their efforts
to prevent and eliminate human trafficking, in line
with the Additional Protocols of the Convention. The
firm commitment of Member States and effective
coordination of their actions are absolutely crucial to
identifying and bringing to justice the perpetrators of
those heinous crimes, wherever they may be.

The smuggling of migrants towards Europe is
spiriting many thousands of young Africans across the
Mediterranean Sea each year. This is a serious crime
that Africa and the rest of the world must diligently
oppose. However, despite efforts aimed at dismantling
the illegal migration networks, including the use of
coercive methods authorized by resolution 2240 (2015),
the phenomenon does not seem to have abated. In that
regard, Chad reiterates that the States of origin, transit
and destination must firmly tackle the root causes of
that evil. It is essential for the international community
to place greater emphasis on the links between peace,
security and economic development by financing
programmes aimed at creating jobs for young people
and women, particularly in the migrants' countries of
origin.

Finding a lasting solution to the issue of human
trafficking will require the Council's deep involvement
in resolving the conflicts currently under way
worldwide, particularly in Syria, Iraq, Libya and other
African countries. To that end, the Council must be
united in the maintenance of international peace and
security, particularly in efforts to ban the supply of
weapons and munitions to armed groups, regardless of
their character or objectives. By the same token, the
Council should work to end the destabilization of weak
States, on the basis of any available pretext, in order to
preserve peace and security throughout the world.

In conclusion, Chad underscores the importance of
the universal implementation of the Palermo Convention
and its two additional Protocols. The Convention is
the fruit of a long consideration process and covers all
aspects of human trafficking, which has grown at an
alarming, unprecedented rate due to the evolution of
terrorism. The response to such crimes also calls for
renewed commitment and determination on the part of
all States Members of the United Nations.

