Mr. Reindel (Germany): Owing to time constraints,
I will deliver only a condensed version of my statement.
The full text will be available online.

Let me congratulate Spain on its assumption of the
presidency of the Council. We express our gratitude
to you, Sir, for having convened this debate and for
putting the women and peace and security agenda at the
centre of your presidency. I would also like to commend
the Executive Director of UN-Women for her excellent
briefing and the two civil-society briefers for their
insightful testimonies.

Germany aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the European Union.

The adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) one and a
half decades ago was a milestone, and we have made
great strides since then. Today, it would be inconceivable
for a major Security Council-mandated mission not to
include a gender component. More than 50 countries,
including Germany, have adopted national action plans
for the implementation of the resolution.

Yet we still witness gross human rights violations,
including, and particularly, against women, in crisis-
ridden regions across the Middle East and elsewhere.
And we are faced with millions of refugees fleeing their
homes; an estimated 800,000 will have sought refuge in
Germany by the end of 2015.

Against that backdrop, one finding of the recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/716) is
especially significant: the prevention of conflicts and
the women and peace and security agenda are directly
linked. That is why Germany will continue to push
for the political empowerment of women and provide
adequate capacity-building and incentives. A case
in point is our long-standing effort to facilitate the
inclusion of women in the peace dialogues in Colombia
and in the Philippines.

We all know that international peace and observation
missions are expected to be standard-setters. Germany
will thus continue to deploy female police and military
experts, including specialized teams for gender-based
violence. During our chairmanship of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in
2016, we will appoint a Special Representative of the
OSCE Chair-in-Office on Gender Issues.

Germany is fully committed to ensuring that the
women and peace and security agenda has the necessary
financial underpinning. To that end, we will this year
once again contribute €1 million to the International
Committee of the Red Cross for use in preventing
sexual violence in armed conflict and in assisting its
victims.

Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Bangura has been tireless in drawing our attention to
the horrific sexual crimes being carried out in conflicts
around the world. We encourage the members of the
Council to resort to her expertise more frequently.

It is deplorable that the survivors of sexual violence
frequently face stigmatization upon returning to their
families and communities. We commend the Yazidi
spiritual leadership in Iraq for defying this paradigm.
The positive message of acceptance and integration is a
model to be followed the world over.

In the spirit of our national action plan, we are
weaving the women and peace and security agenda into
our response to the higher number of refugees arriving
in Germany. We are investing in services that take into
account the specific needs of refugee women and girls,
in particular those who have lived through the horrors
of sexual violence.

In the 15 years since the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), we have together achieved significant progress
in expanding and promoting the women and peace and
security agenda. Now that the normative framework is
largely in place, we need to make further rapid strides
towards its implementation. Germany will remain a
strong partner in this endeavour.

