Mrs. Smaila (Nigeria): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open date, which
places in the proper context the issue of women and the
rule of law and transitional justice in conflict-affected
situations. We also thank Azerbaijan for the concept
note (S/2013/587, annex), which has provided direction
to our discussion.

Nigeria shares the Secretary-General's view that
there has been measurable progress in all areas of the
women and peace and security agenda, especially as
it relates to the increased provision of expertise and
training. We are pleased to note that, under the rubric of
prevention and protection, there has been a significant
increase in focus on policy and operational focus on
the monitoring, prevention and prosecution of violence
against women. The international community must
sustain that momentum.

In spite of those accomplishments, we believe that
considerable work still needs to be done to overcome
the challenges posed by a lack of implementation of
commitments on women and peace and security. A nexus
must be created among women's participation, security
and the core work of United Nations peacekeeping
operations i often overlooked when gender-specific
information is provided to the Council. Indeed, the lack
of sex-disaggregated data on security threats prevents
action that could contribute to greater security for
women. We therefore welcome the Secretary-General's
recommendation to explore options for providing
guidance that would facilitate reporting to the Security
Council to include information on the situation of
women and girls. The Council requires such information
to work in concert with other intergovernmental bodies
such as the Human Rights Council.

Sexual violence against women and girls in conflict
and post-conflict situations should remain a matter of
high priority to the international community. More
needs to be done to hold accountable the perpetrators
of such heinous acts. Indeed, the adoption of resolution
2016 (2013), in June, underscored the need for more
systematic monitoring of sexual violence in armed
conflict. It is therefore imperative that the Council
develop the appropriate mechanisms to ensure women's
participation in all aspects of mediation, post-conflict
recovery and peacebuilding to address sexual violence
in conflict.

The gender dimensions of transitional justice are
critical in assessing crimes committed against women
in conflict. The lack of access to justice occasioned
by the deterioration of an already weakened criminal
justice system amplifies their vulnerabilities. Indeed,
UN Women notes that securing justice for women
entails engaging with the processes that shape future
justice mechanisms, including constitution-making
and peace processes. That ultimately accentuates the
need for greater women's participation in post-conflict
nation-building, where frameworks are instituted to
enable them seek redress.

Nigeria is committed to the implementation of
the relevant Security Council resolutions on women
and peace and security. Strident steps have been taken
at the national level to ensure the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). In the same vein, Nigeria
stresses the importance of compliance with resolution
1820 (2008), on ending acts of sexual violence against
women in conflict situations.

It is essential for Member States to adopt and
implement comprehensive legislation on violence
against women as a concrete step to increase women's
access to justice. Special courts designed to reduce
delays in rendering justice should be established where
necessary to facilitate access to justice for victims.
Strong advocacy to break the culture of silence and
promote zero tolerance across the globe is fundamental
to the restoration of the rights and dignity of women in
all circumstances.

