Mr. M'Beou (Togo) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to commend you, Mr. President, for
organizing this debate on the issue of women and peace
and security in the context of the role of women's civil
society organizations in the prevention and settlement
of armed conflicts and peacebuilding. I would also like
to thank the Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Michelle
Bachelet, Ms. Bineta Diop and Mr. Herve Ladsous for
their statements. I assure Ms. Diop of my country's
support for her work at the head of her organization for
the effective protection of women's rights, in particular
in Africa.
Twelve years after the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), Togo welcomes the ongoing
reflections begun by the United Nations on the
implementation of the resolution. The importance of
this process resides in the fact that it is an opportunity
to take stock of the results achieved and difficulties
encountered, and to contemplate strategies to be
adopted in our future work. While tremendous efforts
have been made in the implementation of the resolution,
much remains to be done, in particular in areas such
as the implementation of peace agreements, seamless
transitions, the gradual drawndown of United Nations
missions, and the pursuit of a secure environment for
civil society organizations. All these elements must
be taken into consideration in order to strengthen
the process of preventing and resolving conflicts and
peacebuilding.

The report of the Secretary-General before us
(S/2012/732) indicates that women and girls continue
to suffer violations of their rights, in particular through
sexual and gender-based violence, forced displacement
and obstructions to humanitarian access, which are
serious violations of international human rights law
and international humanitarian and refugee law. While
the United Nations does its best to protect civilians, in
particular women and children, and calls on all parties
to the conflict to act accordingly, we must still note
that violence against women and children is growing,
as seen in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
and northern Mali.

In addition to these horrible, tragic and reprehensible
acts, we also note the use ofheavy weapons in populated
areas, which leads to mass population movements,
in particular among women and children, thereby
exposing them to all types of violence and violations
of their rights. These actions must cease and their
perpetrators punished under the relevant international
legal instruments.

It is therefore important that national legislation
incorporate international criminal law, which provides
for such acts and punishes their perpetrators. The
Council must ensure that impunity is not the rule, but the
exception. My country welcomes the fact that measures
adopted by the United Nations to protect women and
girls include guidelines that have been drawn up by
the heads of military and police units in peacekeeping
operations. The sanctions laid out therein against
peacekeepers involved in cases of sexual violence meet
the expectations of the international community and
are designed to fully and completely protect vulnerable
women and girls.

The international community has deployed
immense efforts to promote such protection, but it
will be successful only if women are involved in the
crucial processes of conflict settlement. Unfortunately,
women's organizations and civil society are very often
excluded from such processes. Yet the implementation
ofresolution 1325 (2000) requires enhanced cooperation
among Member States, international and regional
security institutions, and civil society.

The gaps in the implementation of peace
agreements - which are undoubtedly complex ~ have
led the United Nations and international human rights
organizations to require the effective participation of
civil society, in particular women's organizations.
These organizations have, of course, an important role
to play in the prevention and resolution of conflicts.
Their involvement in the settlement of conflicts
is an opportunity to influence peacekeeping and
peacebuilding policies. It is therefore appropriate for
women to participate actively in the different stages of
negotiations, as the peace process gains legitimacy and
credibility when women participate in it.

In 2011, women were represented in 12 - or 86 per
cent - of the 14 United Nations mediation support
teams. However, only four of fourteen delegations to
peace negotiations had a woman among their ranks. This
deplorable state of affairs underscores the urgent need
to impress upon the parties to conflicts that they should
give a significant role to women in peace negotiations
and in the implementation of peace agreements, as it
is women's civil society organizations that ensure the
sustainability of peacebuilding on the ground.

Women cannot play this positive role unless they
are given responsibilities within the support structures
for rebuilding the country. We are therefore welcome
the participation of women in the facilitation and
mediation processes for conflicts in countries such as
the Central African Republic, Cyprus and Malawi. In
this respect, we support the report of the Secretary-
General, which encourages Member States and regional
organizations that participate in peace processes to
appoint more women as mediators, co-mediators and
mediation advisors.

I note in that respect that my country since
2006 has included a gender mainstreaming strategy
in our development policies and programmes.
This strategy, in its preamble and in accordance
with resolution 1325 (2000), affirms the important
role that women play in the prevention and settlement
of conflicts and in peacebuilding, and emphasizes the
importance of their participation on an equal footing in
all efforts to maintain and promote peace and security.

In translating this strategy into reality, Togo
promoted the participation of women's civil society
organizations in the signing of the comprehensive
political agreement of 2006, which allowed the country
to emerge from the socio-political crisis that began in
1990. They also played an active role in the work of the
truth, justice and reconciliation commission, the results
of which were accepted by almost all of the population.
The importance that the Government attaches to the
role of women in building the country is also evident
in the election of many women to Parliament and the
appointment of a number of others to Government
and other positions of responsibility. The aim of the
Government is to ensure that women's participation
in our country's political and administrative life is
increased to achieve in the long term percentages that
reflect their real commitment and interest in public
affairs.

To conclude, I wish to assure the Council of the
support of my Government in the full and complete
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We welcome
the fact that on 31 October the Council adopted a
presidential statement on this subject (S/PRST/2012/23),
under the Guatemalan presidency.

