Mr. Charwath (Austria): Let me begin by thanking
France for convening this very pertinent open debate.

Austria aligns itself with the statements made
earlier on behalf of the European Union, the Human
Security Network and the Group of Friends on Women,
Peace and Security.

As the President pointed out, we need to focus
more on the implementation of the agenda. Austria
is convinced that regional organizations, such as the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), have a crucial role to play in translating our
political commitments on the global level into concrete
action and impact on the ground. As a consequence,
we have put the implementation of resolutions 1325
(2000) and its successors high on the agenda of the
Austrian OSCE chairmanship this year. Based on our
experiences, let me share just three short points that we
take away from our work in the OSCE.

First, there can be no sustainable solution to a
conflict without the participation of women. In April,
we organized a high-level retreat on effective peace
processes and the inclusion of women, and we were
able to collect concrete recommendations on how to
increase women's meaningful participation in them.

Secondly, another key element is gender-responsive
journalism and the protection of female journalists.
While women are often portrayed only as victims,
gender-responsive journalism can transform gender
stereotypes, promote women's empowerment and
raise awareness of the critical role of women in the
prevention, management and resolution of conflicts.
We will take this discussion forward in the OSCE
on 3 November through an event on the role of the
media in implementing the women and peace and
security agenda.

The third point I would like to highlight is that
regional organizations are ideally suited to building a
bridge between the global framework and its national
and local implementation. Therefore, Austria has
repeatedly called for the adoption of an OSCE-wide
action plan on women, peace and security, which would
be a useful tool in this regard. Unfortunately, to date
no consensus on the adoption of such action plan could
be reached.

Having said this, we believe that the upcoming
OSCE Ministerial Council meeting in Vienna in
December will provide a good opportunity to strengthen
and reaffirm the OSCE commitments in this regard. We
hope that the OSCE participating States will be able to
support us in this endeavour and adopt the two draft
decisions that we have tabled.

Finally, let me stress that Austria remains
committed and will continue to promote women's
rights, gender equality and the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda in the OSCE
region and beyond.

