Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): I thank the French
presidency for putting the spotlight on the women
and peace and security agenda, and the Secretary-
General for his astute recommendations. We would
like to express our warm appreciation to Executive
Director Mlambo-Ngcuka and her team for their
leadership and groundbreaking work on the issue. We
also thank Ms. Ribeiro Viotti, Ms. Jean, and Ms. Mina-
Rojas, the representative of civil society, for their
insightful briefings.

The women and peace and security agenda, as
first outlined in resolution 1325 (2000), should be
increasingly used as an important tool for conflict
prevention and resolution, as well as a source of
transformational change across all three pillars of the
United Nations. Providing support to newly created
United Nations mechanisms - such as the Council's
new Informal Expert Group on Women, Peace and
Security; the Women's Peace and Humanitarian Fund;
the Women, Peace and Security National Focal Points
Network and the Peacebuilding Commission's gender
strategy - will further accelerate the implementation
of this agenda. Council resolutions and presidential
statements should make increasing use of the language
ofthe women and peace and security agenda in order to
bring a new paradigm into the thinking of the Council,
the United Nations system, Member States and
police- and troop-contributing countries. Kazakhstan
is committed to continuing the excellent practice of
inviting representatives from women's organizations to
brief the Council. We must still persist with efforts to
bridge the gap between spoken commitments and actual
action, especially when the participation of women is
still lacking, in times of peace as well as conflict.

A more proactive role for women in preventing
and resolving conflicts is a priority for Kazakhstan.
We should diligently support the Secretary-General's
reforms focused on keeping gender at the centre
of prevention efforts and a firm commitment to
gender parity at the highest levels across the United
Nations, as well as supporting his work to reform
the Organization's peace and security architecture.
That requires improving the collaboration between
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
UN-Women, both in the field and at Headquarters,
as well as on the new United Nations initiatives
aimed at doubling the number of women in military
and police contingents by 2020. All peacekeeping
operations should have strong mandates on women
and peace and security, with gender specialists in the
areas of the rule of law; human rights; disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration; internally displaced
people; refugee returnees; rehabilitation; livelihood
services and trauma counselling. We need stronger and
more systematic gender mainstreaming to help prevent
violent extremism and asymmetric conflict situations.

Funding for areas related to the women and peace
and security agenda, especially in protracted conflicts,
remains a concern. We must provide the necessary
funds to ensure that missions have sufficient expertise,
authority and capacity. Part of that funding gap can
be overcome by expanding reforms and improving the
streamlining and coordination of strategies through the
United Nations system and its collaboration with other
partners. Global processes are much more effective
when they are firmly established on the ground and
when each Member State and region plays its role.

In support of multilateral efforts, Kazakhstan has
begun the process of integrating all four pillars of the
women and peace and security agenda into its national
legislation, including formulating new, strong pro-
women policies. Commitments on women and peace
and security have been included in the Republic of
Kazakhstan's family and gender policy for the period
from 2016 to 2030, with the goal of ensuring women's
engagement in policy- and decision-making in all
spheres of national governance and gender-equality
training for the armed and security forces, as well as
women's deployment in peacekeeping operations.

Zero tolerance for gender-based violence is a
definitive part of our national policy, inspired by
resolution 1325 (2000). Throughout the world, the
perpetrators of such violence must be brought to
justice, and that justice must be transformative.
Sustainable Development Goal 5 focuses on women, but
investments in women are also critical to truly fulfilling
the other 16 Goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, as well as the Secretary-General's new
agenda for peace. Women and young people are central
to the entire cycle, from conflict prevention to conflict
resolution and from peacebuilding to development.
Both groups should be seen as important links in the
security-development nexus.

We welcome the fact that the Peacebuilding
Fund has surpassed its 15 per cent target again this
year, and we are focused on achieving the target of
earmarking 15 per cent of our official development
assistance for gender mainstreaming. We applaud the
Swedish delegation and Foreign Minister Wallstrom for
highlighting the case of Afghanistan in her statement.
We, too, are focusing on Afghanistan through our
KazAid programme, with a multidimensional approach
based on conflict prevention and resolution, as well as
recovery, reintegration and humanitarian assistance.
Last year, in cooperation with Japan and the United
Nations Development Programme, Kazakhstan
launched a project to promote gender equality in
Afghanistan, including by providing policy support
and capacity development. National efforts must be
reinforced by regional and subregional commitments to
strengthening cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations, which is what Kazakhstan
has been attempting to accomplish in Central Asia
through the United Nations Women Multi-Country
Office in Almaty.

In that context, we believe that the first-ever
African Union-United Nations joint mission to African
countries on women and peace and security, led by
Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed in
July, which did so much to create awareness, should
become a regular practice. We commend regional
organizations for implementing the women and peace
and security agenda in their regions, and we especially
commend the African Union for its progressive gender
mainstreaming within the African Peace and Security
Architecture. We acknowledge civil society's important
role in improving women's access to leadership and
participation in peace processes, and we encourage all
Member States to strengthen their engagement with
civil society organizations, including women and youth
groups. Kazakhstan is committed to continuing the
good practice of inviting representatives from women's
organizations to brief the Council.

Lastly, enhanced data collection and reporting are
also very important for the success of the women and
peace and security agenda. We see stagnation in certain
indicators and therefore call for enhanced gender
analysis of countries' situations. We need expanded and
more timely and accurate national gender-disaggregated
data and progress reports on the implementation and
monitoring of those commitments.

Kazakhstan pledges its unfailing support to the
women and peace and security agenda, with the goal
of seeing all societies develop new possibilities and
potential for human well-being hrough the empowerment
of women and girls. Today Ambassador Fode Seck of
Senegal mentioned that women are a majority of the
world population. In that regard, I would like to read a
short extract from a poem by a famous Kazakh writer,
Mukaghali Makatayev.

"Today women are a majority of the population.
We need to support that strength because women
mean beauty. Let us add beauty to our planet".

I would like to conclude by saying that only women,
in their wisdom, beauty and leadership, can save our
fragile world.

