Mr. Moritan (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the initiative taken by the United Kingdom
presidency to hold an open debate on the fourth
anniversary of the adoption of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security. The resolution has already demonstrated its
importance in peacekeeping operations, post-conflict
reconstruction and conflict prevention. Our task is to
perfect that instrument in order to make it more
effective and universal.

We would also like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Guehenno, Ms. Louise Arbour, High
Commissioner for Human Rights, and Ms. Thoraya
Obaid, Executive Director of the United Nations
Population Fund, for their briefings to the Security
Council. We welcome the report of the Secretary-
General on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) and the important information
and suggestions contained therein.

The struggle of women for their rights is a
question of paramount importance to Brazil. Our
Constitution reflects the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and guarantees full equality between
men and women. It also recognizes the special needs of
women in certain circumstances and the duty of the
State to give them the necessary guarantees.

Brazil also recognizes the importance of the
leadership role that women should play in situations of
conflict, post-conflict and conflict-prevention - as
stipulated in the Beijing Platform for Action.

Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) and
efforts to implement it are crucial in order to pursue
work that began more than 30 years ago and is still
ongoing in the United Nations agencies and
programmes and in Member States. Since the year
2000, much has been done to turn the concepts
contained in Security Council decisions into reality;
however, difficulties and obstacles remain numerous.

First and foremost, we must be aware of the fact
that the issue discussed in the Council can not be
restricted to women as vulnerable victims of conflicts,
but they must also be considered as actors in the peace
process, as agents in rebuilding society and as
peacekeepers. All aspects of that issue are essential and
should be addressed by the Organization.

The proliferation of civil conflicts over the past
15 years has particularly affected the situation of
women involved in those disputes, as they are
confronted by regular or irregular military forces.
Sexual crimes, trafficking in women and other forms of
violations of human rights have become tools of war
and have been on the rise.

Degradation in the status of women has
characterized many of the conflicts, which have created
waves of violence and violations of rights that are not
directly related to the conflict, but are related to a
breakdown of society. Those forms of violence further
inflame wars and made them more difficult to resolve.
The international community must use all tools
available and prepare new tools to combat that evil. We
welcome the ongoing and repeated condemnation by
the main bodies of the United Nations against those
practices against women, because revealing the
existence of such practices is fundamental to efforts to
eliminate them.

It is also worthwhile to mention the work of
women and women's groups that have overcome ethnic
and religious divisions to contribute to sustainable
peace, in many regions in turmoil.

Brazil supports the inclusion in legislation
and national institutions - with international
cooperation - of specific measure to penalize those
who commit crimes against women. We want the
International Criminal Court to have an important role
in prosecuting those accused of gender-based
violations.

Building up the rule of law can not be carried out
without establishing the specific impact of a conflict on
women and girls. The Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women spells
out obligations of States to guarantee gender equality,
but that is not enough. We must guarantee the
participation of women, as well as that of women's
groups, in building the State.
In that connection, the international community
must make more progress. Few women's organizations
are participating in peace negotiations or in
disarmament exercises, thereby losing precious
contributions that can contribute to the success of such
processes.

An important measure would be to make sure that
an increasing number of women register to vote and
also become candidates, thereby making it possible for
women to participate in key positions at the time of the
reconstruction of a State.

As has been emphasized, preventing and
punishing violations of the rights of women is not
enough. It is necessary to work to make certain that
they take on their full role as actors.

The report of the Secretary-General recommends
relevant strategies - whose implementation requires
local and international efforts - that have positive
prospects for the future. There are clear advantages to
ensuring that women and groups of women participate
in early warning systems to prevent conflict from
starting at the local level; however, such initiatives
have not been used much yet. Another important
possibility is to work to make sure that women play a
greater role in organizing communities of refugees, in
combating epidemics, in particular HIV/AIDS, and in
guaranteeing adequate conditions for reproductive
health.

In order for those initiatives to take a positive
turn, it is necessary that the international community
not forget the political or the material means needed
for their implementation. International organizations
and Member States must overcome age-old mindsets
that do not include gender mainstreaming in all
processes of conflict prevention, conflict resolution, or
post-conflict reconstruction. There must also be funds
available in order to implement those projects - the
donor community can not wait until a conflict region is
completely stable before beginning to finance such
projects.

In the area of peacekeeping, you can find some of
the most significant progress made concerning women
in armed conflicts. We particularly welcome the
inclusion of gender aspects in all of the mandates
recently adopted by the Security Council, including the
United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI),
the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), and the United Nations Operation in
Burundi (ONUB).
We have also noted the attention given by the
Security Council to the topic, since the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000). In future, we must make
certain that such attention does not stray, and that it in
fact become institutionalized.

Despite the progress made, we have still not
made the desired progress towards establishing a
substantial presence of women in peacekeeping
operations. The Secretariat's statistics on women in
peacekeeping operations - l per cent of military
personnel and 5 per cent of police - make clear that
there is need for ongoing, progressive action to reach
an appropriate ratio.

Peacekeeping missions should coordinate closely
with the organs, programmes and agencies of the
United Nations in the elaboration of peacekeeping
mission policies. We commend the coordination work
already under way involving elements of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
Department of Political Affairs, the Department of
Public Information and the United Nations
Development Fund for Women, as well as the
secretariat for the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women, among
others. We also draw attention to the importance of
ensuring an adequate presence of women in high-
ranking positions of the Secretariat.

Brazil underlines in particular the need for
cooperation between the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council, under Article 65 of the
Charter, to link peace, security, reconstruction and
development. There are already success stories of
cooperation, such as those of the Economic and Social
Council's ad hoc groups for Guinea-Bissau and
Burundi. Those experiences should be reproduced and
enhanced, specifically taking into account the question
of gender.

In conclusion, I consider it important to underline
that the actions taken to promote the question of
women in armed conflicts should be capped with broad
and inclusive strategies for disseminating information
on this important issue. All organs, agencies and
programmes of the United Nations, as well as Member
States, have a responsibility to communicate their
efforts in order to highlight problems and possible
solutions and to receive the necessary cooperation.

