Mr. Le Hoai Trung (Viet Nam): It gives me great
honour and pleasure to speak on behalf ofthe 10 member
States of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN), namely, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia,
Indonesia, the Lao People's Democratic Republic,
Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore,
Thailand and my own country, Viet Nam.

At the outset, we would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today's debate on the
important issue of women, peace and security. We
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report (S/2013/149), which provides a
useful basis for our deliberations. We extend our sincere
appreciation to the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative for their comprehensive briefings.

Sexual violence in armed conflict is not a new
phenomenon and has occurred in several corners of the
world. Sexual violence in armed conflict has harmful
and lasting economic, social, cultural and health
consequences for victims, families and communities,
even after the conflict stage has ended. We are deeply
concerned about the dire plight of women and girls in
situations of armed conflict. We condemn all violence
against women in armed conflicts, including sexual
violence. We recognize the urgent need to address their
plight.
ASEAN member States wish to reiterate their
strong commitment to working closely with the
international community and the United Nations in
ending sexual violence, wherever it occurs. Our States
have been supportive of efforts to eliminate and prevent
all acts of violence against women. ASEAN attaches
great importance to the implementation of landmark
resolution 1325 (2000) and the subsequent resolutions
1820 (2008), 1888 (2009), 1889 (2009) and 1960 (2010).
ASEAN supports the continued efforts of the Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict and the
relevant United Nations bodies to advance the women,
peace and security agenda in accordance with their
respective mandates.

At the national and regional levels, ASEAN
member States have been establishing legal and policy
frameworks and implementing mechanisms to further
enhance the status and welfare of women and girls
and to eliminate all forms of violence against women,
including sexual violence. Those efforts have been
strengthened by the adoption of various declarations,
including the Declaration on the Advancement of
Women in ASEAN, in 1988; the Declaration on the
Elimination of Violence against Women in the ASEAN
Region, in 2004; and the ASEAN Human Rights
Declaration, in 2012.

Also, the Association established the ASEAN
Committee on Women, in 2002, and the ASEAN
Intergovernmental Commission on Human Rights
and the ASEAN Commission on the Promotion and
Protection of the Rights of Women and Children, in
2009. All those bodies aim to uphold, promote, protect
and ensure respect for and the fulfilment of the human
rights and fundamental freedoms of women and
children in the ASEAN area. In that context, ASEAN
member States would like to underline the following.

First, the fundamental causes of sexual violence
in armed conflict should be tackled at their root. A
preventive mechanism that addresses the root causes
of armed conflict should be implemented. ASEAN's
Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia,
which aims to promote perpetual peace, everlasting
amity and cooperation among its people, is a regional
framework that we have put in place to that end. Such
root causes should be addressed, inter alia, by promoting
the rule of law, good governance, democracy, poverty
eradication, sustainable development and respect
for and the protection of human rights, as well as by
providing multisectoral assistance and services for the
specific needs of women and girls.

Secondly, preventing and eradicating sexual
violence against women are closely linked to women's
empowerment and to gender equality. ASEAN views
women as agents of change, who should participate,
in a full and equal part, in peace, conflict resolution,
peacebuilding and post-conflict processes. In that
regard, the continued efforts of the international
community to address sexual violence in armed conflict
must be supported.

Most recently, the fifty-seventh session of the
Commission on the Status of Women adopted the
agreed conclusions on the elimination and prevention
of all forms of violence against women and girls. That
document was widely hailed by Governments, United
Nations officials and civil society as a huge step forward
and a historic global agreement in the ongoing efforts
to protect women and girls from violence.

Thirdly, ASEAN member countries are of the
view that States must bear responsibility and do their
utmost to prevent and address sexual violence in armed
conflict. The United Nations and the international
community can play a supporting role by providing
assistance, by sharing best practices and by helping
States to exercise that responsibility.

Let me conclude by stressing ASEAN's readiness
and commitment to join efforts with the international
community to ensure the elimination of sexual violence
in armed conflict and to implement effective measures
of accountability and redress in the field of women and
peace and security.

