Mr. Szijjarto (Hungary): Thank you, Madam
President, for giving us the opportunity to express our
views about this very important topic, although I have to
be very careful since I represent a small country whose
army is not one of the world's most powerful. I will
therefore try to make my remarks modest and humble.

Regardless of size, we are a responsible member
of the international community and have always
been committed to contributing to the success of
peacekeeping operations. We recently celebrated the
twentieth anniversary of our accession to NATO, and
when we looked at our track record, we were proud
to see that we have not only received the benefits
of belonging to the Alliance but have been able to
contribute to its success as well. Similarly, when we
look at our track record in United Nations peacekeeping,
I can say that we have contributed and will continue to
contribute to the success of our common efforts, since
we consider peacekeeping one of the most important
functions of the United Nations. We should, of course,
implement reforms, and we are ready to take part in
that, especially since we consider peacekeeping a vital
instrument for tackling the root causes of migration,
which is currently a major challenge all over the world.
We can see that if we can prevent the occurrence of
situations that force people to flee their homes, we may
ultimately succeed not in managing migratory flows
but stopping them altogether.

The Hungarian Government recently decided to
increase the number of our troops serving abroad from
1,000 to 1,200, which will enable us to increase the
numbers of our peacekeepers within the United Nations
framework as well. Since that decision was taken, we
have begun withdrawing from the United Nations
Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus. I can now announce
that we will be deploying 60 additional peacekeepers
to the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon. Our
peacekeepers will serve in sector west in Lebanon
under Italian command. In that regard, I would like
to take this opportunity to express our respect for the
Government and the people of Lebanon in their work of
caring for millions of refugees and making enormous
efforts to ensure their country's stability and thereby
have a positive impact on the region.

We see great opportunities for the involvement of
police forces in international peacekeeping operations.
Our police forces in the Western Balkans are very well
trained and are helping countries in the region protect
their own borders. Those are not classic peacekeeping
operations, but keeping borders properly protected
definitely helps keep the peace.

We recognize the role of women in those operations.
In Hungary 20 per cent of the staff of the armed forces
and 23 per cent of the police forces are women. Based
on those figures, we are clearly committed to the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda and are interested in understanding best
practices, or, in particular, as the representative of the
United Kingdom said, the best of the best. We have not
so far drafted a national action plan, but I am happy
to announce that our armed forces guidelines on the
matter are already in preparation.

