Mr. Ellinger (Czech Republic): Let me thank you,
Mr. President, for your timely initiative in organizing
today's important debate.

The Czech Republic fully aligns itself with the
statement delivered on behalf of the European Union.

Let me also take this opportunity to declare our
unfailing support for Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed's hard work and also congratulate
Ms. Pramila Patten on her appointment as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and wish her all the best in all her
future endeavours. We also thank Ms. Zainab Bangura
for all her hard work in recent years.

The fact that all the stakeholders in this area take
a firm position is of the utmost importance, especially
now in an era when armed extremist groups place the
subordination of women at the top of their agenda.
Empowering girls and women, while maintaining a
zero-tolerance policy for all forms of sexual violence,
is the only way to address inequality and violations of
women's rights.

Even in times of peace, we should not forget that
sexual violence must be adequately addressed. Czech
law criminalizes such behaviour. In 2015, the Czech
Republic adopted its action plan for the prevention
of domestic and gender-based violence for the period
2015-2018. Its aim is to prevent domestic and gender-
based violence and to increase the efficiency of the
victim-support system. It addresses domestic violence,
as well as sexual harassment, rape, stalking and other
forms of gender-based violence. The Czech action plan
on women, peace and security, adopted in early 2017,
sets out concrete tasks for combating sexual violence
and other forms of violence against women and girls.
We have also set up a framework for training sessions
and programmes for military and civilian personnel
in order to prevent this dangerous behaviour, together
with the Ministry of Defence action plan on women,
peace and security.

In the framework of development cooperation and
humanitarian aid, the Czech Republic has implemented
a number of projects abroad, totalling CZK130 million
in 2016, with a strong gender aspect, including projects
aimed at preventing sexual violence and the abuse of
women and girls. We have also set up health-care and
hygiene centres for marginalized and abused girls and/
or internally displaced persons. Those projects have
been implemented in Georgia, Serbia, Kosovo, Syria,
the Central African Republic and Afghanistan. In 2017,
the Czech Republic started the implementation of a
project aimed at combating sexual violence in Cuba.

Allow me to assure those present that the
Czech Republic remains absolutely committed to
strengthening the efforts of the relevant United Nations,
regional and national bodies in their efforts to combat
sexual violence.

