Mr. Kapambwe (Zambia): I have the honour to
address the Security Council on behalf of the member
States of the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) - namely, Angola, Botswana, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Lesotho,
Madagascar, Malawi, Mauritius, Mozambique,
Namibia, South Africa, Swaziland, the United Republic
of Tanzania, Zimbabwe and my own country, Zambia.

We would like to thank the Secretary-General, the
Special Adviser to the Secretary General on Gender
Issues and Advancement of Women, the Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, the Ad
Interim Executive Director of the United Nations
Development Fund for Women and the Coordinator of
the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and
Security for their introductory statements, which were
very instructive.

SADC welcomes the opportunity, on the seventh
anniversary of the adoption of the landmark resolution
1325 (2000), to participate in this open debate on
women, peace and security, focused on achieving
coherent and effective implementation of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000). As we are all aware,
the resolution, among other things, calls for the
incorporation of a gender perspective in negotiating

and implementing peace agreements, planning refugee
camps and peacekeeping operations, and reconstructing
war-torn societies. Today's debate therefore provides
us with an opportunity to assess the concrete and
specific efforts in the implementation of the resolution
at all levels and the role of the Security Council in such
efforts.

The adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) by the
Security Council and the six subsequent presidential
statements on women, peace and security provide a
solid framework for action in all areas of the peace
process. The importance of women's equal
participation and full involvement in all efforts to
maintain and promote peace and security cannot be
overstated. While some progress has been made in the
implementation of the resolution, greater coordinated
efforts are required to achieve the goal of full
implementation. In that regard, SADC calls on the
international community to render sustained support in
the development of national action plans, including
financial and human resources, that will eventually
drive the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

We thank the Secretary-General for his report,
contained in document S/2007/567, on women and
peace and security. The report reviews and monitors
the implementation of the 2005-2007 United Nations
System-wide Action Plan and identifies gaps and
challenges, including in the areas of funding of gender
projects and insufficient institutional capacity for
gender mainstreaming. We must address those
challenges if we are to obtain the desired results. We
welcome the recommendations contained in the report,
which we believe will contribute to the acceleration of
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

We would like to commend the Inter-agency
Network on Women and Gender Equality, the Inter-
Agency Task Force on Women, Peace and Security, and
the Office of the Special Adviser on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women for their commendable work
in coming up with a holistic and coherent 2008-2009
United Nations System-wide Action Plan, which will
serve as a results-based programme and monitoring and
reporting tool. The responsibility of ensuring the full
realization of the Plan rests with the international
community. The Security Council should hold national
Governments accountable for the implementation of
the Action Plan.

The high number of victims of violence continues
to be a concern for SADC. We are saddened that
women continue to bear the brunt of grave violations
of human rights, including violence and sexual abuses.
We condemn all those parties that perpetuate acts of
violence and abuse against women and children. We
call for the speedy investigation of all cases of Violence
and sexual abuse, especially those committed against
women and children. The culture of impunity must be
stopped by, among other things, bringing to justice all
the perpetrators.

SADC is encouraged by the progress on
mainstreaming gender in relevant policies and
programmes on disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR). It is necessary to recognize the
needs of women and girl ex-combatants in the DDR
process and to ensure that their concerns are taken on
board from the planning stages. We commend the work
that has been done by the United Nations Children's
Fund in reintegration projects that has led to the release
of girls from the armed forces in various countries.

We commend the various United Nations
agencies that have undertaken capacity-building
efforts, including the development of the training
models. We would, however, request that there be
synergy and coherence in the various training models
produced. We wish to reiterate that awareness of
resolution 1325 (2000) needs to be broadened and that
capacities at the national level to implement the
resolution need to be enhanced. In that endeavour, we
wish to underscore the importance of building capacity
at the local level and, in particular, the capacity of
national and local women's groups on the ground.

Experience has shown that the participation of
women in peace processes produces positive results,
especially because they, together with children, are the
major victims of atrocities committed in conflict.
Women need to hold decision-making positions. It is
imperative that women be encouraged and supported to
run for offices, especially in countries emerging from
conflicts. In that regard, we wish to commend the work
undertaken by United Nations agencies in facilitating
the promotion and effective participation of women in
decision-making processes.
In conclusion, I wish to state that SADC remains
committed to the full and effective implementation of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000). We in the
international community have an obligation to ensure
that the rights of women the world over are protected
and that their place in all aspects of the peace process
is assured. It is their equal participation and their full
involvement that will contribute to the effective
maintenance and promotion of sustainable peace and
security.

