Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to place on record India's appreciation to
you, Sir, and through you to your delegation, for
having organized this open debate to mark the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).

I belong to a country with a 5,000 year-old
civilization that regards gender equality and the
empowerment of women as its constitutive principles. I
am equally proud to be a Sikh - a member of a
religion which, at the time of its founding in the latter
half of the fifteenth century, deemed it fit to
incorporate gender equality and independence for
women among its essential attributes.

The imperative of the political empowerment of
women cannot be overemphasized. India took a
historic initiative of empowering women by reserving
one third of the seats in more than 300,000 institutions
of local self-government to women. As a result, today,
out of the 3.2 million elected representatives in these
local bodies, there are 1.2 million women, about
86,000 of whom serve as Chairpersons or

Vice-Chairpersons of their respective units. We are
taking further steps to increase the participation of
women to 50 per cent in these institutions, which
would take the number of elected women to between
1.6 and 1.8 million. Presently, a bill mandating such
measures is under consideration by the Parliament of
India. There are, perhaps, more democratically elected
women in India alone than in the rest of the world put
together. This political empowerment of women is an
unprecedented feat in the entire history of the world.

Today's open debate of the Security Council
marks the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security. I am honoured to take part in this debate.
When resolution 1325 (2000) was adopted
unanimously in 2000, it was a landmark resolution
dealing with women's issues in the area of
international peace and security. Recognizing this, the
Secretary-General made a very pertinent point by
saying that although women suffered the impact of
conflict disproportionately, they also held the key to
the solutions of the conflict.

Resolution 1325 (2000) highlights the impact of
armed conflict on women and the need for effective
institutional arrangements to guarantee their protection
and full participation in peace processes. Having had
the resolution in operational mode for a decade, we
now need to redouble our efforts to increase women's
participation at all stages and all levels of peace
processes and peacebuilding efforts. We can achieve
lasting peace and security in any country only when
women are represented at the negotiating table or in
talks on post-conflict reconstruction. In the same vein,
let me add that the three pillars of lasting peace -
namely, economic recovery, social cohesion and
political legitimacy - cannot be achieved without the
active engagement of women.

India has consistently held the view that the
greater participation of women in the areas of conflict
prevention, peace negotiations, peacekeeping and
post-conflict reconstruction is an essential prerequisite
of lasting peace and security. Let me also add my voice
to those of other speakers who have called for the
greater deployment of female military and police
personnel to United Nations peacekeeping operations,
and for the provision to all military and police
personnel with adequate training to carry out their
responsibilities. In this regard, we especially encourage
those who champion the importance of the
participation of women peacekeepers and have the
inclination and capacity to do so.

Over the past six decades, India has contributed
more than 100,000 peacekeepers to virtually every
peacekeeping operation. We have necessary
disciplinary provisions in place to ensure that reports
of incidents of violence against women, children or
civilians are dealt with firmly, swiftly and resolutely
within our existing legal provisions. In 2007, India
even had the distinction of being the first country to
deploy a full female peacekeeping unit - a 100-strong
contingent in Liberia. Deployments similar to this
oft-cited Indian example remain, unfortunately, a rarity.

India will be happy to contribute positively to
this process. As one of the largest contributors of
troops to the United Nations, India has been conscious
of its responsibility and has trained its troops on this
important issue.

The United Nations system, Member States and
civil society have made steady and noticeable efforts in
implementing resolution 1325 (2000). While the
Secretary-General and several speakers before me have
pointed out the mixed results in the implementation of
the resolution by the international community and the
United Nations system, it is worth noting that the
appointment of women to senior decision-making
positions, as well as their participation in mission
planning, reporting, assessment, post-conflict planning
and peacekeeping operations, have increased. We
welcome this, but must stress the need to do much more.

Equally pertinent is the role played by civil
society in internalizing the provisions of resolution
1325 (2000) while addressing issues in various conflict
zones. We would also, in particular, like to encourage
local communities to step forward and assume their
rightful role in conflict zones.

Discussions on the establishment of a Security
Council working group dedicated to reviewing the
progress in implementing this resolution are relevant
and have our support. We are confident that such an
effort will go a long way towards transforming words
into concrete action.

The United Nations system has also come up with
a useful set of indicators as global markers of progress
in the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). India
has taken note of the set of 26 global indicators in the
four key areas. We believe that reaching agreement on
the set of goals, targets and indicators to monitor the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) should be
the first step in reducing the fragmentation of
information and monitoring progress on this critical
and important issue.

We are equally mindful that the development of
such indicators, benchmarks and guidelines, given their
sensitivity, should involve a process of broader
intergovernmental consultations and discussions before
their eventual adoption. One must also be aware of the
difficulties in obtaining authentic, credible,
corroborative and verifiable data from conflict-ridden
environments.

We are happy that Member States were able to
reach consensus earlier this year in establishing UN
Women, which will be fully operational by January
2011. We were, in that context, particularly pleased by
the presence of the newly appointed Under-Secretary-
General who heads this Entity with us earlier today.
With the consolidation of authority and responsibility
within the United Nations system on women's issues, I
am positive that the United Nations system will also
coherently coordinate and assist Member States, at
their request, in the implementation of the resolution
1325 (2000).

We unequivocally, unambiguously and resolutely
condemn the abhorrent behaviour of sexual violence in
armed conflict, regardless of who perpetrates it, be
they party to an armed conflict, peacekeeping
personnel, including their civilian components, or
humanitarian actors.

There is a need for more stringent regulations in
combating and eliminating this menace. We would also
request the Secretary-General to further strengthen his
efforts to ensure zero tolerance of sexual exploitation
and abuse in United Nations peacekeeping operations.

We have not yet attained a global culture of
human rights that could serve as a unifying force rather
than a divisive force. As the world's largest democracy,
India considers it an honour to uphold and cherish the
concept of gender equality and the empowerment of
women.

I would like to reiterate India's firm commitment
to its international obligations flowing from resolution
1325 (2000) and its successor resolutions, and I look
forward to engaging constructively and proactively
with other delegations in the Security Council from the
beginning of next year, when we assume our
responsibility as a member of the Council.

Let us not lose the momentum that has been
generated on this issue on the occasion of the tenth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), a symbol of
strength for women and peace and security.

