Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French): I
thank Minister Hague for his focus on inscribing the
prevention of sexual violence on the international
agenda. The statement recently adopted by the Group
of Eight (G-8), the Minister's visit to the Great Lakes
region and the decision to hold a debate of the Security
Council on the issue are all extremely useful initiatives
in the context of the international campaign against
sexual Violence in conflict.

I also thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2013/149) and for his briefing this morning. The
recommendations in his report are included in resolution
2106 (2013), which the Council has adopted today.
Belgium welcomes the comprehensive operational
framework outlined in the resolution to fight sexual
violence in conflict, and is proud to co-sponsor the text.

My thanks also go to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Bangura, for her unwavering commitment.
In clearly emphasizing the importance of national
leadership, she has successfully negotiated specific
commitments with the Governments of the Central
African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Guinea and Somalia.

As the Special Representative is aware, my country
has always been a strong advocate of resolution 1325
(2000) on women and peace and security; she also
knows how wholeheartedly Belgium supports her
mandate and her action plan. I note that my country is
currently finalizing its second national action plan for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), covering
the period 2013-2016.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
to be made by the observer of the European Union.
I shall therefore limit my remarks to four points of
particular importance for Belgium.

First, conflict-related sexual violence can amount
to crimes against humanity and war crimes. Such
violations of international law are imprescriptible and
perpetrators incur heavy penalties. During Minister
Hague's visit to the Great Lakes region, he saw for
himself how the lives of women and children continue
to be destroyed every day by such crimes. We remain
convinced that national courts must remain the locus
of prosecution of perpetrators of serious international
crimes, such as sexual Violence. In that context, it is
important to strengthen the judicial systems of those
countries in order to allow trials to take place in the
best possible conditions. The Special Representative
has announced the important signing by the Congolese
authorities of an agreement in principle to fight against
sexual Violence. In the light of recent human rights
violations in the region, we nevertheless believe that
the implementation of the agreement must be constantly
monitored.

Secondly, the International Criminal Court is
complementary to national criminal courts. The broad
definition of sexual violence in the Rome Statute should
be applied in this context. We invite those countries
that have not yet done so to ratify the Statute without
further delay.

Thirdly, I would also like to thank the Team of
Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict for its determined and courageous actions.
We also attach great importance to the activities of
the intergovernmental organization Justice Rapid
Response, which specializes in the deployment of
the panels of experts where sexual violence has been
committed. Belgium supports all efforts to build the
capacities of national actors and all initiatives to aid
the victims.

Fourthly, Belgium would also like to recall that any
sexual violence is a serious violation of human rights.
In that context, everything must be done to ensure that
victims have access to all necessary services from
multiple sectors.

