Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to express my gratitude to France for organizing
today's debate, and thank the briefers.

The growing body of evidence shows that women's
participation in peace and reconciliation processes and
their implementation have contributed to increased
chances of success for the sustainability of peace and
security arrangements in various parts of the world. As
a result of foreign intervention and military invasions,
as well as foreign occupation combined with an upsurge
of violent extremism and terrorism, women and girls
in many parts of the Middle East are witnessing the
collapse of their hopes for a better future. At the
same time, sadly in many conflicts, especially in the
Middle East, women have been and continue to be
the primary victims of large-scale and often systemic
sexual violence.

Acts committed by terrorist groups, particularly
Boko Haram, Da'esh and Al-Shabaab, demonstrate
the most extreme forms of such violence, which
particularly targets women and children. There are
thousands of confirmed cases in which sexual violence
has been used as a tactic of terrorism and employed by
terrorist groups in places, such as Iraq, Syria, Somalia,
Nigeria and Mali, to advance their military, economic
and ideological ends.

It would be naive to assume that, based on the
physical disappearance of Da'esh in Iraq and Syria,
its heinous activities and atrocities directed against
innocent civilians, especially women and children,
might cease. Indeed, they have integrated those dreadful
practices into their takfiri ideology - a destructive
ideology of hate an exclusion enforced through a
complex system of networking throughout the world.
The international community needs first and foremost
to concentrate on combating such a vicious ideology
and those who propagate it.

At the same time, we cannot neglect the very
significant dynamic generated by interventionist
policies and occupation, as well as attempts at regime
change that have prepared the optimal breeding
ground for terrorist and extremist groups to grow and
function. Experience in our region clearly shows that,
following every instance of aggression and foreign
intervention, there is a vacuum resulting in instability,
which is effectively exploited by those groups that have
committed the most serious crimes against innocent
civilians, especially women and children, who are the
most vulnerable part of the fabric of society. A failed-
State situation and post-aggression environment give
them a free hand to organize themselves and propagate
their ideology. Unfortunately, the Security Council
normally does not discuss the role of those who bear
the primary responsibility for such scenarios by having
created the breeding ground for terrorists. For obvious
reasons, it prefers to discuss the symptoms and not
the causes.

Iranian women are an integral part of a vibrant
Iranian society. Their outstanding role in advancing
development, peace and humanitarian causes in
society is incontestable. They are active participants
in political life and elections as both candidates and
voters. Education has been the centrepiece of our
efforts to empower women and girls over the past
four decades. It is therefore not surprising that the
number of women who study medicine and science in
Iran is now double that of men. The role of the private
sector, including microenterprise and cooperatives
for women's economic empowerment, has increased
substantively in Iran.

It noteworthy that our national achievements are
being made against the backdrop of the most hostile,
unilateral and coercive sanctions against Iranians. Such
inhuman and indiscriminate sanctions imposed by the
United States under dubious pretexts are in flagrant
violation of the basic economic and social rights of all
women and girls, as well as their right to development,
and undermines the constructive role that Iranian civil
society and women can play therein.

I hope that this open debate will contribute to
ongoing efforts to integrate the women and peace and
security agenda into conflict prevention.

