Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President,
and your delegation for convening this important
debate. I also thank the Secretary-General, the
President of the General Assembly and the ministers
that have taken part in this debate for their presence. I
would like to welcome the presence of Deputy
Secretary-General Asha-Rose Migiro and Her
Excellency Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of South Africa.

Without a doubt, the twenty-first century should
be the century of women. Despite all the progress made
during the last century, women crossed the threshold of
the third millennium bearing the heaviest of all human
burdens. We are very clear that this is not the forum in
which to advocate for the emancipation and
empowerment of women, but we welcome today's
meeting as an opportunity to debate the issue of
violence against women in situations of armed conflict.
On this day and in this place, we are witnessing a
convergence of efforts to make war more humane and
to ensure that women everywhere enjoy their full status
as human beings.

Two weeks ago, a group of Council
representatives visited a number of camps for refugees
and internally displaced persons (IDPs) in Darfur,
Chad and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
There we heard the voices of women who spoke of the
sufferings of war, the murder of their comrades, the
massacre of their children and the violation of their
bodies. Their experiences oblige us to ensure that
today's debate does not conceal the reality of the pain,
humiliation and outrage behind technical language.

This must be a debate that truly responds to the
wish expressed by those women. None of them spoke
to us of revenge; rather I recall them speaking to us of
their hopes, their desire to return to their homes and
their dream of living in a safe and secure environment.
I also recall them expressing the hope that they will
never again be victims of further violations and
outrages.

We must come away from today's debate
prepared to learn to prevent. Hitherto we have focused
our efforts on suppressing violence against women in
situations of armed conflict and on fighting impunity.
We have limited ourselves to seeking to carry out
security sector reform - and not always with great
success. Although our efforts to end impunity through

action by the International Criminal Court (ICC) and
the ad hoc tribunals, are important and indeed
indispensable, they are not sufficient. We must now
enhance what we have been doing and must learn to
create prevention mechanisms; that will be a complex
and difficult process.

If we truly want to be effective and to help
women in times of conflict - women in Africa,
women in the Balkans, women everywhere, the women
of today and tomorrow - we must undertake the
difficult task of engaging in prevention. I say it is
difficult because prevention is not the same in all
places or in all cultural contexts. I say it also because
prevention cannot be tackled only from the standpoint
of the woman: that would amount to making her out to
be guilty of her own pain. Violence against women in
war and in all other contexts can be prevented only
from the standpoint of the perpetrator.

Violence against women in situations of armed
conflict cannot be understood or prevented if it is
analysed only through the prism of sexual violence. We
are witnessing abhorrent methods of warfare; these are
weapons of terror whose victims are not only the direct
casualties but also their families and their
communities. We must not trivialize this phenomenon,
for that would be to continue to fail to prevent it and to
respond to it effectively. It is indisputable that sexual
violence, when carried out in a systematic and
widespread manner and is part of an attack against
innocent populations, exacerbates an armed conflict
and becomes an enormous obstacle to its resolution and
to peacebuilding.

For that reason, Costa Rica pointed out during
last month's debate on post-conflict peacebuilding
convened by the United Kingdom (see S/PV.5895) the
need for all peacekeeping operations to be conceived as
integrated missions bringing together all United
Nations efforts, including the contribution of the
Peacebuilding Commission. Only in that way will we
be on the road of prevention, able to provide an
enduring response to this problem, one which has
prevented women from fully playing their important
role in preventing and settling conflicts and in building
peace.

