Mr. Nduhuura (Uganda): At the outset, my
delegation extends to the Russian presidency our great
appreciation for convening this open debate on the very
important theme of women and peace and security.

My delegation appreciates the efforts made by the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, in promoting the
mainstreaming of gender equality and empowerment.
We welcome the briefing he gave this morning, as
well as that delivered by the Executive Director of the
United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women, Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-
Ngcuka. We also take note ofthe briefing made Ms. Rita
Lopidia, Executive Director of the EVE Organization
for Women Development in South Sudan.

Uganda joins other Member States in reiterating

the concerns the international community continues
to have in the effective implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). Women continue to face numerous
challenges, but most specifically their plight is even
more debilitating during conflicts and wars. More often
than not, they are not the causes but mere victims and
bear the greatest brunt ofthe excesses of such conflicts.
Women and girls have endured some of the greatest acts
ofhumiliation by being subjected to such degrading acts
as rape and other forms of sexual violence and abuse
during conflicts. In most instances, sexual exploitation,
violence and abuse are even used as weapons of war.
United Nations reports are awash with many such acts
in many conflicts and war situations all over the world,
including in Africa. Conflicts and wars have registered
many widows and orphans, the most vulnerable of
whom are girls. In the same vein, women continue to be
sidelined and marginalized in conflict management and
resolution, peacemaking, peacebuilding, peacekeeping
and peace support operations.

We commend the United Nations for some deliberate
actions taken so far to address those challenges and for
the implementation of some aspects of resolution 1325
(2000). However, a lot ofwork still needs to be done. We
therefore call for the full and effective implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). We note with appreciation
the recognition of the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2016/822) of Uganda as an outstanding example
of a country that has demonstrated that women are
making a remarkable difference as agents of change.
In local districts under the localization programme,
Uganda, facilitated by the Global Network of Women
Peacebuilders, has adopted local action plans that
have resulted in a decrease in sexual and gender-
based violence.

The question of sexual exploitation and abuse in
peacekeeping operations must be seriously addressed
and those who commit such crimes should be held to
account for their actions. Uganda is exemplary in that
respect. Not long ago, some Uganda People's Defence
Force members serving in the African Union Military
Observer Mission in Somalia were identified for
transgressions and were duly tried before a court of
law, both in the Mission area and at home. Those found
culpable were severely punished for their actions.

In order to address the question of gender balance
and gender mainstreaming in a holistic manner,
Uganda has made tremendous strides in empowering
women and girls through not only the provision of
universal primary and secondary education, but also
the introduction of affirmative action in admissions
to tertiary institutions in the country. That has
greatly enabled more women to acquire the necessary
education that empowers them with the required skills
and knowledge to compete with men in various aspects
of life, both internally and globally.

In politics and governance, more women have been
able to be elected to the national legislature and other
Government legislative institutions due to the deliberate
Government policy of affirmative action of reserving
certain positions for women alone, in addition to their
ability to compete with men in other positions. More
female members have also been appointed to the national
Cabinet in Government. The Government of Uganda is
committed to continue exploring more opportunities in
the effective implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
We wish to call upon the United Nations to involve
more women in preventive diplomacy, negotiations and
mediation to promote gender balance in these areas.

Last but not least is the question of gender
budgeting that must take into account the special needs
of women in the domain of peacekeeping and support
operations. Working together through and within the
United Nations system, we should continue to promote
the equal and effective participation of women in all
efforts aimed at the promotion of peace and security.
