Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I thank you, Madam
President, for organizing this important open debate.
I would also like to convey my sincere gratitude to
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and to his Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, for their respective
statements. Under their leadership, the silence has been
broken surrounding the crime of sexual and gender-
based violence, and they have rallied the Security
Council to put in place a normative framework. But as
Ms. Bangura has consistently stated, sexual violence
continues to be pervaisive in crisis. We also wish to
acknowledge the statement made by Ms. Rhoda Misaka,
representative of the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security.

A few years ago, the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda established that rape and other
forms of sexual violence were used as a weapon of war
during the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda.
Although no one can tell the true number of the victims
of rape during the genocide, it is reported that between
100,000 and 250,000 women were raped. Some of
those women survived with scars, some with incurable
diseases, such as HIV/AIDS. The consequence of those
heinous crimes is beyond description. Nevertheless,
the perpetrators of those crimes in Rwanda, now
acting under the umbrella of the Forces democratiques
de libe'ration du Rwanda, continued their mayhem in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where they
terrorized communities and committed rape against
women and girls.

Sexual violence is also a reality in Syria, the
Central African Republic and many other conflict
areas. In South Sudan, the radio is even used to call
for the rape of women based on their ethnicity. We
totally agree with Ms. Bangura that sexual violence in
conflict needs to be treated as a war crime, not as an
unfortunate collateral damage of war. It is therefore up
to us as Member States to end this scourge.

It must be made clear that sexual violence is not
only a United Nations issue but an issue that requires
the leadership, national ownership and responsibility
of States. National ownership is imperative because
it is at the national level that Governments create a
platform for awareness and outreach against those
crimes. Governments, whether in conflict or at peace,
have a primary responsibility to prevent any acts of
sexual violence against women, children and men,
and to ensure accountability for such crimes. That
responsibility is transferred to non-State actors under
whose control civilians are.

We call on the established United Nations Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict to continue supporting national institutions to
strengthen their response in addressing sexual violence.
Ending impunity for those who commit sexual Violence
during conflict should be our collective effort and goal.
Along the same lines, the Council should ensure that all
country reports and mandate renewals evaluate the level
of protection and promotion of women's human rights,
as set out in several Security Council resolutions.

In that regard, I totally agreed with what our
colleague Prince Zeid that rapes perpetrated by United
Nations civilian staff while on a peacekeeping mission
cannot and should not go unpunished.

As the Council discusses options for the United
Nations engagement in several conflict-stricken
countries where the situation continues to worsen,
with women bearing the brunt of the conflict and with
human rights violations increasing, the United Nations
presence should have a robust mandate to protect
civilians. Protecting those in need should be given
priority by ensuring that we take full measures, in
particular to provide more effective protection to the
civilian population at risk, to create the conditions for
humanitarian assistance and to allow the investigation
of violations and abuses. All peacekeepers should be
trained on gender issues and ways to support victims of
rape before deploying to peace operations.

On our part, Rwanda has adopted predeployment
courses for all our troops that include lessons related
to sexual and gender-based violence. In the same vein,
we call for the deployment of gender advisers, women
protection advisers and child protection advisers in
all United Nations peacekeeping missions to focus on
violations and abuses committed against women and
children, including all forms of sexual violence in
armed conflicts.

Needless to say, the fight against impunity and
accountability is key to eradicate the scourge of sexual
violence in conflict. The Security Council should
reinforce its efforts to ensure that investigations and
prosecutions are carried out through the national justice
systems when possible, or through various international
justice mechanisms. Regardless of any debate we may
have, our main objective is to ensure thatjustice is done
for the victims, which can also serve as a deterrent for
all belligerents.

In conclusion, allow me to restate our understanding
that sexual violence in conflict, like any other growing
violent trend, is a criminal practice that we can eradicate
if we have the political will. We strongly believe that
our joint efforts can yield tangible results and create a
changed environment on the ground for those affected
by that terrible scourge. My delegation will continue
to support and work closely with the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict in the implementation of
its mandate.

