Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): Austria warmly
welcomes and highly appreciates the initiative of the
United States presidency and fully supports the
measures contained in the draft resolution to be
adopted later today. We are, as the Council is aware,
very pleased to be a sponsor of this important draft
resolution.

The issue of women and peace and security is a
foreign policy priority for Austria. In the past eight
years, visible progress has been made in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We now
have a set of clear rules under international law to
prevent Violence against women, including sexual
violence in armed conflict. Nevertheless, as has been
pointed out in today's debate, the prevalence and
brutality of acts of sexual violence against women and
girls in conflict and post-conflict situations around the
world have reached a level requiring urgent attention
and action by the international community.
We all agree that sexual violence is often not only
a mere manifestation of war but, rather, a deliberate
tactic of warfare. That practice and the adverse effects
it has on peace processes, reconciliation and post-
conflict reconstruction make it clear that sexual
violence against women is indeed a security threat.

We highly appreciate the important efforts
already under way within the framework of the United
Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict. We
also strongly support the system-wide campaign to end
violence against women and hope to see significant
progress leading up to 2015. Recent measures
strengthening the enforcement of a zero-tolerance
policy against sexual exploitation and abuse by United
Nations peacekeepers and related personnel constitute
a major contribution. The United Nations must lead by
example. Sexual violence is unacceptable under all
circumstances.

Women must have a seat and a voice at
negotiation tables. Regrettably, women's representation
in peace processes is still the exception. In its national
action plan on implementing Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000), Austria has made a clear
commitment to lobby worldwide for women's
participation in all peace efforts. Conferences in
Vienna last year, bringing together women leaders from
the Middle East, as well as from Serbia and Kosovo,
were important opportunities to establish networks
which allow for the multiplication of women's voices
and for enhancing influence.

We are encouraged by the Secretary-General's
recent appointments of women as special
representatives and envoys and to leading positions in
the Secretariat. We hope to see more such
appointments in the future and reiterate our call for
Member States to support, encourage and nominate
women for such positions.

Despite clear rules under international law
outlawing sexual violence, perpetrators still largely go
unpunished. This situation demands further action by
the Security Council to strengthen the rule of law in
order to end impunity. Unfortunately, some of the
existing mechanisms and tools of the Council have
been underutilized. We therefore call on the Council to
make full use of the range of measures and tools
available, including the imposition of targeted
measures and referrals to the International Criminal
Court. We also call on Member States to strengthen the
rule of law and fully utilize accountability mechanisms
to bring to justice perpetrators of violations against
women and girls.

In this context, I would like to draw the Council's
attention to our initiative on the Security Council and
the rule of law, which contains 17 concrete
recommendations on how the Security Council could
strengthen the rule of law. Recommendations 8 and 9
specifically address the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) and the Secretary-General's zero-tolerance
policy on sexual exploitation and abuse in
peacekeeping operations. The report was recently
issued as a United Nations document (S/2008/270, annex) and is available in all official languages.

