Mr. Sun Joun-yung (Republic of Korea): Mr.
President, I would like to begin by offering my
delegation's thanks to you for organizing this open
debate on the important issue of "Women and peace
and security". Recalling last June's twenty-third special
session of the General Assembly, entitled "Women
2000: gender equality, development and peace for the
twenty-first century," my delegation welcomes today's
meeting as a timely effort to build on the outcome of
the special session.

Although the threat of an armed conflict at the
global level has continued to diminish since the end of
the cold war, rampaging armed conflicts at the
regional, national and local levels have increased,
posing challenges to international peace and security.
Though armed conflicts affect both women and men,
the current patterns of conflicts make women and girls
particularly vulnerable to numerous threats because of
their status in society and their gender. In most cases,
casualties among combatants are outnumbered by
civilian deaths, mostly women and children.
Increasingly, parties to a conflict even engage in
deliberate violence against women as a strategy of war
and terrorism. The fear of such violence has created a
mass flow of refugees and displaced persons, the
majority of whom are women, adolescent girls and
children.

Fortunately, there have been important
developments in the treatment of violence against
women in armed conflict. We welcome the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court, which took
gender concerns into account when defining genocide,
crimes against humanity, war crimes and crimes of
aggression. This Statute validates our agreement that
no impunity is to be granted for the perpetrators of
specific gender-related crimes.

I also appreciate the work of relevant United
Nations agencies, such as the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the United
Nations Children's Fund, the United Nations
Development Fund for Women and the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights for their
coordinated and dedicated efforts. Nor should we
forget the contributions of non-governmental
organizations in raising awareness about the situation
of women and girls in armed conflicts and in assisting
them.

Despite the progress that has been made so far,
much remains to be done to ensure gender-sensitive
justice, to address the specific needs of women affected
by armed conflicts and to increase the participation of
women in peacekeeping, peace-building and
reconciliation processes.

The relative absence of women in decision-
making processes with regard to armed conflicts is also
a cause for concern. My delegation shares the view of
the Security Council that peace is inextricably linked
with equality between women and men, and that
women should play an equal part in maintaining peace
and security. We urge the Security Council to continue
to expand its involvement in this issue.

Having said that, I should now like to make a few
points which in our View deserve the urgent attention
and action of the international community. First of all,
we must ensure, without further delay, the full
participation of women at all levels of decision-making
and implementation in peacekeeping and peace-
building. We encourage gender balance in peace
negotiations and in the appointment of special envoys
and representatives of the Secretary-General. We also
encourage States participating in peace negotiations to
include women representatives, in order to reflect the
special needs of women and girls.

Secondly, my delegation believes that United
Nations peacekeeping operations should pay more
attention to gender mainstreaming in their work. With
the expansion of the work of peacekeeping operations
in political affairs, public information, humanitarian
assistance and refugee return, among other areas, the
role of peacekeeping personnel in meeting women's
and girls' specific needs is also being enlarged. To
ensure the effective work of protecting and promoting
women's needs and rights, specialized gender training
should be provided to all peacekeeping operation
personnel. In this respect, my delegation welcomes the
Secretariat's efforts to provide Member States with
gender awareness guidelines and materials. In addition,
the number of female personnel in peacekeeping
operations, in particular those personnel addressing
women's special needs, should be increased. The
Republic of Korea, for its part, has included women
officers in its peacekeeping operation missions and
plans to expand their number in the future.

Thirdly, considering that women are more likely
than men to be placed in refugee camps, we believe
that women refugees and displaced women should be
more involved in the design and management of
humanitarian activities so that they can benefit from
these activities as much as men do. To this end, we ask
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and other relevant United Nations
agencies to provide all women and girls in refugee
camps with appropriate health care and education and
to ensure their safety.

Without full gender equality and the advancement
of women, we cannot achieve the world envisioned in
the Charter of the United Nations. All Members should
make the utmost effort and fully cooperate with the
relevant United Nations agencies to effectively protect
women and girls in armed conflict, redress Violations
of their human rights and empower women as equal
partners at every step of the process to achieve peace
and security. My delegation wishes to reaffirm the
strong commitment of the Republic of Korea to
contribute to the efforts of the international community
to this end.

