Mr. Errazuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
thanks the United Kingdom presidency for convening
this important open debate of the Security Council
on the topic "Women and peace and security". We
support the Security Council's role regarding women
and peace and security and the work accomplished by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Bangura. We
also support the United Nations Team of Experts on the
Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict.

Chile attaches great importance to the prevention
of sexual violence in conflicts and to the care,
protection and compensation of victims of sexual
violence in conflict. On earlier occasions we have
drawn attention, inter alia, to the progress made by our
national legislation on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). We particularly support the role being
played by the women serving as protection advisers for
their work with survivors of acts of sexual violence in
places affected by conflicts, and we attach the greatest

importance to ending the culture of impunity for sexual
violence in conflicts in all its manifestations.
We agree with the Secretary-General's March
report on sexual violence in conflict (S/2013/149)
that national courts remain primarily responsible for
investigating and judging crimes of sexual violence in
conflicts, and we value the important complementary
role played by the international tribunals in combating
crimes of that kind. We attach the greatest importance
to the contribution made by resolution 1960 (2010)
in that regard, which represented great progress in
establishing a political commitment to the prevention
and handling of the atrocities of rape in wartime and in
establishing the basis for ensuring the accountability of
perpetrators.

We also wish to highlight the work of the International
Criminal Court. Its Rome Statute includes within the
category of war crimes and crimes against humanity
crimes involving acts of sexual Violence against women
and children. We emphasize the contribution made in
that connection by the International Criminal Tribunals
for the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, with their
valuable rulings on the subject.

We wish to express concern, however, about the
fact that in several areas it is still difficult to investigate
and judge crimes of sexual violence committed against
women and children because the national courts lack
skills and expertise. That continues to make it difficult
to bring perpetrators of such crimes to trial. For that
reason, we emphasize the support needed from the
United Nations as regards capacity-building in that
area.

In recent years, efforts have been made to modernize
Chilean institutions to conform to the human rights and
gender focus of resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent
resolutions on the subject in a forward-looking approach
reflecting our national and regional reality. This year
we will be launching our national plan based on that
resolution, updated for the period 2014-2018, with
specific indicators for effectively measuring various
types of activity. That, in turn, will be the basis for
the next national plan for the period 2019-2022. The
indicators represent five specific goals: prevention,
participation, protection, help and recovery. They will
be implemented globally and jointly, with the aim of
creating a strong foundation for combating sexual
Violence committed in pre-conflict and post-conflict
situations.

Although that action concerns the national sphere,
we also attach great importance to the enhancement of
the international humanitarian response capacity and to
the role of international cooperation in achieving those
goals, particularly in the context of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti. In accordance with
the principle of gender equality, Chile has included a
female military contingent in the Mission and supports
the zero tolerance policy of the United Nations towards
cases of sexual abuse and improper conduct in which
some members of its contingent have been involved.

In that connection, Chile's national plan provides
expanded training in peacekeeping operations for
soldiers and for members of the forces of law and order
and security in the pre- and post-deployment stages.
It also places greater emphasis on the distribution of
information on the international instruments concerning
gender, security and peace, and we are promoting
gender mainstreaming in the institutions performing
these roles. We believe that such a policy should be the
general norm for all peacekeeping missions in which
the United Nations participates.

The subject of women and peace and security and
sexual violence poses many challenges and covers a
number of areas. I refer in particular to the existence
of and access to compensation and justice mechanisms
for women and girls, especially in situations of armed
conflict; the operation and supervision of compensation
systems; and combating impunity for those responsible
for crimes.

For that reason, my delegation would like to
conclude by expressing our satisfaction with the
adoption of resolution 2106 (2013) this morning, which
Chile co-sponsored.

