Ms. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2014/l8l). Our respect, immense appreciation
and sentiments go to Ms. Zainab Bangura. Our full
solidarity goes to Ms. Rhoda Misaka. I wish to thank
them for their briefings and for their commitment to
making progress on full equality for women.

I am going to take a different angle in relation to
referring to how much we have done. I am going to
focus not only on what how much we still have to do,
but also to add a hint of optimism.

First, the international governmental community
has agreed that sexual and gender-based violence in
armed conflict constitute a war crime and a crime
against humanity. It is worth mentioning it when we
in the international community agree to say things in
the same way and to work to the same end - in this
instance towards the eradication of a problem.

Secondly, there is also reason for optimism owing
to the international tribunals, such as those for Rwanda
and the former Yugoslavia and the Special Court
for Sierra Leone. Today, the International Criminal
Court and those tribunals have been building a clear
definition of sexual violence as a war crime and as a
crime against humanity. Certain countries in my region
of Latin America and the Caribbean are also doing so.
In my country, 1,083 persons have been prosecuted and
443 have been convicted for crimes against humanity,
with a gender perspective and the aspect of women's
human rights having been incorporated in all the cases.

Sexual crimes reported by victims in their
testimony were not subject to punitive action until
Rwanda, Yugoslavia and Sierra Leone, until the
initiatives undertaken in our own countries, because
they remained invisible. They were part of war, the
spoils that came with vengeance and hate that targeted
women's bodies. But while gender-based violence, and
sexual violence aimed at women and girls in particular,
is not a new phenomenon in history, the adoption of
measures to investigate and prosecute it nationally and
internationally is very recent. For that reason, we had
to continue to work patiently but collaboratively. As
my dear Jordanian colleague said, gender-based crimes
used to be considered collateral damage in war; their
investigation in many cases was peripheral and often
resulted in impunity for the perpetrators.

The Inter-American Commission on Human
Rights says that acts of sexual Violence against women
are crimes against humanity when they are used as
weapons to inspire terror. It has defined sexual violence
as any physical or mental abuse committed as an act of
violence and also characterizes it as a crime of torture.
Sexual crimes against women are now internationally
codified. There is no statute of limitations, which we
should recall here in the Security Council. Crimes
against humanity have no statute of limitations.

The Belem do Para Inter-American Convention on
the Prevention, Punishment and Eradication of Violence
agaisnt Women says that it is not only an offence to
human dignity but also a violation of human rights. Let
me speak not just about what the justice system has

said, the words I have just read out. Justice in fact now
says that because the victims had begun to be heard.

In one horrible case, a woman named Susana was
raped in the hospital afterjust having been operated on.
To this day I can hear her crying and saying that she had
been a virgin. That was a crime against nature. For a
woman, rape is an act of the worst possible humiliation.

Another woman, Monica, said:

"I asked them, when the Red Cross came to see us, I
asked, 'As a woman, how is it possible that I did not
become pregnant after being raped so many times?'
They explained to me that women's periods tended
to stop. They said that in concentration camps, like
here, we did not become pregant, we were afraid to
getting pregnant. We did not menstruate. We did
not want to end up pregnant by a rapist."
Estela said:

"They did not allow us to bathe. It was very hard
not to be able to wash after being raped and to have
to remain soiled. They would give me stale bread.
I was able to wash in a bathroom only a couple of
times. I have images in my mind of being raped
in the bathroom. By the final rapes I was fainting;
I do not have a recollection of those. They would
blindfold me. I heard a girl screaming, 'Mama,
mama, mama'. We were in the same camp, and she
was being raped."

A man named David said:

"They would give us electric shocks to our gums,
under our lips, to our genitals. In my case, I had
an abcess on my penis the size of a peach. They
also placed things in my rectum that would conduct
electricity. We were humiliated. I could not bear
the agony. How could we go back - to say that a
boy had been raped?"

I hope that all the victims will be heard, as those
victims were heard and it was possible to do justice and
combat impunity. We hope we will be able to work not
just to eradicate this crime against humanity in conflict
situations, but also to build equality for women in times
of peace. Our friend Ms. Bangura has said it. "We will
go out to find them", the children and grandchildren of
the State terrorism that took place in Argentina call out
in the streets. "As with the Nazis, we will find them,
no matter where they are." They call out in the streets
for the sake of the memory of their mothers and for the
sake of truth, justice and reparation.

"We seek them without weapons, without hate or

vengeance. We seek them for the sake of truth,

memory, justice, reparation and peace."

