Mr. Bassole (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
Violence against women in areas of conflict is
continuing, in spite of the Security Council's adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000) and all other relevant
instruments. The phenomenon is worsening, becoming
systematic and a genuine war strategy for some
combatants. Victimized women and girls are
deliberately targeted for abominable acts of violence.
That is an unacceptable violation of the most
fundamental human rights - in other words, a crime
against humanity. Unfortunately, it seems that our
repeated calls and recommendations have yet to be
heeded.
08-39069

Sexual violence in conflict zones highlights the
vulnerability of young girls and women. That is
especially true in certain parts of Africa where certain
sociological factors continue to hinder their
emancipation. When the violence itself does not
outright kill the victims, its consequences take a heavy
toll, leading to physical and psychological trauma,
unwanted pregnancies and the spread of sexually
transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS. How, then,
can we effectively combat those degrading practices
and ensure that women are better protected against
such atrocities?

First of all, we must work to prevent conflict. We
must make every effort to ensure that democracy and
the rule of law take root, as well as to promote good
governance and effective development policies. We
must also devote resources to educating women and
young girls. Education and training are the primary
tools we must give them to help them empower
themselves and participate in every aspect of the
social, political and economic arenas, including even
the military.

If conflict does erupt, several actions must
follow. In particular, the Council must have at its
disposal precise, relevant and credible information
about the nature of the violence in all its aspects,
including information about those who planned and
carried it out. Moreover, justice must be done when it
comes to prosecuting and punishing perpetrators. There
must be absolutely no impunity when it comes to this
issue.

Other complementary actions must also be taken
at the social level. We must make sure that in situations
of conflict, women and children, who are usually left to
fend for themselves, are protected by peacekeeping
operations.

In conclusion, I should like to welcome the
efforts of the Secretary-General and of the United
Nations system to combat this scourge. Lastly, I would
like to thank and congratulate you personally, Madam
President, for your leadership, as well as for having
made it possible for the Security Council to deliberate
this morning on this important issue.

