Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): Having followed the
discussions that evolved in a very constructive manner,
which is to be particularly appreciated given the
participation of countries that are not often in
agreement with each other, one cannot but regret the
continuation of the policy of repeating an unchanged
rhetoric by the delegation of Azerbaijan.

The reference to the so-called military aggression
of Armenia is totally misleading. The resulting
situation is a reaction of the people of Nagorny
Karabakh to Azerbaijan's own decision to use military
force to suppress the legitimate, just and peaceful quest
of the people of Nagorny Karabakh to exercise the
right to self-determination, guaranteed by international
law and the United Nations Charter.

Also, the references to the four resolutions 822
(1993), 853 (1993), 874 (1993) and 884 (1993) on the
Nagorny Karabakh conflict are a clear attempt by
Azerbaijan to read those resolutions and apply them
selectively in a partial and self-serving manner. Indeed,
Azerbaijan is itself in violation of those resolutions,
which urge the parties concerned to pursue
negotiations within the framework of the Minsk Group
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), as well as through different contacts

between them. Azerbaijan's refusal to engage in direct
negotiations with the elected representatives of
Nagorny Karabakh is one of the main impediments to
the resolution of the conflict referred to by the
representative of Azerbaijan.

Meanwhile, what the Azerbaijani representative
failed to acknowledge is that Armenia has done exactly
what the Security Council resolutions called on
Armenia to do some 18 years ago, that is, to use its
good offices with the leadership of Nagorny Karabakh
to help find a peaceful solution to the conflict.

I would like to stop at this stage. I think that my
comments are more than enough for the representative
of Azerbaijan to understand that the Council is
respected for its serious exchanges. A meaningful
exchange on the Nagorny Karabakh issue is within the
format of the OSCE Minsk Group.

