Mr. Moriko (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the participation of Mrs. Naledi
Pandor, Minister for International Relations and
Cooperation of South Africa, and Ms. Michelle
Muntefering, Minister of State at the Federal Foreign
Office of Germany, in today's debate. We thank
Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and appreciate the
relevance of his assessments. We also appreciate the
enriching contributions of the briefers - Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of UN-Women,
Ms. Bineta Diop, African Union Special Envoy on
Women, Peace and Security, Ms. Lina Ekomo, former
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Central African
Republic, on behalf of the Network of African Women
in Conflict Prevention and Mediation and the African
Women Leaders Network, and Ms. Alaa Salah,
Sudanese civil-society activist.

As the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000) approaches, it is worrying to see, as the Secretary-
General's report (S/2019/800) indicates, that despite
generally encouraging progress, the implementation
of the commitments agreed on to increase women's
contribution to peace and security still has not yielded
the desired results. Many sociopolitical, economic
and cultural constraints continue to hamper women's
full participation in strengthening peace and security,
including in many countries affected by armed conflict
or emerging from crisis. The fact is that although women
are among the primary victims of all types of Violence
in armed conflicts, they continue to be confined to
peripheral roles in negotiations and in strategies for
emerging from crisis and peacebuilding, despite their
evident added value.

In the light of the achievements of the past 20 years
and the challenges that remain, my delegation believes
that we must continue efforts to include women in the
mechanisms for strengthening peace and security. To
that end, it is essential to further open the political space
for women in times of both peace and conflict and to
ensure their empowerment as agents of economic and
social development.

In recognition of the decisive role of women and
following our post-electoral crisis, the Government of
Cote d'Ivoire has worked to position them at the heart
of our national peacebuilding strategy by increasing
their representation in our national political parties
and political institutions such as the Parliament and the
Senate. In that connection, on 16 July the Parliament
enacted a law on the representation of women in elected
assemblies. Well before that, on 6 March, Parliament
decided to grant a subsidy to political parties in which
women's level of representation in elected bodies - in
municipal or regional councils, for example - reached
30 per cent.

With regard to women's contribution to conflict
prevention and resolution, the Government contributed
to the launch on 26 January 2018 of a national network
of women leaders, and in June 2017 committed fully to
the creation of the African Women Leaders Network,
which seeks to enhance women's contributions to peace

and stability on the continent. We have also supported
women's contribution to peacekeeping operations
by including female personnel in Cote d'Ivoire's
contingents in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Mali and the Central African Republic.

At the subregional level, my country supports
the actions of the Network on Peace and Security for
Women in the Region of the Economic Community of
West African States, which seeks to coordinate and
support women's initiatives and the role of women
in conflict prevention, peacekeeping, security and
the promotion of human rights, particularly those of
women and other vulnerable groups. At the regional
level, Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the African Union's
commitment to the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) in the context of a coordinated approach with
the regional economic communities. The adoption in
March 2018 of the Continental Results Framework,
aimed at collecting quantitative and qualitative data on
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), has made
it possible to coordinate and strengthen major initiatives
that have been undertaken, including promoting parity
in executive and legislative systems and enhancing the
role of women in mediation and prevention strategies.

Ensuring greater participation by women will first
require adequate education, health and empowerment
opportunities for women and girls. That will make it
possible to improve women's socialposition andtherefore
their more active participation in all sociopolitical
mechanisms for conflict prevention and peacebuilding.
In the light of that imperative, Cote d'Ivoire - which
is so far still the only country to have been removed
from the list annexed to the Secretary-General's reports
on sexual violence in armed conflict - attaches
particular importance to the empowerment of women.
Among other things, that commitment on the part of the
Ivorian authorities has materialized in the creation of a
Government department dedicated to the empowerment
of women and the allocation of funds for financing
micro-projects that help women. For example, a social
programme adopted by my Government in January with
a fund of F727.5 billion, equivalent to $1.455 billion,
places the empowerment of women at the heart of its
priorities and reinforces actions already undertaken by
the Support Fund for Women of Cote d'Ivoire, which
has so far enabled 170,000 women to emerge from
poverty by financing their projects.

In conclusion, my delegation urges all actors
concerned to take all necessary measures for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and the
related subsequent resolutions 1889 (2009), 2122 (2013)
and 2242 (2015), which enshrine the fundamental
imperative of the role of women in conflict prevention
and the restoration of lasting peace and stability.
