Mr. De Laiglesia (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Spain aligns itself with the statement made by the
representative of the European Union. As this is the
first time that I address the Security Council as the new
Permanent Representative of Spain, I would like first
to express my gratitude for the opportunity to take part
in this debate.

Sexual violence in situations of conflict, like
gender-based violence in the home, has remained in the
private sphere for far too long. In his report
(S/2010/604) on the implementation of resolutions 1820
(2008) and 1888 (2009), the Secretary-General affirms
that sexual violence used as a weapon of war can
become a way of life that continues once the conflict
has ended. All too often, such violence is invisible and
thereby protected because it is considered a private
aspect of interpersonal relationships. However, we
cannot forget that it is a crime of war, a crime against
humanity and a flagrant breach of human rights.

The situation is exacerbated by the intolerable
impunity that many perpetrators of those crimes enjoy,
which allows the problem to be perpetuated over time
and prevents it from being fought effectively.
Combating that impunity should indeed be our main
priority and tried in the appropriate forums, including
the International Criminal Court.

The body of standards established by resolutions
1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1889 (2009), as well as
1960 (2010), adopted yesterday by the Council, is the
main tool for combating sexual violence in conflict.
The institutional structure being set up, and led by
Special Representative Ms. Margot Wallstrom, is also
essential. However, as became obvious at the thematic
debate held by the Security Council (see S/PV.6411) on
the occasion of the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), a body of standards will not be
enough if measures are not applied and implemented.
The new resolution should lead the United Nations as a
whole to combat sexual violence in situations of
conflict even more decisively, ensuring the perfect
coordination of the activities of the various bodies and
relevant entities, including, of course, the new entity
UN Women.

My delegation supports the recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General, and
co-sponsored the resolution submitted to the Council.

My Government also supports the Special
Representative's agenda of priorities and considers it
very important to continue training peace contingents
to combat sexual violence and to consolidate the
institutional structure set out in the resolutions,
ensuring that they have the necessary financing.

My Government is completing the second review
of our national action plan on women and peace and
security, bringing it into line with the provisions of
recent Security Council resolutions and broadening its
provisions on sexual violence in conflict. In that
regard, I am pleased to report three actions that we
have recently undertaken.

First, in cooperation with the Government of the
Netherlands, we have launched a joint civilian-military
training exercise on gender-based violence and the
protection of civilians, as mentioned yesterday by the
Permanent Representative of the Netherlands in his
statement. Secondly, Spanish cooperation funds
activities promoted by civil society to combat sexual
violence in situations of conflict in Colombia, Peru,
Ecuador and Brazil. Finally, in June, the Spanish
criminal code was amended to include a specific
penalty for those violating the sexual freedom of a
protected person in the context of armed conflict.

The international community must continue to
combat sexual violence in conflict at the national,
regional and global levels. We must end the impunity
of perpetrators and provide appropriate compensation
to victims, ensuring that they become agents of change
and peace. The international community can count on
the cooperation of my Government in that undertaking.

