Mr. Argiiello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate your delegation,
Madame President, on its presidency of the Council for
the month of December. We appreciate the initiative to
convene this open debate on such a sad and timely
issue. I would also like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, his Special Representative for Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Margot Wallstrom, as well as
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations
Alain Le Roy and Lieutenant General Babacar Gaye
for their briefings yesterday.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2010/604) on
the implementation of resolutions 1820 (2008) and
1888 (2009) lists a series of acts that can only be
described as atrocities committed against women in
various conflict situations currently on the Council's
agenda. It is hard to believe that such acts can be
perpetrated as mere war tactics deliberately directed at
civilian populations in an environment of complete
insecurity, and therefore complete impunity.

The international community cannot remain
indifferent to such atrocities, nor accept the myth that
rape is an inevitable by-product of war. Doing so
would paralyse any attempt to eradicate such actions.
Sexual violence must be considered a violation of the
victims' human rights; that being the case, the
perpetrators must be prosecuted, judged and punished.
At the same time, we must step-up awareness-raising
campaigns aimed at the civilian population vis-a-vis
preventing such crimes. And we must urge States to
strengthen protection for girls and women in conflicts.

Regrettably, sexual violence is a constant at all
stages of armed conflict. Often, it is not a matter of
isolated incidents, but instead includes related crimes
such as kidnapping, indiscriminate killing, torture,
looting and forced displacement. The international
community must continue to urge armed groups to end
such abhorrent practices and to work with States to end
the impunity surrounding them.

In Argentina, all selection and training procedures
carried out when deploying a peacekeeping operation
take into account the peacekeeper code of conduct,
including issues of gender, abuse, violence and sexual
exploitation, as outlined in the concepts and terms
established in resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008).

My country would like to congratulate the
Secretary-General's Special Representative for Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Margot Wallstrom, on her
appointment and the work she is doing. We also
support the recommendations contained in the
Secretary-General's report, in particular the following:
first, including in the Secretary-General's annual
reports lists of those parties who have committed acts
of sexual violence in situations of armed conflict, as a
basis for more focused engagement with the parties
and, where necessary, for the application of targeted
measures; secondly, calling on all parties to a conflict
to make specific and time-bound commitments to cease
all acts of sexual violence; thirdly, establishing a
monitoring, analysis and reporting system; and, lastly,
that the Security Council systematically consider the
issue of sexual violence when it authorizes or renews
the mandates of peacekeeping and special political
missions.

I would like to conclude by reaffirming my
country's unshakable commitment to combating sexual
violence in situations of conflict. As a demonstration of
that commitment, we were proud to join the
co-sponsors of the resolution 1960 (2010), which the
Council adopted yesterday.

