Ms. Kadare (Albania): Albania aligns itself with
the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union. I wish to add the following remarks
in my national capacity.

I would like to thank Germany for its leadership
on the women and peace and security agenda and for
convening this important debate. I would also like
to thank the briefers from civil society, who bring
perspectives from the reality on the ground perspective
to this Chamber.

Conflict-related sexual Violence is a grave human
rights violation and a security challenge that is certainly
as destructive as any weapon. It inflicts unimaginable
suffering, endangers families and communities and
erodes social and political stability. In the pervasive
way in which it impedes reconciliation and undermines
the prospect of peace and reconstruction, sexual abuse
is among the worst of crimes. The landmark adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000) created a strong global
normative framework and triggered an important
paradigm shift. Sexual violence in armed conflict is
now clearly considered to be a threat to international
peace and security.

Yet, despite greater political will and efforts,
progress is slow and conflict-related sexual violence
has not diminished. Putting an end to impunity, which
continues to be the norm, is a priority. The message
that we send today should be clear: there must be zero
tolerance for rape and other forms of sexual violence
in conflict. In addition, Member States should also
implement policies that redirect the stigma from
victims to perpetrators.

We also recognize the important role that civil
society and women's organizations play in documenting
abuses and providing survivor-centred responses. A
good example of that is the partnership of Justice Rapid
Response with UN-Women to ensure criminal justice
and accountability for sexual Violence.

In September 2018, the Albanian Government
approved its first national action plan on resolution
1325 (2000). The national action plan aims to integrate
the gender perspective into our national, foreign
and security policy, providing a comprehensive
legal framework to promote and increase women's
participation in political and public life, as well as
in the security sector. Particular attention has been
paid to mainstreaming a gender-sensitive approach in
the training of civil, police and military personnel,
with a special focus on prevention and response to
sexual violence.

I come from a region that, in its recent past, has
witnessed first-hand the devastating legacy of sexual
violence being used as a tactic of war. Here, I would
like to mention the case of Kosovo, where rape targeting
civilians was deliberately and repeatedly used as a
weapon during the war of the late 19905. More than
20,000 survivors are still suffering the consequences
in silence, isolated by stigma, discrimination and fear.
They have to struggle with social ostracism, physical
and psychological damage and emotional torment.
Despite substantial evidence, not a single case of war-
related sexual violence has been prosecuted.

We regret that the current report of the Secretary-
General (S/2019/280) continues to fail to list Kosovo
among the post-conflict countries that are suffering
the consequences of sexual crimes, and we call upon
the Secretary-General to include Kosovo in his future
reports. That would help to acknowledge the survivors
and combat the prejudice and shame that they face.
It would also highlight Kosovo's valuable experience
in supporting them as a good example in the region
and beyond.

It is our collective responsibility to closely
cooperate and take concrete actions to prevent sexual
violence, protect survivors and bring perpetrators
to justice. Albania fully supports the Secretary-
General's recommendations in his report, as well as
resolution 2467 (2019), presented by Germany and just
adopted, and remains committed to playing its part in
implementing the resolution.

