Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt): At the outset, Mr. President,
allow me to express our appreciation for your initiative
to convene today's meeting. Our appreciation also goes
to Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
and Ms. Saran Keita Diakite', representative of the NGO
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security.

Our meeting today is very timely in that it comes
nearly one month after the adoption of the agreed
conclusions ofthe Commission on the Status ofWomen,
which reflects the international community's firm
stance against all forms and manifestations of violence
against women and girls in all contexts, settings and
circumstances, including crimes of sexual violence in
conflict.

The report of the Secretary-General, entitled
"Sexual violence in conflict" (S/2013/149), which was
been presented by his Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, highlights several concerns
emerging this year, including the perpetration of sexual
violence against men and boys as a tactic of war or in
the context of detention or interrogation, children born
as a result of rape in wartime, and the practice of forced
marriages by armed groups. It also draws attention
to the nexus between sexual violence and the illicit
extraction of natural resources, the displacement of
civilian populations, the inadequacy of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and security sector
reform efforts, and the challenge of sexual violence
being universally underreported for reasons that
include the risk of reprisal.

The report responds to those emerging concerns
through a set of important recommendations that
include ensuring the deployment of women's protection
advisers in United Nations peacekeeping operations
and special political missions, thereby systematically
responding to sexual violence in conflict in all the
relevant situations. In that regard, my delegation would
like to express its appreciation for the efforts exerted by
Ms. Bangura and her team in the preparation of the first
report since she assumed her responsibilities, which
took into account the concerns expressed by Members
States last year regarding the mandate of the Special
Representative.

Sexual violence in conflict represents one of
the most serious forms of violation of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
Such violations cause a lifetime of pain that cannot be
healed. In that regard, Egypt stresses the importance
of implementing policies of zero-tolerance for sexual
violence, ensuring that all perpetrators be held
accountable, whether they be the ones who committed,
ordered or condoned such crimes, and that all
perpetrators be pursued by any and all possible means.
Despite the Security Council's unique ability to impose
targeted sanctions on perpetrators as an important
part of deterrence, Egypt emphasizes the importance
of adopting preventive measures to address the spread
of sexual violence in conflict as a priority. There is an
urgent need to support the Member States concerned in
preventing sexual violence, in ensuring zero tolerance
for it and in prosecuting its perpetrators.

Egypt also believes that it is of importance to
address sexual violence issues in the early phases of
peace processes, in mediation efforts and in ceasefire
and peace agreements, particularly in provisions
on security arrangements, transitional justice and
reparations. Increased attention must be paid to the
survivors of sexual violence in conflict situations as
an integral part of States' obligations towards them,
including by setting up mechanisms aimed at preventing
the recurrence of such crimes and by providing them
with all the services and assistance they need, including
rehabilitation and reintegration support.

