The President: I will now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the United States.

I would like to thank both the Secretariat and
Prince Zeid for their briefings today on this matter. In
particular, I would like to commend Prince Zeid for the
important work he has done as the Secretary-General's
Special Adviser to shine light on what is arguably one
of the greatest stains on United Nations history. It is
absolutely unacceptable that horrific crimes of sexual
abuse and exploitation have been committed by United
Nations peacekeepers against individuals they have
been assigned to protect.

Having an open briefing on this subject is
important because, while we rightly express our moral
outrage, we must take firm and decisive action. We

must take action now, not only to pursue justice and a
resolution to the crimes that have already been
committed, but also to establish the necessary
institutions, mechanisms, training and oversight
procedures to ensure they are not repeated in existing
and future peacekeeping operations. We cannot wait
months and years while more children are exploited
and the reputation of United Nations peacekeepers
continues to decline.

Failure to act on this matter will have profound
implications for both existing and future peacekeeping
missions. As we begin to plan our next operation in
Darfur, we do not want to contemplate potential
headlines of United Nations peacekeepers in Darfur
raping the very population that they are entrusted to
protect. We concur in full with Under-Secretary-
General Guehenno when he remarked last May that,

"Indeed, it is precisely our image and reputation
that gives us the credibility to work so effectively
in war-torn countries and bring peace and
stability to millions across the world. Eliminating
such misconduct is therefore integral to the
success of peacekeeping". (S/PV.5]91, p. 5)

Throughout our wide-ranging discussions on a
variety of issues related to United Nations reform, we
have spoken of the need for a fundamental change in
the culture and the way the United Nations operates.
We have heard Paul Volcker, Chairman of the
Commission investigating the oil-for-food scandal,
speak of a culture of inaction. Just yesterday, we
discussed the Office of Internal Oversight Services
(OIOS) report on Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) procurement, where OIOS spoke
of a culture of impunity.

Resolution and prevention of future acts of sexual
exploitation and abuse call for the same fundamental
shift. We are pleased that the Secretariat acknowledges
this point, with Under-Secretary-General Guehenno
remarking that,

"We need to create a culture and environment in
peacekeeping operations that does not permit
sexual exploitation and abuse. This requires joint
action by both DPKO and Member States". (ibid, P- 7)

The United States, for its part, takes its responsibility
as a Member State seriously in this regard. We are
working closely with others to finalize language in the
new, amended Memorandum of Understanding issued
by DPKO last fall and encourage other troop-
contributing countries to do so as well.

The United States Congress has expressed keen
interest in this matter and has taken action. In 2005,
Congress passed and President Bush signed the 2005
re-authorization of the Trafficking Victims Protection
Act of 2000. This new legislation requires the
Executive Branch, starting in June 2006, to report
annually to the United States Congress on the actions
taken by the United Nations and other international
organizations to prevent trafficking and sexual
exploitation and abuse by employees, contractors and
peacekeeping forces. It also requires the Secretary of
State to report to the United States Congress on the
effectiveness of those actions prior to voting on any
new or re-authorized peacekeeping mission.

The United States Government has also taken
action on an important matter closely linked to the
problem of sexual exploitation and abuse at the hands
of peacekeepers, namely, the spread of HIV. We have
fully supported, and will continue to support, Security
Council resolution 1308 (2000). The United States
Department of Defense, and more recently the
President's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief, have
provided resources and technical assistance to
implement long-term strategies for HIV/AIDS
education, prevention, counselling, testing and
treatment in more than 70 military and peacekeeping
populations around the world. Since the adoption of
resolution 1308 (2000), the United States has assisted
with the HIV/AIDS education of over two million
uniformed personnel, trained 7,000 uniformed peer
educators, established more than 200 HIV/AIDS
counselling and testing facilities on or near military
bases, provided HIV/AIDS diagnostic and screening
equipment to 30 armed forces and trained over 600
uniformed medical personnel in the care and treatment
of HIV-infected personnel and their families.

We strongly endorse the recommendations of the
United Nations General Assembly's Special Committee
on Peacekeeping to strengthen enforcement of a
uniform United Nations code of conduct for
peacekeepers, improve the capacity of the United
Nations, in cooperation with troop-contributing
countries, to investigate allegations of sexual
exploitation and abuse, establish assistance to and
compensation for victims and enhance pre- and post-
deployment training for United Nations peacekeepers.

We also welcome the creation of personal conduct
units within the United Nations missions in Burundi,
Cote d'Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
East Timor, Haiti, Liberia, Sierra Leone and the Sudan
to address allegations and assist victims. We feel it is
critical that all United Nations missions include similar
units in each of their respective fields. We will strongly
encourage other United Nations Security Council
members to continue to support the inclusion in United
Nations Security Council resolutions establishing
peacekeeping operations specific and strong language
to that end. Finally, we take special note of DPKO
efforts to increase the participation of female
uniformed personnel serving in United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

We are concerned, however, about the status and
progress of the investigations into past cases of abuse.
We understand that the Office of Internal Oversight
Services took over all investigations as of last October
and is expected to issue a report this May. We expect
that DPKO will cooperate fully with OIOS in its
investigations of past abuses and in providing access to
all information on new allegations as they surface. We
know this is a daunting task and that OIOS has only
begun to scratch the surface of this problem. To date,
the United Nations has investigated 295 cases,
resulting in 137 repatriations and 16 dismissals of
soldiers, commanders, police and United Nations staff.
It is also critical that OIOS operate with complete
autonomy to investigate these matters. This will help
all parts of the Organization by insulating it from
accusations of trying to cover up the scope and
magnitude of the problem.

I note that OIOS is absent today, as it was absent
yesterday, and we find this troubling. I note also that
the Secretary-General's Chief of Staff did not answer
my question yesterday on the independence of OIOS,
and we find that troubling as well. We intend to pursue
these matters.

All of these vitally needed reforms by the United
Nations must be matched by resolve on the part of
troop-contributing countries to prevent and punish
crimes by their personnel who participate in United
Nations peacekeeping missions. Pre- and post-
deployment training, compliance, adequate living
standards for troops, discipline and compensation for
victims require commitment and action by troop-
contributing countries.
We understand that no system will be perfect, and
there will be instances that require Member States to
prosecute their citizens in their own courts. For those
countries that have repatriated alleged perpetrators of
these heinous crimes, we encourage them in the
strongest terms to follow the lead of countries such as
Morocco and be transparent and forthright in their
judicial proceedings. The international community
expects no less. We know this is not always an easy
task, but it is an important one.

It was two years ago that the world began to
wake up to the reality that we are confronted with
today - that the sexual exploitation and abuse of
women and children at the hands of United Nations
peacekeepers is not an isolated incident. It is a
widespread scourge that creates lasting victims, scarred
for their lifetimes. The "boys will be boys" attitude,
which too long pervaded peacekeeping operations,
must correctly be met with a zero tolerance policy.
Now that we are aware of this problem, though, it is
time to take this recognition and translate it into
decisive action without delay. We should do so not just
because we recognize the impact of such crimes on the
success of a particular mission, but because it is our
moral and ethical responsibility to do as much as
possible to prevent the sexual exploitation and abuse of
women and children, wherever it may exist.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Brazil. I now give him the floor.

