Ms. Agladze (Georgia): I would like to express
our appreciation to the Franco-German presidencies of
the Council for their leadership in advancing the issue
of sexual violence in conflict. I also want to thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2019/280), as well as
this morning's briefers, who gave us moving accounts
of their experiences and their perspectives on tackling
impunity and increasing accountability in the area of
sexual violence in conflict. We welcome the adoption
today of resolution 2467 (2019) and are committed to
its implementation.

This year marks the tenth anniversary of
the establishment of the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict. During that time we have seen
groundbreaking changes in terms of understanding and
addressing the root causes and the devastating impact
of conflict-related sexual violence. However, sexual
violence continues to be used as a strategy of warfare
and a tactic of terror to this day. It continues to function
as both a driver and a result of forced displacement. It
is thus our primary responsibility to address conflict-
related sexual Violence at all stages of the prevention,
protection and prosecution nexus.

The Government of Georgia has been carrying out
its national action plans for implementing the Security
Council's resolutions on women and peace and security
since 2012. Our most recent plan covers the inclusion of
the needs, priorities and recommendations of internally
displaced women and women affected by conflict in
peace and security efforts, as well as women's increased
participation of women in the Geneva international
discussions and in the mechanisms for preventing and
responding to incidents of sexual violence. To that end,
the participants in the Geneva international discussions
and the prevention and response mechanisms
meet and consult regularly with representatives of
non-governmental organizations, including those
specializing in the protection of women's rights.
To further support women affected by conflict, the
Government of Georgia has launched a project aimed
at empowering them economically by expanding their
knowledge and enhancing the practical skills they need
to start their own businesses.

Gender equality is an essential pillar of military
and civilian personnel management in Georgia.
Our Ministry of Defence's gender-equality strategy
establishes the conditions required to guarantee equal
rights, freedoms and opportunities for men and women,
prevent and eradicate all forms of discrimination,
counter any kind of gender violence and eliminate
misconduct, sexual harassment and physical and
psychological mistreatment. Today approximately
8 per cent of our armed forces and 49 per cent of
Ministry of Defence personnel are women. The gender-
equality monitoring team at the Ministry of Defence
coordinates gender mainstreaming, the implementation
of a gender perspective and the institutionalization and
fulfilment of national and international obligations.
The team is also engaged in implementing measures
designed to prevent domestic violence perpetrated
by representatives of the Ministry of Defence. The
Ministry has further improved its legislative base
to ensure accountability for sexual harassment by
military servicemen, and has introduced a mandatory
training course for all employees on the elimination of
sexual harassment in the workplace. Training on gender
perspectives and resolution 1325 (2000) has been part
of predeployment training for peacekeepers since
2014, and more than 5,000 military servicemen and
-women have been trained so far. Gender and domestic
violence issues are also included in sessions on post-
traumatic stress disorder held by Ministry of Defence
psychologists following deployment.

Despite the Government's efforts to promote the
full inclusion in the peace process of women affected
by conflict, the ongoing occupation of Georgia's
Abkhazia and Tskhinvali regions by the Russian
Federation hinders the peace process and imposes
severe conditions on women living in Georgia's
occupied regions, as well as in areas adjacent to the
occupation line. Those areas are systematically subject
to human rights violations, including the denial of the
right to freedom of movement, illegal detentions by
Russian FSB officers and threats to physical security
for so-called illegal border crossings. International
engagement and monitoring of the situation inside the
conflict-affected regions, and the occupied regions
of Georgia in particular, are thus crucial to ensuring
substantive gender equality and preventing sexual
violence against women.

