Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank you, for convening of this meeting and
for your participation, Madam German Minister
of Defence. We also thank the briefers for their
informative presentations.

We consider it essential that the Security
Council remain united with regard to the progressive
development and implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda, since the contribution
of women to conflict resolution, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding is no longer merely a useful
recommendation, but has become a paradigm for its
efficient and necessary implementation.

From that perspective, the increase in the number
of female personnel in military and police contingents,
as a central part of the Organization's reform process,
contributes directly to promoting and crystallizing
such participation. Therefore, integrating the gender
perspective established by resolution 1325 (2000)
makes it possible not only to develop policies that
recognize the specific effects of conflict on women, but
also to recognize the need to involve women as positive
agents in peace processes. We must also express our
satisfaction about the organization ofjoint field visits
by United Nations and African Union representatives
to observe in detail the relationship among women,
peace, security and development, including generating
appropriate responses to the scourge of sexual violence
in conflict, with a view to continuing to implement
tangible measures to promote women's participation in
those processes.

At the same time, the empowerment of women's
leadership and enabling them to make proposals are also
prerequisites for conflict prevention and a powerful tool
for achieving the Sustainable Development Goals. That
belief is more than just a theory for us. It is currently
embodied in the following commitments: first, in
our firm support for systematically incorporating a
gender perspective in the mandates of peacekeeping
operations, based on specialized training aimed at
providing specialized responses to, and protecting
the human rights of, women and girls in conflict
situations, while promoting their active participation,
and, secondly, through a gradual increase, as a troop-
contributing country, of women's participation in peace
operations, such that the percentage of women staff
officers is 30 per cent, of mission experts it is 33 per
cent and of military contingents it is 10 per cent of the
total number of deployed troops. We have committed
to increasing that participation to reach the target of
15 per cent in the category of contingents by 2020. For
Peru, that commitment is binding and is complemented
by the incorporation of a gender perspective in
predeployment training programmes for our troops and
military observers. We are pleased that the National
Training Centre for Peace Operations in our country
has established guidelines for action in that area as a
central part of the training of our troops.

We would like to conclude by reiterating our
commitment to continuing to work in the Informal
Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security,
which we co-chair with Germany, to promote the
implementation of this agenda by the Council, in
particular as established in the historic resolution 1325
(2000).

