Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
should like at the outset, Sir, to thank you for presiding
over this meeting and to express our appreciation to the
delegation of Namibia for its initiative in convening it.
I should like also to thank the Secretary-General for his
statement and to express our deep appreciation for the
statements made by his Special Adviser on Gender
Issues and Advancement of Women, Ms. Angela King,
and by the Executive Director of the United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM), Ms.
Noeleen Heyzer. Both statements touched on a number
of important issues and also contained a number of
important recommendations that merit serious
consideration by the Council.

Women play an irreplaceable role in the creation
of human civilization and in the promotion of social
development. In China, there is a popular saying that
"women hold up half of the sky". Without the full
participation of women, therefore, our efforts to
maintain international peace and security can be
neither fruitful nor lasting.

However, women, more often than not, are the
direct and principal victims of war and armed conflict.
Given that the Security Council's primary
responsibility is the maintenance of international peace
and security, today's open debate on "Women and
peace and security" will help the Council to better
fulfil its mandate, entrusted to it by the Charter of the
United Nations.
My delegation condemns all violent acts
committed against women in time of armed conflict,
and it urges all parties to conflicts strictly to abide by
international humanitarian and human rights law. We
also call on all Governments to investigate and bring to
justice those who commit crimes against women. We
hope also that the international community will
intensify its efforts to protect and assist conflict-
affected women and help them return to their homeland
and resume their normal lives. We call on all concerned
States, international organizations and non-
governmental organizations to enhance their
cooperation in this regard.

We also encourage women actively to participate
in conflict prevention and settlement and in post-
conflict reconstruction, and we hope that the
international community will create favourable
conditions in this regard.

I would like here to pay tribute to the role played
by women in non-governmental organizations. We
hope that women will also play a greater role in
peacekeeping operations, in order better to assist
women who have been affected by war and conflicts.
Women should participate also in post-conflict
reconstruction efforts. We would be encouraged to see,
some day in the future, in a war-torn area, a
peacekeeping operation composed entirely of women.

In our opinion, women do not fully participate in
our work not because they are not capable of doing so
but because we have not given this question sufficient
attention. We look forward to an effective training
programme in this regard.

In June, the United Nations convened, here in
New York, a special session on the issue of women.
The Political Declaration adopted at that session called
on all Governments and countries to intensify their
joint efforts in order better to protect women's rights
and interests. Today's open debate could be considered
part of the follow-up of the June special session. We
hope that this meeting will make a significant
contribution to enhancing the protection afforded to
women and that it will lead to effective follow-up
actions. We are hopeful also that this momentum will
be maintained within the United Nations system. We
believe that a full assessment, within the United
Nations system, of the impact of armed conflict on
women would be most useful.

The question of women is a cross-cutting one
which the United Nations agencies have been
deliberating for many years. The work of the Council
should be synergetic with that of other agencies, for
only in this way can we motivate all parties and players
to make full use of the advantages provided by the
United Nations system as a whole in order to achieve
the best possible results.

