Ms. Velichko (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): Allow
me to congratulate the delegation of Azerbaijan on
holding this open debate on the role of women and the
rule of law and ensuringjustice in conflict and post-
conflict situations.

We are grateful to the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative on Sexual Violence for their
personal commitment and leadership in the fight
against violence against women. We also believe that
UN Women and the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights should play an important role in
combating violence against women and protecting
women's rights.

Belarus condemns all forms of Violence, including
in conflict situations, particularly against the most
vulnerable segments of society - women and children.
As with any other country, Belarus has zero tolerance
for that scourge. Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 2106 (2013) adopted in June, have created a
clear legal framework for responding to sexual violence
in conflict and prohibited its use as a weapon of war.

We believe that a thorough investigation of all acts
of sexual violence and the immediate punishment of
perpetrators are crucial in combatting this scourge.
That violence can be eliminated only through
coherent collective efforts by the international
community - Member States, international
organizations and civil society. Such efforts can and
should be carried out through a genuine partnership
based on a unified approach, respect for each other's
views and agreement on the steps to be taken.

Today, it is clear that there is no State in the world
that would not endeavour to put an end to violence
against women. The question is not who is right, who
is for, who is against violence. Today, the question is
how and in what way can come together through our
collective efforts.

In that context, we are seriously concerned
about recent incidents - be they deliberate or
unintentional - that replace the painstaking and
time-consuming work on the formation of such a
partnership with vociferous media campaigns based
on documents drawn up by an inner circle and hastily
gathered expressions of support for them. We are willing
to believe in the sincere intentions of the proponents of
that approach to combating Violence against women. At
the same time, we cannot but disagree with an approach
that puts those States with the wisdom and strength
of will to consider every word in the international
documents that they sign in an awkward position.

We also consider it inadmissible that members of
the international community that have done a great
deal, including specifically in combatting violence
against women and children, have been placed in an
artificially created situation and forced to justify
themselves for failing to appear on a list of countries
who combat sexual violence. Every State plays an
important role in combating sexual violence, and no
vociferous media campaign should alienate or disregard
even one Member.

We pay tribute to reasonable initiatives to
strengthen international support to combat sexual
violence in conflict. Belarus calls for us not to replace
real partnerships with unity that is merely on paper,
and to avoid hasty and irresponsible actions that may
devalue the noble idea of combatting this scourge.

Our shared responsibility, affirmed as a moral
imperative of policy, is to steadfastly abide by
partnerships based on respect, even if that goes against
our short-term interests and plans. Only that approach
can guarantee a genuine implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) on women and peace and security,
resolution 2106 (2013), and resolution 2122 (2013),
adopted today.

