Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your country's accession to the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of April. The presence
among us this morning of the Federal Minister
of Defence of Germany is clear testimony to the
importance that your country attaches to the topic of
women and peace and security. I also wish to take this
opportunity to congratulate France for its extremely
successful presidency of the Council during the month
of March. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing and for all his efforts to making parity a reality
at the United Nations, as well as Major General Kristin
Lund and Ms. Lorna Merekaje for their briefings.

Morocco welcomes the initiative to convene this
open debate on a topic that has taken on particular
importance since the historic adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), which is now at the centre of our
debates - the role of women in United Nations
peacekeeping operations. The choice of this topic is
timely, a few days after the Peacekeeping Ministerial
of 29 March, during which many delegations expressed
their commitment to the greater representation of
women in United Nations peacekeeping operations.

Bearing in mind the importance and need to
strengthen women's participation in peacekeeping
operations, Morocco - a major contributor to
peacekeeping operations since the 19605 - has
undertaken considerable efforts to achieve the target
of 15 per cent female staff officers. Moreover, the
Secretary-General's Action for Peacekeeping initiative
and Declaration of Shared Commitments on United
Nations Peacekeeping Operations, which Morocco
was one of the first countries to endorse, also provide
for actions to be taken in that regard. We congratulate
and strongly support the efforts and initiatives of the
Secretary-General to promote gender equality and
parity in all United Nations activities.

To date, Morocco has achieved the 15 per cent
threshold and is already preparing to significantly
increase its female contribution through specific
pledges, particularly in terms of medical personnel,
military observers and officers for the Civilian-Military
Cooperation Unit. With that in mind, an all-female unit
was deployed by the Royal Moroccan Armed Forces to
the rapid deployment battalion of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Morocco will also contribute
for the first time to the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan with the deployment of a military observer group.

It is a reality highlighted by experience and studies
that the increased participation of women can have a
positive impact on the effectiveness of peacekeeping
missions. We therefore welcome the launching of the
Secretariat's uniformed gender-parity strategy, which
proposes 25 per cent female participation for staff
officers and military observers and 15 per cent for
contingents. In that regard, and with a View to ensuring
its full implementation, it would be useful to consider
two important factors, including the number of troops
deployed and the national considerations of troop-
and police- contributing countries. Other elements
should also be taken into account in order to facilitate
the greater participation of women in peacekeeping
operations, and I will refer to a few.

First, we should offer incentives to encourage
women's participation. In that regard, we commend
the Secretariat and Canada for launching the Elsie
Initiative for Women in Peace Operations. We could, for
example, consider shorter rotation periods. Secondly,
we must ensure that the specific needs of women are
taken into account across all missions, particularly in
terms of housing. Thirdly, we must avoid restricting
the full participation of women in mission activities by
conditioning them with caveats. Fourthly, we should
provide more training modules that are specifically
designed for women. And, fifthly, we should favour
women candidates for civilian posts within missions.
Today's topic is not only about women's
participation in peacekeeping operations but also
political processes, mediation and conflict prevention.
On those aspects too, efforts have been made by all
actors, including Governments, the United Nations,
regional organizations or civil society. Morocco is
committed to supporting mediation as a means for the
peaceful resolution of disputes and ensuring the full
participation of women in peace processes. Therefore,
as part of our joint initiative with Spain on mediation
in the Mediterranean, various activities have been
undertaken, particularly in strengthening the capacities
of women mediators as well as active participation in
the various networks of women mediators.

To conclude, I would like to take this opportunity
to pay a heartfelt tribute to all of the women and
men deployed on the ground in the service of peace
and international security, often in very difficult
circumstances and at the risk of putting their lives
in peril.

