Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): Spawned by misanthropism,
sexual or gender-based violence in any form and in any
society is reprehensible. Such crimes assume a more
sinister dimension when employed as tactics of war
and tools of humiliation during armed conflicts. All
parties to a conflict have the moral and legal
responsibility to ensure due protection of all vulnerable
groups, including women, children, the elderly and the
disabled.

Pakistan welcomes this opportunity to have an
open and frank discussion on the important topic of
sexual violence in armed conflict. We have listened
carefully to the remarks made by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Wallstrom. We
are also grateful to Under-Secretary-General Ladsous
and to Ms. Megheirbi.

Pakistan's commitment to the United Nations
agenda of peace and security needs no elaboration. For
more than half a century, Pakistanis have served in
United Nations peacekeeping operations in challenging
circumstances. We have noted the Security Council's
enhanced emphasis on addressing violations of the
human rights of children and women through new
mechanisms, such as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
and the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict. Employed
properly and in cooperation with concerned States and
other relevant actors, such tools have the potential for
good.

We are supportive of the work that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General is doing, and
would like to encourage her to continue to focus on the
core of her mandate, that is, situations of armed
conflict or occupation. Having carefully read the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2012/33), we have some
questions and comments on its specifics.

Ideas such as the inclusion of elections, political
strife or civil unrest under "other situations" go beyond
the mandate of the Security Council. They run counter
to paragraph 8 of resolution 1960 (2010), which clearly
confines the whole debate to the implementation of
resolution 1888 (2009), that is, situations of armed
conflict. That is what the report should focus on, not
situations that are neither armed conflict nor
post-conflict or that threaten international peace and
security. It is a matter of concern that some members of
the Council, while arguing for a binding nature of
Security Council resolutions, paradoxically condone
deviations from mandates authorized by those very
resolutions. The report should also not deviate from the
established notion of sexual violence in situations of
armed conflict

As paragraphs 1 and 3 of resolution 1960 (2010)
affirm, the mandate of taking action against specific
parties is restricted to those situations that are on the
agenda of the Security Council. However, in
paragraph 116 of the report, the Secretary-General
recommends that the Security Council take specific
actions, including the use of targeted measures by
sanctions committees, against all parties named in the
report, instead of those mentioned in the annex. We
would appreciate clarification of that anomaly.

The report also mentions the development of a
framework for early warning indicators specific to
conflict-related sexual violence, with the aim of
integrating the analyses yielded by the framework into
existing and emerging early warning and prevention
systems to facilitate a rapid response. It should be
ensured that such a mechanism works strictly within
the mandate and under the guidance of the Security
Council to obviate politicization.

Let me conclude by saying that, our questions
notwithstanding, Pakistan attaches the highest
importance to and supports this important mandate. We
would like to stress the need to strengthen the rule of

law through a focus on national judicial systems, better
training for peacekeeping troops and local police
forces, and the increased participation of women in all
peacemaking, peacebuilding and peacekeeping
processes to help end sexual violence in situations of
armed conflict. We are also supportive of the
recommendations made by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on the need to take steps for
the legal, medical and psychological rehabilitation of
the victims of sexual Violence, as well as efforts to
strengthen institutional safeguards against impunity for
perpetrators.

