Ms. Bachelet: It is an honour to address the
Security Council and to introduce the report of the

Secretary-General on women and peace and security
(S/2012/732).

I join the Deputy Secretary-General in thanking
the presidency of India and the previous President
of the Council, the Ambassador of Guatemala, for
encouraging us to address the role of women's civil
society organizations in the prevention and resolution
of armed conflict and in peacebuilding. We are grateful
that this open debate was rescheduled after last month's
hurricane. We thank the Council for having met
exceptionally on 31 October to adopt the presidential
statement that welcomed the enhanced participation,
representation and involvement of women in the
prevention and resolution of armed conflict and in
peacebuilding (S/PRST/2012/23). I am also very happy
to participate today with my colleague Herve' Ladsous
and with Ms. Bineta Diop.

The very origin of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) is the courage, leadership and
accomplishments of women's civil society organizations
that promote peace under what are often unimaginably
difficult circumstances. Today we will hear many
examples of the contributions of women leaders and
civil society organizations. I would like to draw the
Council's attention to what women's groups in Mali are
doing right now to contribute to non-violent solutions
to the crisis.

In spite of their absence from official conflict-
resolution processes, women leaders in the north of
the country are using informal channels to call on
the leaders of armed groups to participate in peace
dialogues. Just two weeks ago, nearly 1,000 women
leaders and members of civil society groups gathered in
Bamako and delivered a common call for peace, during
which they expressed solidarity across ethnic and
other divisions and recommended specific measures to
protect women's rights and to prevent violence against
women and children. They asserted that now was the
time to dedicate funding to reparations, care and the
empowerment of survivors.

Wherever there is conflict - whether in Mali,
Syria, the Middle East or the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo - women must be
part of the solution.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2012/732) assesses
the state ofthe implementation ofresolution 1325 (2000)
in the areas of conflict prevention, women's protection,
their participation and gender-responsive relief and
recovery efforts. The report notes the rising number
of countries and regional organizations that have
strategies on women and peace and security, including
the recently announced Pacific regional action plan.

In the area of conflict prevention, the report finds
that more actors, including the Security Council, are
engaged in early-warning efforts to detect threats to
women and girls. However, the effective prevention of
violence against women and girls remain a challenge.
One need look no further than Syria or Mali to find
situations where conflict has severely affected women
and children. Sexual and gender-based crimes persist,
along with other abuses that affect women differently
from men - such as forced displacement, the loss of a
means of survival and limited access to basic services.

In the area of participation, particularly in formal
peace processes, the report notes that while some
good examples exist, specific efforts are needed to
increase the number of women represented on official
delegations. Of the 14 peace negotiations co-led by the
United Nations in 2011, only four had delegations that
included a woman. Of nine peace agreements signed
in 2011, only two - Yemen and Somalia - included
provisions on women and peace and security.

In the area of elections, the report shows the value
of temporary special measures to increase the number
of women candidates. Yet, out of nine post-conflict
elections last year, only one - in Uganda - employed
an electoral gender quota, which produced a
parliament made up of 35 per cent women. In the other
eight elections, women won between 4 and 13 per cent
of the seats.

In the area of protection, the report indicates that
mechanisms pertaining to such things as community
patrols, access to legal aid, rapid response and surge
teams multiplied in the past year. There have also been
initiatives to establish integrated services, address
fuel and lighting needs and train security personnel.
Women's protection is now part of standard operating
procedures for security-sector personnel in some
contexts.

Despite the progress, the report identifies
persistent protection gaps and obstacles to women's
and girl's access to justice. We therefore welcome the
attention given in the presidential statement to mission
drawdown and the imperative of preventing any erosion
of the protection environment during transitions.

In the area of relief and recovery, the report
indicates that post-conflict financial allocations to
women's empowerment and gender equality are low
but increasing. The percentage of project spending that
targets gender-specific needs rose from an estimated
5.7 per cent in 2010 to 7.1 per cent this year. That is
an improvement, but it is clearly still a long way from
the 15 per cent minimum spending target set in the
Secretary-General's action plan on gender-responsive
peacebuilding.

The report emphasizes the need for greater attention
to women's post-conflict employment and other forms
of livelihood support.

The report has a special section on gender-
responsive prevention and the resolution of conflict.
It notes that gender expertise and the participation
of women in official peace processes is decisive in
ensuring greater sensitivity to women's rights and
gender equality in a subsequent accord. For that to
happen, gender issues must be addressed at the earliest
possible stages - right from the start of dialogue and
peace negotiations.

The report welcomes opportunities created in the
past year for women to participate in international
strategy and donor conferences, including in the
Central African Republic, Afghanistan and South
Sudan. However, it acknowledges that insufficient
attention is given to improving women's access to
national and international peace dialogues. Greater
effort must be made to invite women to participate in
conflict-resolution forums.

To ensure greater progress, the report recommends
action in three broad areas.
First, consistent implementation of international
norms and standards on the human rights of women
and girls is needed across all efforts to prevent and
resolve conflict and build peace. The report calls
for systematic attention to women and peace and
security commitments across the Security Council's
actions. It notes in particular the need to sustain the
implementation of these commitments in situations of
mission drawdown and transition.

Secondly, when it comes to women's participation
and representation, determination is needed to provide
more opportunities, eliminate obstacles and build
capacity for influence. The report cites the need for more
women mediators, advisers, negotiators and observers
in peace processes, and more women in the senior
management of international and regional organizations,
and calls for measures to address obstacles to their
participation. In elections, temporary special measures
help to encourage women's participation both as voters
and as candidates. Special attention to the protection of
women human rights defenders is called for. In United
Nations missions, sector-specific gender experts can
advance mainstreaming. Capacity-building of women's
organizations during and after armed conflict will help
amplify women's influence.

Finally, there is a need for continued improvement
of tracking and accountability systems for the
implementation of women and peace and security
commitments, including at the regional and national
levels. It is recommended that challenges to the national
and regional implementation of women and peace
and security commitments be assessed, including in
upcoming reviews of national action plans. The need
for increased coordination and consistent tracking of
results at the United Nations is also noted.

To summarize, we need determined leadership and
dedicated systems to realize changes on the ground.
With regard to leadership, I note the recent significant
appointments of women to strategic international
and regional peace and security roles. I welcome
the appointments of Ms. Zainab Bangura as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict; Ms. Leila Zerrougui as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict; and Ms. Fatou Bensouda as Chief
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court. I also
welcome the appointments of Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini-
Zuma as Chair of the African Union Commission, and
Ms. Mari Skare as the NATO Special Representative
for Women, Peace and Security.
While these high-level appointments are welcome,
I note with concern that the United Nations itself must
do better in building the pipeline of women candidates
for these positions. Since June 2010, women's share of
senior United Nations positions, from P-5 to D-2, in
political missions has actually dropped from 23 per
cent to 18 per cent, and in peacekeeping missions from
24 per cent to 21 per cent. The United Nations system
is currently reviewing this situation to take appropriate
action.

To conclude, the Secretary-General's report notes
that we are not seeing results at the pace that we
expected or that women rightfully expect of us. For this,
we need to ensure that women have opportunities to
play their full role in peace and security. We know that
there is no shortage of women's leadership. However,
as the Secretary-General's report points out, there is
a shortage of opportunities for women to engage in
conflict resolution and peacebuilding. We must create
these opportunities.

Creating these opportunities is not impossible, but
it takes a special effort. It requires determination to
make a priority of preventing gender-based violence
in conflict. It requires determination to investigate
and prosecute abuses of women's rights, or to insist
on including women in a donor conference or a peace
negotiation. This determination is not a matter of
simply going through the motions; it is about going the
extra mile. UN-Women and our partners in the United
Nations system and civil society are here to go that
extra mile.

