Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Madam President,
and your delegation for having convened this important
open debate. I also wish to thank the briefers for their
valuable presentations and relentless efforts on behalf
of the effective implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda, both within the United Nations
system and in the field.

I also take this opportunity to congratulate the South
African delegation on today's adoption of resolution
2493 (2019). We appreciate the efforts made by the
delegation of South Africa during the negotiations
on the resolution and reiterate the importance of
maintaining unity in the Council with regard to issues
on women and peace and security. That is a reflection
of our shared belief in the importance of the women and
peace and security agenda and the common priority we
accord to empowering women and effectively involving
them in achieving peace and security throughout the
world. In that regard, I should like to highlight a number
of fundamental issues.

First, we must promote the achievements made to
date and address the remaining challenges as we move
towards the celebration of the twentieth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).

Secondly, we must emphasize the importance of
the empowerment of women and gender equality in
conflict resolution if we are to achieve sustainable
security and peace.

Thirdly, Member States should work in close
collaboration with the United Nations towards the
effective implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda.

Over the past 19 years, starting with resolution 1325
(2000), the international community, represented by
the Security Council, has developed a robust normative
framework to empower women to enjoy their inherent
right to participate in achieving peace. We welcome
the achievements reached in this regard as 72 per cent
of the resolutions adopted by the Security Council in
2018 refer explicitly to issues of women and peace and
security. All the missions undertaken by the Council
this year included elements pertaining to women and
peace and security, including meetings with groups of
local women. The United Nations Peacekeeping Force
in Cyprus is a role model of empowering women in
peace missions. The Head ofmission is a woman who is
one ofthree responsible women representing the police,
military and civilian components of the mission.

Nevertheless, challenges persist in achieving the
full participation of women in the area of maintaining
international peace and security. One such challenge is
the persistence of violence in different manifestations
against women, including sexual violence in situations
of conflict. The humanitarian needs of women and girls
have not been fully met. The representation of women
in political processes, peace processes and leadership
positions is low.

Next year we will commemorate the anniversaries
of many reference frameworks and important events,
such as the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United
Nations, the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action and the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), which stressed the critical importance of the
participation of women in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts. All of those anniversaries constitute
very important and unique opportunities to synergize
efforts and build on the success that has been achieved
to date on the women and peace and security agenda,
while addressing the challenges that prevent us from
achieving that.

The fact that women are deprived of their basic
rights and not treated equally in conflict, pre-conflict
or post-conflict situations may constitute the main
obstacle to the efforts of the international community
to implement the women and peace and security agenda
with a view to achieving lasting peace. There is no doubt
that a lack of gender equality and continued violence
against women and girls may increase the possibility of
conflict break out.

It is unfortunate and unacceptable that women and
girls are disproportionately impacted by conflicts and
that their basic rights are violated only because of their
gender. That reality is compounded when women are
excluded and marginalized in efforts for peacekeeping,
peacemaking and sustainable peace, and when they are
prevented from truly participating in peace negotiations
and peace agreements. It has been proven that the
effective participation of women in peace agreements
increases the chances that a successful and sustainable
outcome will be reached. Undermining the role of
women means not only marginalizing them, but also
undermining efforts to achieve peace, empower women
politically, economically and socially, and strengthen
the pillars of security and stability.

We welcome the initiative of Member States in
introducing their national action plans on women and
peace and security in the lead-up to the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).
We reiterate that Member States should shoulder the
primary responsibility for ensuring respect for human
rights, putting an end to all forms of violence against
women and promoting their equal participation in all
phases of peacemaking. We also welcome partnerships
with the United Nations in building the capacities of
Member States to implement the women and peace and
security agenda, in line with their national priorities and
characteristics. We also commend the role of regional
organizations in this regard. In that connection, we also
commend the regional women and peace and security
agenda of the League of Arab States, as Arab women
have historically played a pivotal role in achieving
peace in the Middle East. The State of Kuwait supports
that agenda and its implementation.

In conclusion, empowering women, increasing
their role and ensuring their effective participation in
promoting peace, security, development and stability
will undoubtedly contribute to implementing the
principles and purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war.

