Mr. Bhattarai (Nepal): Allow me to read out an
abridged version of my statement.

First of all, I thank the French presidency of the
Security Council for convening this annual debate on
women and peace and security. Ialso thankthe Secretary-
General for his comprehensive report (S/2017/861), and
the briefers for their updates and insights.

From the days of the Council's inception and the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), in 2000, Nepal has
been a proactive supporter of the cause of women and
peace and security. I am pleased to inform the Council
about how far Nepal has come. In 2011, Nepal adopted
a national action plan to implement resolutions 1325
(2000) and 1820 (2008). The Ministry of Peace and
Reconstruction coordinates the plan's implementation,
while its oversight is ensured by a high-level
steering committee co-chaired by the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs and Peace and Reconstruction, with
members drawn from relevant ministries and civil
society organizations.

Nepal has made explicit efforts to localize its
national action plan, with localization guidelines in
place since 2013. With the mandatory provision of
33 per cent women's representation in local peace
committees, Nepal's national action plan has been an
example of a transparent, inclusive and participatory
process, with the close involvement of conflict victims
and civil society organizations. This example has been
well shared with countries in the region and outside.
The success of the first national action plan has led
us to the soon-to-be-adopted second national action
plan, which focuses on sexual violence, particularly
during conflict.
Eager to catch up with the global average of gender
parity in current deployment, Nepal is committed
to progressively attaining the United Nations goal of
15 per cent females in peacekeeping operations, and
has employed inclusive policies to encourage more
females tojoin the national security forces. In the spirit
of moving from zero tolerance to zero cases, Nepal
has endorsed the Kigali Principles on the Protection
of Civilians and signed the Secretary-General's
voluntary compact on preventing and addressing
sexual exploitation and abuse. The United Nations
policies on sexual exploitation and abuse and the
protection of human rights are fully incorporated in the
predeployment training courses for our peacekeepers.

Through its own experiences as a United Nations
peacekeeping and civilian protection partner since 1958
and as the sixth largest troop- and police-contributing
country on the one hand, and as a country emerging
from its own armed conflict, on the other, Nepal has
come to believe that women's increased role in the
national context significantly complements the United
Nations aspiration of women playing a greater role at
the global level.

In Nepal's case, women's increased representation
in legislative and Government bodies and State
institutions since 2007 has directly contributed to

fostering good governance and inclusive societies.
The mandatory 33 per cent representation of women,
guaranteed under the new constitution for both federal
and provincial-level legislatures, will qualitatively
enhance the empowerment and ownership of women
in all walks of national life. Already, Nepal has seen
women in the positions of Head of State, Speaker of
the Legislature-Parliament and Chief Justice of the
Supreme Court at the same time. The National Women's
Commission is now an independent and powerful
constitutional body with an overall mandate to monitor
and safeguard the rights and interests of women.

The recent local level elections, where women have
secured nearly half of the leadership positions - beyond
the constitutional guarantee of 40 per cent - is
expected to generate further multiplier effects to ensure
the maximum inclusion and participation of women
in leadership positions, legislation, and governance.
Moreover, there is a 33 per cent quota for certain
positions in Government services, including in security
forces. The gender responsive budget, introduced
in 2006 has now reached over 35 per cent of the
total budget.

In conclusion, Nepal believes that the meaningful
engagement of women in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts, as well as in sustaining peace and securing
the implementation of Council resolutions, has greatly
complemented our own efforts. Our national experience
suggests that the peace process would not be complete
without the full, equal and effective participation
of women. As a country emerging from a successful
domestic peace process, Nepal stands ready to share its
experience and lessons learned through the constructive
engagement of women in conflict prevention and
resolution, as well as post-conflict restructuring
and rebuilding * all gearing towards the timely
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals.

