Mr. Galbavy (Slovakia): I wish to thank you,
Madam, for organizing this debate. I would also like to
thank the briefers for their comprehensive presentations.

Over the past few decades, gender equality and
women's empowerment have become a positive and
forward-looking vision of Africa's development. At the
continental level, African leaders have adopted strong
instruments, such as the Maputo Protocol, the Solemn
Declaration on Gender Equality in Africa and the
African Women's Decade. In January, the African Union
declared 2016 to be the African Year of Human Rights,
with particular focus on the rights of women. According
to United Nations statistics, African countries now
constitute a third of the countries with national action
plans designed to implement resolution 1325 (2000),
which brings an important African perspective to the
women and peace and security agenda.

Despite the substantial efforts undertaken to
implement the women and peace and security agenda
and the progress that has been made in last 15 years,
numerous challenges remain. Women worldwide
continue to suffer disproportionately from conflict,
sexual and gender-based violence and violent
extremism, which threaten to overturn the fragile gains
that have been made in the past. Going forward, we all
must accelerate the implementation of the commitments
our Governments made to women 20 years ago in order
to achieve gender equality in the post-2015 period. The
United Nations must provide continued support and
assistance to women in their role as agents of peace
and, at the same time, more effectively prevent women
from becoming victims and protect them in situations
of conflict.

Slovakia strongly supports the equal and full
participation of women in international peace and
security and calls for the full implementation of
all relevant Security Council resolutions. Women's
strategic participation and leadership in conflict
prevention, peacemaking and peacebuilding, and more
generally in all aspects of society, enhance the chances
for sustainable peace. Without the equal and active
participation of women, we will not be able to address or
achieve the ambitious Sustainable Development Goals.

It is broadly agreed that security sector reform is
essential to post-conflict peacebuilding and the creation
of the conditions necessary for reconstruction and
development. Security and justice sector institutions
must be representative of and responsive to the needs
of both women and men. A United Nations approach
to security sector reform must be gender-sensitive
throughout its planning, design, implementation,
monitoring and evaluation phases. Resolution 2151
(2014) on security sector reform underscores the
importance of women's equal and effective participation
and full involvement in all stages of the security sector
reform process. Gender-sensitive security sector reform
is key to developing security sector institutions that are
non-discriminatory, representative of the population
and capable of effectively responding to the specific
security needs of diverse groups. Security sector
reform must also include the reform of recruitment
processes and the improvement of the delivery of
security services to address and prevent sexual and
gender-based violence.

In conclusion, I should also like to take this
opportunity to reiterate our strong support for the
United Nations zero-tolerance policy against sexual
exploitation or abuse by United Nations peacekeeping
personnel. Also, I would like to recognize here the
important work of women's human rights defenders
working in conflict-affected situations and the need for
their protection.

