Mr. Nkoloi (Botswana): Let me at the very outset
thank and congratulate the Russian delegation on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of October. My delegation also thanks
you the Russian presidency for convening the Security
Council open debate on implementing the common
agenda in relation to the agenda item "Women and
peace and security".

Our special thanks go to the Secretary-General for
his annual report (S/2016/822) and to Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of UN-Women
and Ms. Rita Lopidia, Executive Director of the EVE
Organization for Women Development, South Sudan,
on behalf of the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security.

Botswana welcomes the annual open debate on
women and peace and security, as convened by this
body since 2000. Through these debates, Member
States and civil society organizations have been given
the opportunity to discuss various themes aimed at
enhancing women's participation in conflict prevention,
peacebuilding and decision-making in matters related
to international peace and security.
We consider today's open debate to be ofthe utmost
importance to assessing the progress made following the
2015 global study on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), the 2015 report of the Secretary-General
on women and peace and security (S/2015/716), and
the adoption of the Global Acceleration Instrument
for Women and Peace and Security and Humanitarian
Action. In that regard, Botswana welcomes the adoption
of the Global Acceleration Instrument, which aims at
accelerating the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda by building capacity and increasing
funding for women's participation, leadership and
empowerment, as well as humanitarian action.

We are pleased that although the Global
Acceleration Instrument is still in its infancy, women
mediators in some conflict-affected countries have been
involved in conflict prevention and resolution efforts.
The outcomes of such efforts have been encouraging.
Given the positive outcomes of the Global Acceleration
Instrument, we appeal to Member States and civil
society organizations to support that noble initiative.

Botswana is deeply concerned that women continue
to bear the brunt of armed conflicts, domestic violence,
sexual abuse and rape and humanitarian crises. In that
regard, it is imperative that we build the capacity of
women to prevent violence, conflict and extremism and
enhance their capacities to respond to humanitarian
crises and emergencies. We are also concerned that
the participation of women in conflict prevention and
resolution, peacemaking and peacebuilding remains
low at the national, regional and international levels,
although studies show that women's involvement
would significantly contribute to sustainable peace
and stability.

Botswana supports the global efforts aimed
at addressing challenges to the women and peace
and security agenda, including increasing women's
representation, leadership and empowerment in all
facets of peacebuilding, security and humanitarian
action. We also recognize the critical importance
of gender equality and mainstreaming in national
development plans and in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.

In conclusion, we applaud the efforts made by
the Security Council since 2000 to regularly convene
these open debates, which place women and peace
and security matters at the top of the global agenda.
We therefore call for the rigorous implementation
and monitoring of the commitments made during the
open debates.
