Mr. Verdier (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
We would particularly like to thank your country,
Mr. President, for convening today's debate.

Argentina aligns itself with the statement just
delivered by the representative of Canada on behalf
of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and
Security, and I would like to add a few remarks in my
national capacity.

At the outset, we welcome the positive efforts
that States, the United Nations, intergovernmental
organizations and local and international civil society
have made in recent years to prevent and respond to
sexual violence. In that regard, Argentina welcomes the
Council's adoption just a few minutes ago of resolution
2467 (2019). However, we regret the text's shortcomings
on some matters of importance to my country.

Argentina continues to strongly support the
efforts of the Secretary-General and the Office of the
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
We welcome the Secretary-General's latest report
(S/2019/280) and fully share his recommendations that all
State and non-State parties make specific commitments
aimed at preventing and combating conflict-related
sexual Violence, while also strengthening prevention
by supporting efforts designed to ensure criminal
responsibility for perpetrators and access to justice
for survivors. The increasing use and threats of sexual
violence by various State and non-State armed actors
and groups against particular groups are deeply
serious international crimes that must be prevented
and sanctioned within a strict legal framework that
makes use of existing tools and mechanisms, including
the Security Council's sanctions regimes, which
should include sexual violence as a specific criterion
for imposing sanctions and referring cases to the
jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court.

We believe that one of the key ways to prevent
sexual violence is by addressing the risk factors and
underlying conditions that put women and various
other groups in particularly vulnerable situations, while
actions and efforts aimed at promoting gender equality
and the empowerment of all women and girls in all their
diversity are equally important.

With regard to access to justice and accountability
for crimes of sexual violence, it is crucial to promote
greater cooperation and exchanges of good practices in
research and legal assistance. Argentina is a member
of the Justice Rapid Response international cooperation
mechanism, which does important work in investigating
international crimes professionally and impartially.
We highly value that mechanism's partnership with
UN-Women, which ensures the inclusion of gender
specialists in the investigation of crimes.

At the national level, in 2009, we adopted a
comprehensive protection law to prevent, punish and
eradicate Violence against women. In 2016, we launched
a national action plan for prevention, assistance and the
eradication of violence against women, which reflected
the resolute will of the executive branch to establish as
State policy the fulfilment of the right of all persons
to live a life free from violence. At the international
level, we reiterate our commitment to the zero-
tolerance policy of the United Nations with regard to
cases of sexual exploitation and abuse. In that regard,
together with more than 80 countries, we joined the
voluntary compact on preventing and addressing sexual
exploitation and abuse.

In conclusion, I would like to underscore the
important role of the Safe Schools Declaration, which
is an initiative led by Norway and Argentina. We invite
States to endorse that non-binding instrument, which
recognizes the various obstacles that affect education
during armed conflicts and establishes commitments
to improving the protection provided to students,
educational institutions and their staff.

