The Secretary-General: I thank the United
States for having taken the initiative to convene this
important debate. I congratulate Secretary of State Rice
for her leadership. It is critical that the Council devote
its full attention to this issue. I look forward to hearing
its Views on the way forward.

Almost eight years after the Council adopted its
landmark resolution 1325 (2000), an increasing and
alarming number of women and girls are falling victim
to sexual violence in conflict. Sexual violence poses a
grave threat to women's security in fragile post-
conflict countries and undermines efforts to cement
peace. It strikes women who are already struggling to
survive and to keep their families together in a
generalized climate of fear. The breakdown of law and
order makes women all the more vulnerable to attacks
and leaves them with virtually no recourse to justice.
Survivors are often so badly stigmatized that they can
hardly even hope for a normal life. Cast out by their
societies, they rarely seek redress. Even when they do
have the courage to come forward despite the
humiliation that that can bring, the justice system too
often fails, and perpetrators go free. That fuels a
culture of impunity that does nothing to discourage
more attacks. So, the vicious circle rolls forward.

But we can and must push back. This March, I
launched a global campaign to end violence against
women. The aim is to tackle all of its manifestations,
including the abominable practice of sexual violence in
armed conflict. I will soon appoint a Messenger of
Peace tasked entirely with advocacy for ending
violence against women.

Around the world, United Nations peace missions
are making a difference by monitoring the programme,
helping the victims and advocating an end to impunity.
The United Nations Mission in Liberia has built a safe
house for survivors and victims of sexual and gender-
based violence. In Haiti, our peacekeepers are
organizing meetings on women's rights for members of
the judiciary and police. Our Rule of Law Unit in
Afghanistan is helping the country draft legislation to
eliminate violence against women. The United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo has created
a special unit to ensure that victims receive help when
they seekjustice.

All of those initiatives are based on Security
Council mandates. When the Council adopts
resolutions with strong language on sexual and gender-
based violence, the United Nations can respond more
forcefully. Let us ensure that all future mandates have
clear provisions on protecting women and children in
conflict situations. When the Council authorizes
multidisciplinary missions, we can produce results.
When Member States send us qualified female
personnel, we can demonstrate the central role of
women in restoring stability to war-ravaged countries.

The concept paper before the Council cites the
all-female Indian civil police unit in Liberia as a
possible model. I believe that successful initiative
serves as an excellent example of the unique
contribution that female personnel can make. Through
their sheer presence, the members of that Indian
contingent are showing Liberian women that they, too,
can play a role in law enforcement. We have the
numbers to prove it. Since the female Blue Berets were
first deployed, there has been a marked increase in the
number of women applying for jobs with the Liberian
police.

I am eager to deploy more women worldwide, not
just as police, military and civilian personnel, but also
at the highest levels of mission leadership. Therefore, I
need Member States to come forward with more
women candidates. Send me your female troops, your
police, your civilian personnel and your senior
diplomats, and I will ensure that they all are
08-39069
considered, that qualified candidates are placed on
rosters and that the maximum number are deployed to
the field as quickly as humanly possible.

The troop-contributing countries are already
moving in that direction, and I appreciate all of their
contributions to United Nations peacekeeping. But at
the same time, I urge them to do more to provide
predeployment training for preventing and responding
to sexual violence. The Department of Peacekeeping
Operations is revising its standardized materials on that
project, and we look to the troop-contributing countries
to help ensure that United Nations personnel are part of
the solution and not the problem.

Let me be clear. The United Nations and I
personally are profoundly committed to a zero-
tolerance policy against sexual exploitation or abuse by
our own personnel. That means zero complacency.
When we receive credible allegations, we ensure that
they are looked into fully. That means zero impunity.
When allegations are found to have merit, all
personnel, whether military, police or civilian, are held
accountable on the basis of the applicable national
jurisdiction. I will strengthen the current code of
conduct by upholding the strictest discipline, whereby
not only the individual concerned but also supervisors
up the chain of command are held accountable in a
system of collective responsibility.

Violence against women has reached unspeakable
and pandemic proportions in some societies attempting
to recover from conflict. Responding to the silent war
against women and girls requires leadership at the
national level. National authorities need to take the
initiative to build comprehensive strategies, while the
United Nations needs to help build capacity and
support national authorities and civil society.

Responding to calls from women's groups, rape
survivors and non-governmental organizations, we are
bringing together a dozen United Nations entities in a
concerted effort called the United Nations Action
against Sexual Violence in Conflict. The initiative
brings together experts on issues such as peacekeeping,
development, HIV/AIDS, reproductive health, human
rights, humanitarian relief and gender concerns to help
stop rape and other sexual crimes in conflict-torn
countries.

We know what it takes for a strategy to succeed.
It takes awareness-raising. It takes effective security
measures, including training for national military and
police forces. It takes close monitoring of human
rights, and it requires prosecuting all perpetrators to the
full extent of the law.

At the same time, we must View this problem in
the broader context of women's empowerment. That
means revising not only laws that deal with violence,
but also laws that affect women's rights with respect to
other issues, such as poverty, inheritance or divorce. It
means creating conditions where justice can flourish,
because the best laws in the world will mean little if
they are not enforced through strong judicial and penal
systems.

Above all, we must do far more to involve
women in conflict prevention, peace negotiations and
recovery after the guns fall silent. We must have more
women participating in the process of seeking justice,
fostering reconciliation, supporting disarmament and
demobilization, shaping development policies and
rebuilding institutions. By creating a culture that
punishes violence and elevates women to their rightful
role, we can lay the foundation for lasting stability,
where women are not victims of violence but agents of
peace.

