Mr. Al Saad (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, allow me to extend the condolences of my
country to the Russian Federation and Germany for
the unfortunate incidents that took place recently. We
resolutely condemn those terrorist attacks.

I would like to thank the President of the
Government of the Kingdom of Spain, Mr. Mariano
Rajoy Brey, for organizing this important open debate.
I should also like to extend our thanks and appreciation
for the President's efforts in ensuring the success of this
important debate on trafficking in persons in conflict
situations. We appreciate the efforts of the United
Nations and its agencies to eradicate this crime by
enacting relevant laws and regulations and mobilizing
international efforts to combat this phenomenon. Our
meeting today to discuss this topic is a clear reflection
of those efforts. We are hopeful that this debate will
help us find solutions to this problem, address its root
causes and put in place a future plan to ensure its
full eradication.

Our meeting is taking place to discuss a crime
that is condemned by the entire world. It is a blatant
violation of human rights. Regrettably, the majority
of its victims are women, girls and children. Almost
all countries around the world are affected by this
phenomenon - whether as countries of origin, transit
or destination. Owing to the numerous conflicts around
the world, this crime has been on the rise recently
and has taken on various forms. Countries around
the world and specialized international organizations
have sought to develop their tools and enact laws to
deter this crime and reduce its social, economic and
psychological impact.

At the national level, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
has sought to combat trafficking in persons at the
legislative, organizational and institutional levels,
in addition, to other national efforts and measures to
prevent crimes of trafficking in persons, prosecute
and punish its perpetrators, protect its victims and
enhance international cooperation with countries and
relevant regional and international organizations. A
law to combat trafficking in persons was promulgated
in my country in 2009. That legislation constitutes an
important step forward in our efforts to combat these
types of crimes. Countries around the world know full
well how important it is to enact legal texts that prohibit
those practices and punish its perpetrators.

My country has also established a standing
committee for combating trafficking in persons under
its human rights commission. Its members include
representatives from Government bodies to coordinate
national efforts to combat trafficking in persons and put
in place plans to address them, as well as put forward
recommendations that ensure that no violations are
committed against categories targeted by trafficking in
persons. The commission is tasked with following up
on the implementation of the recommendations.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has ratified many
relevant international instruments, notably the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and its two Protocols - the Palermo Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, and the Protocol
against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and
Air- as well as other International Labour Organization
conventions, in particular Conventions No. 182 and No.
209. Furthermore, we have ratified the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination and the International Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women, as well as the Convention on the Rights of
the Child and the Slavery Convention of 1926 and its
subsequent protocol.

The number of conflicts throughout the world has
increased, especially in the Middle East. That has led
to a significant rise in crimes related to the trafficking
in persons, especially against displaced Syrians fleeing
conflict zones. Unfortunately, human traffickers have
exploited the dire need and the desperate humanitarian
situation of victims, who are often forced to compromise
their dignity and their humanity and who fall prey to
criminals who exploit their bodies for financial gain.

In conclusion, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia would
like to stress its firm rejection of all forms oftrafficking
in persons under any pretext. We have stepped up
our national efforts to fully eradicate that crime by
enacting relevant laws and regulations, cooperating
tirelessly with the international community to
eliminate trafficking in persons, and ratifying relevant
international instruments and conventions.

