Mrs. Morgan (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Mexico
would like to thank Argentina for its initiative in
convening this debate, and would also like to say that
we support the presidential statement issued by the
Council this morning (S/PRST/2014/21).

Our participation in today's open debate is very
important to us in the lead-up to preparations for the
high-level review next year of the Security Council's
landmark resolution 1325 (2000). We commend the
Council's intention to mandate a focus on women
and peace and security in its regular field visits, and
welcome the new five-year gender strategy devised
by the Departments of Peacekeeping Operations and
Field Support, as well as the action plan involving
commitments arising out of resolution 2122 (2013).
We also acknowledge the trend towards greater
representation of women in senior United Nations
posts. To cite one example, the appointment of Major
General Kristin Lund, the first woman to command a
peacekeeping operation, is a milestone.

Despite the undeniable progress, however, the
reality does not yet live up to all the expectations
raised by resolution 1325 (2000) 14 years ago. As the
Secretary-General says in his latest report (S/2014/693),
we have to ensure more consistent application of the
agenda on women and peace and security.

One of the most alarming consequences of
armed conflicts today is the increase in the numbers
of displaced persons and refugees. The situation of
displaced people and refugees in conflict-affected
environments makes women and girls more vulnerable
to becoming victims of sexual abuse and other human
rights violations. My delegation therefore emphasizes
the importance of the comprehensive integration of the
gender perspective into policies related to refugees and
displaced persons, in accordance with international
law, and of promoting comprehensive strategies for
protecting women and girls on the ground that take
their specific needs into account.

Mexico believes firmly that we should continue
to enhance the prevention of sexual violence in armed
conflict. In the twenty-first century, it is unacceptable
that sexual violence continues to be used as a weapon of
war, and we are particularly concerned about the surge
in such violence against girls registered by the United
Nations in 2013. We consider it a positive development
that sexual violence is now being more broadly
considered by the Security Council as a criterion in
determining the application of targeted sanctions in
situations of conflict.

We hope that the strategic review on sanctions and
peacekeeping operations to be carried out in 2015 will
take into account the commitments and priorities of the
agenda on women and peace and security. Impunity
in cases of sexual violence in armed conflict remains
continues to be a major challenge for the international
community. Those responsible for such crimes must
be brought to justice, and we believe the Security
Council should take stronger measures to deal with
those involved, including by referring cases to the
International Criminal Court.

I would like to conclude by emphasizing how
strongly my delegation feels that conflict prevention
is a crucial tool for addressing the causes of emerging
crises and preventing the reappearance of old conflicts
and the emergence of new ones. We urge the Council,
and the international community as a whole, to pay
more attention to the role of women in early-warning
mechanisms, mediation and prevention in communities,
and we hope that the outcome of this debate will add to
empowerment, peace and security for women and girls.

