Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Mexico
would like to commend you, Mr. President, for
convening this recurring open debate on women, peace
and security. We would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2007/567) on recent
activities with regard to that issue.

In the seven years that have transpired since the
historic adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), many
countries, international organizations and civil society
organizations have spoken in the Security Council to
reaffirm their commitment to achieve the full
implementation of the resolution. We appreciate the
progress made and the work done by the Organization
in the area of capacity building to improve the
protection of women's rights, as well as its efforts to
develop a methodology that will make possible more
accurate measurement of the progress made in this
field. However, we are concerned that the will that has
been expressed in that regard has not resulted in an
integrated and coordinated strategy, either within the
United Nations system or in affected States, that would
make it possible to overcome the diffused nature of
efforts undertaken.

We completely agree that countries themselves
have a great deal of responsibility for mainstreaming
the gender perspective into peace and security issues. It
is only through joint implementation of concerted
efforts at the international and national levels that we
will be able to achieve substantial benefits for women
affected by armed conflict.

Women are not passive actors in highly complex
emergency situations. They are nevertheless especially
vulnerable to the marginalization, poverty and
psychological and physical violence that such
situations entail. Moreover, women often become
targets of war, as they are perceived to embody the
cultural and ethnic identities of their societies. In
becoming pillars of their communities in times of
conflict, their well-being and integrity are intrinsically
bound up with the protection of men and children. It is
for that reason that implementing the commitments
contained in resolution 1325 (2000) cannot be seen as a
matter limited solely to ensuring the protection of part
of society, but rather as a precondition for achieving

sustainable peace for all. Carrying out that task
requires short-, medium- and long-term measures. I
shall now refer to those that Mexico believes to be the
most urgent.

First, there is a need to ratify and unconditionally
implement the existing international framework -
especially as regards international humanitarian law -
including human rights instruments such as the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women.

Second, all peacekeeping operations approved by
the Security Council should include mandates with
regard to the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).

Third, we must strengthen the International
Criminal Court, so that, as feasible, it can try those
guilty of sexual violence in the context of armed
conflict - which is a crime against humanity under the
Rome Statute.

Fourth, we must implement measures in all areas
to ensure security and access for humanitarian
personnel to populations in need of assistance in
conflict areas.

Fifth, there is a need for sustained cooperation
and coordination between the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and United Nations bodies
carrying out programmes to benefit women on the
ground, such as the United Nations Development Fund
for Women (UNIFEM) and the United Nations
Population Fund.

Sixth, we must establish across-the-board
mandatory training programmes in gender issues for
United Nations staff working in the areas of
peacekeeping and humanitarian assistance.

Seventh, we must put in place effective domestic
legislative frameworks to eradicate impunity and
establish educational programmes and awareness-
raising campaigns on the issue of women's rights, in
order to eliminate cultural prejudices against women
and empower women to defend themselves against
abuses to which they may be subject.

Eighth, and last, we must systematically include
women - especially from non-governmental
organizations - in the taking of decisions during
peace and reconstruction processes. Mexico commends
the experience of UNIFEM. in that regard. We have
therefore contributed to the work it is doing to ensure
the participation of women from civil society in Haiti's
peace process, which could be a model in other
situations.

Before I conclude, I would like to express
Mexico's deep concern at the growing number of cases
of sexual abuse against women during armed conflict,
and even in the process of peacebuilding. Such recent
cases as those in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the Sudan and Iraq, to mention a few, cannot be
tolerated either by the Governments of those countries
or by the international community. The international
community must take concrete steps to eradicate such
practices.

The adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) was the
outcome of the political resolve of the members of the
Security Council to provide protection for the millions
of women affected by armed conflict. The time has
come to translate the resolution into real action on the
ground.

