Ms. Ojiambo (Kenya): Kenya welcomes the
leadership shown by Togo in holding this debate during
its presidency. The United Nations is commemorating
the twelfth year since the unanimous adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) and two years since the
adoption of resolution 1960 (2010). My delegation
notes with satisfaction the commitment shown by
Member States, the United Nations system, civil
society and other actors in implementing those and
related resolutions. Those resolutions, together with
other international instruments constitute the bedrock
for women's work on peace and security and also the
basis for cooperation among all actors involved in this
field.

Violence against women in all its manifestations
must be dealt with firmly and decisively. In that regard,
my delegation reiterates Kenya's commitment to the
full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and the
follow-up resolutions.

Sexual abuse is perhaps the most dehumanizing
crime known to humankind. The international
community currently has the framework to bring about
more action and visibility to address this heinous crime
in times of conflict. Prevention is the cornerstone of
any strategy to address the challenges that society
faces. We therefore must address the underlying causes
of conflict that provide the springboard for redressing
sexual abuse cases.

Preventive diplomacy as an intervention must be
undertaken expediently to protect potential victims and
to nip any kind of possible impunity in the bud. The
Council has previously recognized a critical link
between security issues and socio-economic concerns
such as poverty, disease and environmental
degradation. We believe that countries must
systematically integrate and mainstream women-
specific issues in all action plans in order to tackle the
growing problem of sexual and gender-based violence
during conflict and even in peacetime. The need to
mainstream a gender perspective into peacekeeping
and peacebuilding initiatives cannot be
overemphasized.

Following the post-election violence in Kenya in
2007, the Government set out an ambitious plan to put
in place a new Constitution and build and strengthen
institutions of governance that would be accountable to
and responsive to the needs of its citizens. In clear
recognition that all human development and human
rights issues, including peace and security, have gender
dimensions, Kenya has made great advances in
mainstreaming gender in its institutions of governance.
Indeed, arguably, such advances have not been made
by any country in such a short period of time and
during peacetime.

The judiciary is now fiercely independent; the
investigation and prosecution branches have been
revamped. A new Independent Electoral and
Boundaries Commission has been established to better
manage elections. Other institutions, such as the
National Cohesion and Integration Commission and the
Commission for the Implementation of the
Constitution, have also been established and are
currently monitoring the pace and quality of reforms,
including the enactment of necessary legislation to
avert any recurrence of events similar to those of 2007.

The Kenyan Constitution has entrenched
women's participation in all aspects of Kenya's

governance structures and societal life in general. By
promoting full and effective participation and granting
the Kenyan woman her rightful place at the decision-
making table, Kenya has ensured that there shall be
nothing about society without women's involvement
and genuine participation. But ever since the African
Union/United Nations-sponsored mediation process
that led to the formation of the coalition Government,
Kenya has remained true to its promises and strived,
against great odds, to carry out its obligations
responsibly. No single, simple metric conveys better
the contrast between the situation as it then was and is
now. Kenya's cooperation with the International
Criminal Court and the putting in place of key
legislation, such as the International Crimes Act and
the Witness Protection Act, provide necessary legal
safeguards for the effective prosecution of the
perpetrators of post-election violence. Kenya is
grateful to the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime for its continued support in this regard.

The main thrust of resolution 1960 (2010) is the
creation of an accountability system listing those
parties credibly suspected of committing or responsible
for patterns of sexual violence. Needless to say, there
are no ongoing patterns of sexual violence in Kenya
today, and none of the activities reported concerning
Kenya took place during the current reporting period of
2010-2011. The post-election violence of January 2008
is therefore way outside the mandated reporting period.
Additionally, Kenya's report has been lumped together
with another situation with which there is no
correlation. This is not to say that Kenya has not taken
any action to redress the situation described in the
report. Indeed, the Attorney General and the Chief
Justice, both newly appointed, have been holding
consultations on how best to deal with these cases.

In conclusion, I wish to note that all over the
world, many women are denied their social, economic,
political and civil rights. They are systematically
discriminated against because of their gender. While I
reaffirm Kenya's commitment to implementing
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1960 (2010), there is a
nexus between violence against women and the
economic and power structure. We must therefore
emphasize on greater coherence and coordination in
addressing women's issues in a fair and holistic
manner in all situations. It is therefore imperative that
consideration be given to how best to incorporate the
activities of the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
with the work of UN-Women.

Finally, we reiterate that Kenya condemns all
forms of violence against women, including sexual
violence, and has always urged compliance with both
humanitarian and human rights law during times of
conflict. We believe that we have a duty, individually
and collectively, to protect women from violence and
other atrocities during times of war. Women also must
participate in reconstruction efforts, free from threats,
intimidation and discrimination during recovery or
post-conflict periods. It is pertinent, therefore, that in
all situations the special needs of women be respected
and their concerns addressed. Women's perceptions,
concerns and opinions must form an integral part of all
decision-making processes. Indeed, traditional
stereotypes that have ostensibly kept women away
from decision-making forums must be broken.

