Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French): My
delegation would first like to thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this debate and for the opportunity
afforded to Belgium to take part. My delegation awould
also like to thank the Secretary-General, the Executive
Director of UN-Women and the representatives of civil
society for their briefings.

Belgium welcomes the adoption by the Security
Council of resolution 2242 (2015), which it was pleased
to have sponsored.

I fully align myself with the statement made by
the observer of the European Union, and would like to
make the following comments in my national capacity.

From its inception, Belgium has strongly supported
the women and peace and security agenda. Currently,
all the relevant Belgian stakeholders are focusing their
efforts on implementing the second national action
plan on women and peace and security. That detailed
plan, which spans 2013-2016, focuses on six priority
goals, including the protection of women and girls
against all forms ofviolence, including sexual violence,
and the participation of women in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding processes. The plan includes areas of
action and follow-up instruments for each of those six
goals.

Given that the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is one of the three target countries of Belgium's
national action plan, my delegation would like to
thank Ms. Julienne Lusenge for her briefing on the
situation in that country. Belgium actively supports the
participation of women in that country and contributes
to the implementation of the €2 million UN-Women
project there that supports the rights and participation
of Congolese women in the framework of resolution
1325 (2000).

A global study demonstrates that genuine
participation by women increases the effectiveness
of humanitarian aid, the credibility and quality of
peacekeeping operations, the speediness of economic
recovery inpost-conflict situations and the sustainability
of peace agreements. It is therefore disappointing to
note that the same study reveals that, 15 years later,
the participation of women in peace processes and in
post-conflict political transitions remains a significant
challenge.

The peace and security situation is different today
as compared to 15 years ago, as the testimony of
Ms. Mohammed this morning illustrated. The persistent
cycles of conflicts and of fragile situations, among
other things, have been exacerbated by new weapons
technologies and new threats, such as the rise in violent
extremism, which has spread easily thanks to the new
information technologies. Women and girls have a key
role to play because they can constitute one of the most

effective voices in combating violent extremism - as
mothers, sisters and wives, but also in the many other
roles they have in the society that they live in. We must
support them and provide them with the requisite tools
to help them defend the values of tolerance and respect
for others.

In conclusion, I want to emphasize the fact that
Belgium is committed to continue to implement its
national plan and to give political and operational
priority to the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

