Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I thank you, Madame
President, for organizing this important debate. I thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Margot Wallstrom, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations Alain
Le Roy and the Military Adviser, General Gaye, for
their briefings.

Uganda considers sexual violence as a serious
health, human rights and development problem. There
can be no peace, security or sustainable economic
development in societies that deny human rights,
including the human rights of women. We are
concerned that, despite the existence of regional and
international instruments on women's human rights,
sexual violence continues to be committed at an
alarming rate, both in times of peace and during armed
conflicts, thus undermining the right of women to fulfil
their potential. Uganda abhors sexual violence and
condemns it unreservedly. The use of sexual violence
as a tactic of war has been documented in many parts
of the world that have experienced armed conflict,
including our region. Armed groups, such as the
Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Rwanda and
the Lord's Resistance Army, have terrorized the
population, leaving mayhem, pain and death in their
wake.

Many formerly abducted women and girls still
suffer from the devastating consequences of their
period of sexual slavery, and a high number of them
have given birth to children in captivity. That has
impacted severely on the mental and physical health of
survivors, in both the short and the long term.

However, while the spotlight has focused on the
situation in the African Great Lakes region, all forms
of sexual violence have been and continue to be
documented in situations of armed conflict the world
over. Indeed, we agree with the Secretary-General, who
has stated in his report that sexual violence is not
specific to any era, culture or continent, but traverses
all of history and geography.

At the regional level, the Great Lakes region has
taken important steps to address sexual violence. On
18 June 2008, just one day before the adoption of
Security Council resolution 1820 (2008), member
States of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region (ICGLR) committed themselves under
what became known as the Goma Declaration to
eradicate all forms of gender-based violence.

The Pact on Security, Stability and Development
in the Great Lakes Region has a specific protocol on
the prevention and suppression of sexual violence
against women and children and model legislation on
the suppression of sexual violence against women and
children.

Those instruments complement other national,
regional and global policy and legal frameworks to
which Uganda is a party. They serve to emphasize that
such sexual violence is not a new or unknown
phenomenon that has been ignored, but that the region
is determined to put an end to such cowardly acts.

The ICGLR secretariat has, in recent times and in
collaboration with the United Nations, undertaken
activities to draw the attention of member countries to
the seriousness of the problem and to come to
agreement on commitments to end violence against
women and children. We welcome and encourage that
collaborative effort.

The Government of Uganda is committed to the
implementation of United Nations Security Council
resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009),
and 1889 (2009), as well as the Goma Declaration on
Eradicating Sexual Violence and Ending Impunity in
the Great Lakes Region (2008). Uganda welcomes the
progress made in rendering operational the Team of
Experts on the Rule of Law to assist national
authorities to strengthen the rule of law in accordance
with resolution 1888 (2009).

We also welcome the inclusion of women in
peacekeeping missions in civil, military and police
functions. Ugandan women, and particularly those in
military and police forces, are currently engaged in
peacekeeping missions in the region and around the
world. We are convinced that, wherever they are based,
their presence has a positive influence and may
encourage women from local communities to report all
acts of sexual violence.

Uganda also welcomes the idea of establishing
monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements on
conflict-related sexual violence, including rape in
situations of armed conflict and post-conflict, and other
situations relevant to the implementation of resolution
1888 (2009).

We are confident that that will assist the
Council's consideration of appropriate actions,
including targeted and graduated measures levelled at
parties to armed conflict that are listed in the annexes
to the Secretary-General's annual reports on sexual
violence in conflict.

We thank the Secretary-General's Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Margot Wallstrom, for her work. We encourage her
to take advantage of the existing legal and policy
frameworks, including those in our region, to
strengthen support and partnerships to put an end to the
vice of sexual violence.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that there are no
conditions that can either justify or excuse such actions
that destroy the very essence of the human spirit of the
victim and those closest to them. We should, therefore
collectively remain resolute in dealing with sexual
violence.

