Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia would like to thank
the French presidency of the Council for convening
today's open debate on the issue of women and peace
and security. We also wish to thank the Chef de
Cabinet of the Secretary-General, Ms. Maria Luiza
Ribeiro Viotti; the Executive Director of UN-Women,
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka; the Secretary-General
of the International Organization of La Francophonie,
Ms. Michaelle Jean; and the civil society representative
from Colombia, Ms. Charo Mina-Rojas. For Bolivia,
it is encouraging that the Chamber is full of civil
society representatives.

We would also like to welcome the Ministers here
with us in this meeting, in particular the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Sweden, and to tell her that the
words of Ambassador Olof Skoog resonate beyond this
Chamber. During the Council's recent to visit to the
Sahel region, we heard inspiring words from women
leaders, who reminded us that part of their platform and
one of their tools in their fight are the resolutions that
the Council adopts, with the language we debate within
these walls.

Eighteen years have passed since the Security
Council adopted resolution 1325 (2000), which
underscores the fundamental link between respect for
gender equality and international peace and security.
Since then, the United Nations has undertaken
significant efforts and has made great strides in the
implementation of the Council's resolutions with a view
to effectively incorporating the gender perspective and
ensuring the participation ofwomen in peace processes.
However, in spite of those efforts, the implementation
of the agenda on women and peace and security
continues to pose challenges that require political
will and leadership from States, in addition to the
active participation of regional organizations and the
cooperation of the international community as a Whole.

First, it is important to have information on the
situation of women and girls in all conflict zones.
While there are generalities, each country has its
own reality and different challenges to tackle. That is
why we must have data disaggregated by gender and
other relevant criteria that allow us to systematize
information and improve upon our assessments of
strengths and weaknesses. That would make a better
approach possible, so that the mandates of United
Nations missions could address the needs of women
and girls. In that regard, we welcome the initiative of
Norway, Colombia and Namibia to develop an index on
women and peace and security.

In that vein, taking stock of the implementation of
the agenda in each country will make it possible to see
in which areas we need to strengthen the participation
of women. We must build capacities for monitoring and
assessment in order to ensure the implementation of
the agenda, with the guidance of the United Nations
and other specialized organizations, at the request of
the parties.

As we stated a few months ago in this Chamber,
we must secure a meaningful role for women in the
processes of prevention, negotiation, mediation and
resolution of conflicts and peacebuilding. The creation
of societies that promote gender equality not only
bolsters economic development, but also ensures that
peace processes are inclusive and sustainable. To that
end, we believe that encouraging the political and
economic empowerment of women is key, in addition
to ensuring access to justice and education. Moreover,
we cannot deny that the fight against impunity through
accountability for crimes of sexual violence contributes
to the healing processes necessary for sustainable peace.

Like our colleague from the United Kingdom, I will
try to address a few specific issues, related to Bolivia's
experience. Since the promulgation of the new political
State Constitution in 2009, Bolivia has developed
and implemented legislation for building an equitable
society with equal opportunities for women, while
placing emphasis on their political empowerment. The
electoral system law established parity and alternation
on the candidate lists for representative seats, which
makes Bolivia the second country in the world with
greater representation of women in parliament. In
Bolivia more than 50 per cent of elected positions are
held by women, not just in Parliament but in other
elected bodies. Furthermore, in the economic sphere,
the community-renewal agrarian reform law not only
ensures the participation of women in the healing
processes and distribution of land; it prioritizes the
right of women to own land, thereby promoting their
economic empowerment.

Those topics are closely related to inequality. Ten
years ago, when we spoke of women, especially of
indigenous women, we were speaking of poverty. That
issue is linked to inequality, not just within countries
but around the world. I believe it is worthwhile to recall
that eight men have the same wealth as 360 million
people, and that is one of the causes of conflict. In my
country, 10 years ago 38 per cent of the population was
living in abject poverty. Ten years later, that 38 per
cent has been reduced to 16 per cent. What is the key
to that success? It is, without a doubt, the recovery of
strategic resources and the State's fulfilment of its role
in wealth redistribution.

The United Nations must maintain a close
relationship with regional organizations to implement
this agenda. For example, working with the African
Union has been very important in being able to
implement the programme on women and peace and
security in the African continent and to strengthen
existing mechanisms. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the African Union's Agenda 2063
place gender equality and women's empowerment
among their primary goals.

An example that we would like to highlight is the
political leadership that Nigeria showed by establishing
anational plan ofaction on women and peace and security
in its fight against the terrorist group Boko Haram. We
emphasize that that initiative has encouraged countries
in the region to develop similar measures.

Lastly, we commend the work of the United
Nations and leadership of the Secretary-General. The
Organization has a sizeable system directed at the
global objectives of gender equality and implementation
of the agenda on women and peace and security. It is
essential that all of its agencies and offices dedicated to
this issue work in a coordinated fashion.

