Mrs. Blokar Drobic (Slovenia): I thank German
presidency for organizing this debate and the invited
speakers for their briefings and testimonies.

Slovenia aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier on behalf of the European Union and would like
to make some additional remarks in its national capacity.

We once again welcome the report of the
Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual violence
(S/2019/280). We are outraged by the persistent and
widespread occurrence of sexual violence in armed
conflict and join others in condemning these violations.

Regarding resolution 2467 (2019), adopted this
morning, we regret the fact that agreement could
not be reached on issues of crucial importance,
including providing sexual and reproductive health
services to all survivors of sexual violence in conflict.
Ensuring comprehensive assistance to all survivors
of these heinous crimes is at the heart of a survivor-
centred approach.

We must seriously increase our efforts to do
three important things: prevent such heinous crimes
from ever happening again, bring those responsible
to justice and provide victims with all the assistance
and help they need and deserve. We must do all of that
regardless of whether a situation is on the agenda of the
Security Council.

In the past decade, an important paradigm shift
has been made: conflict-related sexual violence is
itself understood as a threat to international peace and
security. It especially impedes women's participation in
peace and political processes, including post-conflict
reconstruction and reconciliation. In most cases, sexual
violence in conflict occurs where there is systemic
discrimination against women and girls. We must
therefore promote efforts to eliminate discrimination
against women and girls in law and practice.

Again, sexual violence in contemporary conflicts is
not a side effect. Rather, it is a front-line consideration,
a horrifying tactic of war, a means of repression, terror
and control used to humiliate and injure victims, their
families and their entire communities. All survivors,
regardless of their gender or age, are traumatized and
stigmatized for life. Entire generations and communities
are affected for decades to come.

Ensuring accountability and ending impunity is
of paramount importance. The primary responsibility
to protect civilians and bring perpetrators to justice
always resides with States. Ensuring accountability
remains a major challenge. In this regard, the role of
international criminal justice has been recognized, in
particular the International Criminal Court. Slovenia
supports the different international mechanisms for
investigation and prosecution of such crimes.

We also express our support forthe recommendations
of the Secretary-General in his report (S/2019/280)
to fully integrate the issue of conflict-related sexual
violence into the work of its sanctions committees
and include sexual violence as an explicit designation
criterion for sanctions as well as to include measures
to prevent conflict-related sexual Violence in security-
sector- and justice-reform initiatives.

The approach to sexual and gender-based
violence must be survivor-centred, and awareness-
rising activities must be added in parallel to victim
assistance so as to fight stigmatization of the survivors
and children born as a result of sexual violence and to
challenge negative perceptions and misunderstandings
that prevent survivors from rebuilding their lives.

Slovenia is addressing the correlation of conflict-
related sexual and gender-based violence in its second
national action plan on women, peace and security for
the period 2018-2020, adopted in November 2018. The
plan contains, inter alia, several activities relating to
prevention and accountability. In June 2018, Slovenia
also joined the Call to Action on Protection from
Gender-based Violence in Emergencies and committed
to stepping up its engagement in prevention and response
to gender-based violence. Last year, we allocated
an additional financial contribution for prevention
of sexual exploitation and abuse in the Democratic
Republic of Congo. The education and training on
women, peace and security, which were systematically
introduced throughout the Slovenian Armed Forces, are
also an important domestic achievement.

Let me conclude by once again confirming our
strong support for United Nations action against
conflict-related sexual violence. We call on all parts
of the United Nations to continue prioritizing this
important issue and further call on the Security Council
to strongly, systematically, consistently and promptly
respond to all violations in situations of armed conflict.
Neither silence nor tolerance nor impunity is an option.
This is a message that should clearly emanate from the
Security Council.

