Mr. Djedje (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank you, Madam Minister, for your
presence among us today and for presiding over this
Council meeting in such a brilliant way. My delegation
congratulates Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed and Ms. Bineta Diop, Special Envoy of the
African Union for Women, Peace and Security, for the
quality of their briefings, which have enlightened us
about women, peace and security issues in Africa, in
particular in the Lake Chad basin and Sahel regions.

We welcome the tripartite United Nations-African
Union-Sweden mission led by the Deputy Secretary-
General to the Sudan, Chad and the Niger to assess the
role of women in political decision-making and peace
processeswithaviewtopromotingtheirfullparticipation
in development efforts. That joint visit, which is in line
with the visit organized one year ago to Nigeria and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, illustrates the
validity of the strategic partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union in the area of peace and
security. Cote d'Ivoire remains convinced of the need
to work collectively to strengthen that partnership, and
welcomes the joint mission, the lessons of which will
enable the Security Council and the United Nations to
strengthen strategies and mechanisms to maximize the
benefits of women's participation in peace, security and
sustainable development processes.

Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
significant progress has been made in strengthening
the role of women in conflict prevention and resolution.
However, we must recognize that many obstacles
continue to hinder the full participation of women in
peace and post-crisis processes, especially in Africa.
Indeed, new security challenges, such as the rise of
terrorism, violent extremism, radicalization and climate
change, are having a negative impact on women's
ability to play their full role in peace and security.
The complex and multidimensional crises facing the
Sahel and Lake Chad basin regions are giving rise
to the systematic use of sexual violence as a tactic of
war, specifically by Boko Haram, and to criminal and
terrorist activities in those regions. We deeply regret
the fact that terrorist groups also use women as suicide
bombers and human shields.

In response to that alarming situation, the
Security Council adopted resolution 2349 (2017),
which integrates the three dimensions of security
and humanitarian and long-term development,
thereby addressing the root causes of the crisis,
which are poverty, underdevelopment, inequality and
environmental degradation. Our Council also intends
to contribute to the fight against the depletion of natural
resources, the lack of employment and income, as
well as issues of poor governance. My delegation also
welcomes the launch on 30 June by the United Nations of
a support plan, entitled "Sahel: Land of opportunities",
to promote sustainable peace and inclusive growth in
the Sahel region, as well as to empower women and
young people.

The stabilization of the countries of the region
certainly requires the human, technical and financial
support of the international community, but it also
requires the full involvement of the populations
concerned, in particular women, who should no longer
be considered victims, but as full participants in the
peace-building or post-conflict recovery processes.
In that regard, it is worth recalling the relevance of
resolution 1325 (2000) which, while underscoring the
need for special measures to protect women against
sexual and gender-based violence, highlights the
importance of their participation at all stages of the
peace-building process.

Like the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
Agenda 2063: The Africa We Want identifies gender
equality and the empowerment of women as priority
objectives. The goals of the joint mission are therefore
strengthened and call for, inter alia, a more inclusive
approach to the role of women in peace processes. As
stated in the framework document, the joint mission
provides an opportunity to assess the progress and
opportunities resulting from the implementation of
the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel,
which is based on the empowerment of women and
youth, cross-border cooperation, conflict prevention
and peacekeeping, inclusive economic growth, climate
action and renewable energy. My country takes this
opportunity to commend the leadership and work of the
Deputy Secretary-General and supports her efforts to
conduct a delicate mission in a context of instability
and insecurity in the Sahel.

At the subregional level, the women and peace and
security agenda receives special attention from the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS), which works closely with the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS),
in particular on promoting the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions.
In that regard, we welcome the high-level conference
on the theme "Women, violence and terrorism in
West Africa and the Sahel: Building a regional and
international response", which was held in Dakar on
10 and 11 April. The conference was organized by
UNOWAS, in partnership with ECOWAS, the Group of
Five for the Sahel, the Mano River Union and relevant
United Nations agencies. It provided an opportunity
for participants to recall the importance of building the
resilience of communities, and in particular of women,
against the spread of ideologies and networks that
promote violent extremism and terrorism.

Coordinating efforts between the United Nations
and the African Union, through the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel, as well as the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa, is
crucial in addressing the challenges of the Sahel and
Lake Chad basin region. In that regard, it is important
for the countries of the region and the international
community to ensure the protection of women, who
are most often the primary victims of conflicts. They
must therefore ensure that women participate in all
peacebuilding efforts, given that it is now unanimously
recognized that women's participation in peace
processes ensures the sustainability and inclusiveness
of those processes.

My country takes this opportunity to welcome
the establishment in June 2017 of the African Women
Leaders Network. The Network's call for action seeks
to ensure that women help stabilize the continent with
a view to achieving Agenda 2063 and the Sustainable
Development Goals by 2030. To that end, it should be
recalled that Cote d'Ivoire, which has always made the
role and future of women a priority, was the second
country in Africa to launch on 26 January, through its
Ministry of Women, Child Protection and Solidarity,
the African Women Leaders Network in Cote d'Ivoire.

The role of women in peace processes must be
encouraged and supported, in particular when women
are from crisis-affected or developing countries. To
support countries, the international community must
continue to ensure that women are increasingly involved
in conflict prevention. It must also support women's
leadership in the peace, security and development nexus.

