Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this open debate on
an issue to which Portugal attaches great importance. I
wish also to thank Under-Secretary-General Eliasson;
the Executive Director of UN-Women, Michelle
Bachelet; Under-Secretary-General Herve Ladsous;
and Ms. Bineta Diop, President of Femmes Africa
Solidarite, for their very useful briefings.

Portugal naturally aligns itself with the statement
to be made later by the observer of the European Union.

This open debate is an excellent and timely
opportunity for the Council to express its strong
support for the efforts of individual women and
women's networks in organizations that are doing so
much for peace and security from the grass-roots to the
international level. Our British colleague has already
given us some concrete examples of that growing
involvement.

Women are important, often indispensable
actors of change and development. With the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent Council
resolutions on this issue, the Council has recognized
that their active participation in political processes and
in discussions about their own countries' futures is
extremely valuable and should be mandatory.

Women undeniably play a crucial role in rebuilding
post-conflict societies and in social cohesion. It is
therefore essential, as has been mentioned, to guarantee
that women are included in peace processes from the
early phases and to ensure that their perspectives, direct
knowledge and concerns are taken into account by
international and local actors in shaping peacebuilding
efforts. It is also essential to ensure that women's
organizations and their leaders get the necessary
support and encouragement from the international
community to continue their work. The Council can and
should play an important and active role in that regard.

During the past few years in the Council, Portugal
has been working not only to support the promotion and
protection of the rights of women, but also to support
women's political participation in situations on the
agenda of the Council, be it in Libya, Somalia, South
Sudan or Afghanistan. We have also encouraged more
interaction between the Council and women mediators
who have a direct and personal experience in engaging
with women in mediation and conflict prevention.

In an Arria Formula meeting that we coorganized
with the United Kingdom, we heard very useful
testimonies from experienced mediators with direct
and personal experience in engaging women in conflict
prevention and in the ways and means to enhance
their participation in peace processes. Likewise, we
also had the opportunity to meet with several gender
advisers from United Nations peacekeeping missions
and learned from them about the extremely valuable
work that they had been doing to support the political
participation of women in countries such as Cote
d'Ivoire, the Democratic People's Republic ofthe Congo,
Timor-Leste and Haiti, as well as to implement broader
women and peace and security mandates. We believe
that the Council can only gain from organizing more
of these meetings in order to have direct information
from women and women's organizations with regard to
the prevention of conflict and post-war consolidation
and reconstruction as essential elements for the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). In that
regard, let me also underline the importance of keeping
up the practice of organizing meetings with civil society
when the Council travels on a field mission.

Another key aspect of the Council's work in
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) is its
monitoring of women's participation in political
processes in post-conflict situations. In that context,
it is important to invite Ms. Bachelet, as was done
during the past two years, to regularly brief the Council
on women's political participation and the concrete
situation on its agenda. Those briefings not only
complement the briefings that the Council receives
from other Secretariat representatives, but they also
help the Council in the implementation of the women
and peace and security mandate.

Indeed, important progress has been accomplished
in the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
the subsequent resolutions on women and peace and
security. Nevertheless, we have to recognize that
significant challenges still remain in order to ensure
the adequate representation of women and women's
groups in formal peace processes, as Mr. Ladsous
underlined, and to benefit fully from their knowledge
and experience.

The Council adopted a presidential statement
encouraging efforts to strengthen the capacities of
women's organizations to engage in conflict prevention
and mediation (S/PRST/2012/23). Portugal strongly
supports the specific efforts by Member States and
the United Nations. In that regard, we welcome
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
UN-Women's efforts to give technical support to
women's organizations at local and regional levels
to strengthen women's civil society groups. The
presidential statement also recognizes that those who
protect the human rights of women are very often
placed in situations of serious risk, and it calls for
members to address those risks. In that regard, we
pay tribute to human rights defenders who fight for
women's human rights in so many parts of the world
in extremely difficult conditions. We appeal for their
adequate protection.

Every effort must be made to promote women's
full and equal participation in electoral processes,
as candidates and as voters, and to eliminate
discriminatory or legal barriers against women's
participation. A lack of access to education, but also
the fight against violence, in particular sexual, violence
should be addressed in this context, as has been already
rightly underlined in previous statements.

In conclusion, resolution 1325 (2000) is a powerful
message to encourage women around the world in
countries at war and countries in peace to engage in
the future of their countries and in the promotion of
peace and security. Portugal remains fully committed
to that objective and engaged in enhancing action at the
national and international levels to fulfil those goals.
As was mentioned here today, we must go the extra
mile with UN-Women, the United Nations system as a
whole and with civil society. Let us do it!

