Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): We welcome the
Argentine presidency's convening of this open debate.
We thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report (S/2014/693) and its recommendations. We also
commend the work and dedication of Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka, the Executive Director of UN-Women,
and her team, and thank all the briefers today for their
valuable contributions.

More than 50 million people are currently displaced
around the globe, the worst levels we have seen since
the Second World War. Afghanistan, Colombia, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Somalia, the Central
African Republic, Iraq, Sudan and South Sudan - and
that list is not exhaustive - have all seen massive
numbers of people flee for their lives. Syria, with its
more than 6 million internally displaced persons (IDPs),
is the worst humanitarian crisis of this century. And in
the middle of Europe, forced displacements have also
peaked owing to Russia's aggression against Ukraine.

Accounting for half of those displaced, women
bear the physical and psychological brunt of conflict.
For many of them, as they provide subsistence for their
families, procure firewood and water and take care of
basic sanitary needs, every step outside the displacement
camps - and often even within the camps - is fraught
with very real physical dangers, including sexual
violence and rape and a heightened risk of sexually
transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS. Early and
forced marriages stunt the lives of many Syrian girls
living in refugee camps. The horrendous practices of
forced impregnation, human trafficking and sexual
slavery are shattering lives in areas under the control of
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.

We are yet to see the release of the Nigerian
schoolgirls kidnapped by Boko Haram. The illicit flow
of arms through porous borders and in defiance of arms
embargoes fuels violence and criminality and increases
the vulnerability of refugees and IDPs, even in refugee
camps and settlements. Women and children are the
primary victims of such illicit flows, as recalled earlier
today by Ms. Allami.

A number of important documents provide the
basis for addressing the problem of displacement. The
Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement provide
an overarching normative framework that applies
international human rights and humanitarian law to
IDPs. The Kampala Convention, the first of its kind
in the world, binds Governments to provide legal
protection for the rights and well-being of those forced
to flee inside their home countries due to conflict,
violence, other human rights abuses or due to natural
disasters. Then there is the landmark resolution 1325
(2000), whose fifteenth anniversary will be marked next
year, and its follow-up resolutions, including resolution
2122 (2013), which includes important references to
forced displacement and its effects on women and girls.

However, as our British colleague has reminded all
ofus, gaps still exist, and we need to work to close those
gaps between existing legislation and the reality on the
ground. We must continue working to improve gender
mainstreaming by providing gender-awareness training
to peacekeepers, field staff and humanitarian actors,
appointing gender advisors and developing concrete
indicators to assess the implementation of gender-
mainstreaming policies. Gender-disaggregated data is
key to better decision making in terms of addressing
the needs and concerns of displaced women, as Special
Rapporteur Beyani said earlier today.

Even basic improvements, such as supporting
on-camp provision of cooking fuel or water and
integrating women in the design, implementation and
review of distribution systems, can literally make a
difference between life and death, by reducing their
exposure to attacks. Developing leadership skills and
the capacity of displaced women is essential to enabling
their meaningful participation in decision-making
processes at the community level, within camps, in
non-camp and urban displacement settings, as well as in
the broader political, security, peace and reconciliation
processes. As the UN-Women Executive Director noted
earlier today, in part women and girls are the best
hope for sustainable development following conflict.
Existing good practices must be collected and made
readily available, including on engaging displaced
women in transitional justice processes.

Sexual violence in the context of displacement
affects those already most vulnerable. Last week
we heard a shocking account from the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Bangura, of her
recent visit to South Sudan. Such crimes will continue
unabated as long as those who commit them know they
will walk free, no matter how many victims they leave
behind.

The importance of bringing the perpetrators of
sexual crimes against displaced women and girls
to account under national and international law is
paramount. The systematic collection of accurate,
reliable and objective information by commissions of
inquiry, fact-finding and human rights missions on the
crimes committed against displaced women and girls is
key to pursuing justice.

We note the significant advancement in
international law made by the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), which includes
sexual violence in the definition of crimes, in particular
as a crime against humanity. The ICC continues to be
an important mechanism in combating sexual violence
in conflict and should be used vigorously to pursue
accountability.

Greater interactions between the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Sanctions
Committees, as well as the regular inclusion of violence
against displaced women and girls, including sexual
violence, as a sanctions-designation criterion would
facilitate tackling impunity for such crimes.

Systematic and delicate work needs to be done
on the ground to address the social stigma associated
with such crimes and to create an environment in
which victims of sexual Violence will feel safe to
speak out. Providing gender-sensitive training to local
police, military forces and judiciary personnel, as well
as health care personnel and social workers, in the
particular context of displacement, is thus essential.
The recruitment and training of female law and order
officials and judges, and providing the necessary social
and psychological support mechanisms for displaced
women and girls should be further advanced.

On the peacekeeping and field staff side,
preventative measures must be part and parcel of
predeployment training. A zero-tolerance policy
regarding sexual Violence and abuse must be firmly
implemented. It is unthinkable that women and girls
could suffer sexual abuse from those who are there to
protect them. The recent allegations against personnel
of the African Union Mission in Somalia are deeply
troubling and must be properly investigated. We
welcome the fact that the African Union has established
a panel to this effect.

Finally, while discussing the situation of displaced
women, we should also bear in mind non-conflict
related displacement caused by natural disasters and
climate change. We need to closely examine the gender
dimensions of such displacement in order to identify
specific vulnerabilities and good practices in gender-
sensitive protection, assistance, adaptation, mitigation,
relocation and reconstruction processes.

