Mr. Le Roy (spoke in French): It is a great
honour for me as well to address the Council to review
the progress made in the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000). It is no exaggeration
to say that, in the eight years since its adoption,
resolution 1325 (2000) has changed the way we
manage peacekeeping operations. From our planning
processes to the principles guiding development,
training, staffing and operational priority-setting, we
are ensuring that gender issues within those areas are
accorded due consideration and priority. The resolution
has, moreover, galvanized women in post-conflict
countries to demand greater accountability from us to
respond to gender issues during post-conflict
transitions.

Whether in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in Kosovo or in the Cote d'Ivoire, women have
sought to establish regular channels of communication
with the leadership of our missions. For our part, we
have sought to standardize that practice of regular
consultations between women's groups and mission
leadership through a recently-issued checklist for
senior managers, which underlines their personal
responsibility for implementing resolution 1325
(2000). Indeed, we as peacekeepers understand all too
clearly that our efforts to avoid conflict relapses in
fragile post-conflict countries can only succeed if we
ensure that all members of society have an equal stake
in safeguarding the peace dividend.

The theme of this year's open debate, "Women's
equal participation and full involvement in all efforts
for the maintenance and promotion of peace and
security" serves as an important reminder of one of the
core principles that underlines resolution 1325 (2000),
namely, that women in post-conflict countries are not
merely victims of war, but agents of change with
immense contributions to make to establishing policy
priorities. In the peacekeeping context, the clearest
entry points to support women's participation in
decision-making are of course through the political
process and through the reform of security institutions.

(spoke in English)

In recent years, we have supported the
participation of women in elections in a number of
countries including Afghanistan, Burundi, Haiti,
Liberia and Nepal. In most cases, we have facilitated
an unprecedented registration of female voters. We
have also seen significant progress in the election of
women to political office, both local and national,
particularly in situations where we have worked with
political parties and national authorities to adopt
constitutional quota guarantees for women, such as in
Afghanistan, Burundi and Nepal.

Our experience through those processes has
taught us that it is not enough to have women voting or
being elected to office. The bigger challenge is
ensuring that women in elected offices stay in those
positions and that they help implement gender-
sensitive policies. In Timor-Leste, for example, four
women parliamentarians quit within three months of
their election to office in 2002. To create an enabling
environment for women's political participation, we
must therefore first invest in providing technical
support to those who are unfamiliar with constitution-
making and with the working of formal political
procedures and legislative processes. That is as true
today for the Democratic Republic of the Congo as it is
for Nepal.
08-57476

Secondly, we must support networking platforms
and cross-party caucuses for women in political office
to enable them to strengthen their power base in
advocating for gender-sensitive laws. In Timor-Leste,
for example, the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste and the United Nations Development
Fund for Women (UNIFEM) are supporting cross-party
representation of women to fight discriminatory
practices against women in politics.

Thirdly, we must provide training support to
women politicians as well as their male counterparts to
ensure that they promote legislation on issues of direct
concern to women. In the lead-up to elections in
Burundi in 2005, our gender unit facilitated strategic
planning sessions between some women running for
electoral office and peacekeeping personnel from rule
of law and human rights components in order to
support them in setting priorities for addressing issues
of real concern to women at the grass-roots levels.

Fourthly, our role as standard-setters requires
that, in all negotiations with national authorities, we
underline the importance of women's participation. In
Darfur, continued appeals by the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) for
women's participation in the peace process have
defined a space for women to express their views and
encouraged rebel groups and the Government to have
women in their negotiating teams. Exercising our
standard-setting role also requires that we have more
women in senior positions both within the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and the
Department of Field Support and at the field level in
peacekeeping missions.

We have made some modest progress in that
regard over the past year. As the Council knows, at the
Headquarters level, the appointment of Ms. Susan
Malcorra to the post of Under-Secretary-General for
Field Support has enabled us to maintain gender
balance at the highest level of decision-making in
peacekeeping. At the D-2 level, three new women have
been appointed in the past year: Ms. Donna Maxfield,
as Chief of Staff; Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, as Director of
the Policy, Evaluation and Training Division; and
Ms. Margaret Carey, as Director of the Africa Division.
Our first female Deputy Police Adviser, Ms. Anne-
Marie Orler, has also recently been appointed to the
Police Division. At the field level, we have also
appointed two women as Deputy Special
Representatives in the past year: Ms. Rima Salah, to

the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad; and Ms. Leila Zerrougui, to the
United Nations Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. That brings to six the current number of
women Special Representatives and Deputy Special
Representatives in our peacekeeping missions.

Our experience in peacekeeping has also
underlined the importance of supporting women's
leadership aspirations in situations where we have a
mandate to support security sector reform. For
example, the percentage of women recruited to the
police sector in such missions has been higher than the
global average, which is presently under 10 per cent.
Yet in Timor-Leste, Sierra Leone, Liberia and Kosovo,
the percentage of women in the police force averages
between 12 and 20 per cent.

The lessons from this are clear. First, targeted
outreach to enhance the recruitment of women to the
security sector and the use of special measures to offset
women's qualification gaps, as in Liberia, have proven
successful. Secondly, increased representation of
women in the police can facilitate greater attention and
responses to sexual and gender-based violence in the
post-conflict period. In the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, for example, the commendable work of Major
Honorine, a female police officer who heads a women
and children protection unit in South Kivu, is greatly
contributing to efforts to combat sexual violence
against women and girls. Similarly, in Liberia, we have
observed that increased recruitment of women to the
police sector is facilitating more serious attention to
sexual violence crimes and helping to change the
attitude of male officers to dealing with such crimes.

Both of these examples demonstrate how the
presence of women in the police can enable better
responses to gender-specific crimes in post-conflict
environments. The presence of women in Darfur as
Chief of Security and as Deputy Commissioner in
UNAMID is also sending a positive signal to local
women and State authorities about women's capacity to
successfully exercise leadership in non-traditional
professions.

Thirdly, just as in the political arena, the retention
of women within security institutions requires
investment in building support networks to enable
them to combat discrimination, sexual harassment and
marginalization within low-ranking jobs. In working to
promote gender-sensitive policing practices, DPKO has
recently issued gender guidelines to enable United
Nations police in peacekeeping missions to address
gender concerns in the advisory, mentoring and
training support they provide to local police in
post-conflict countries. We have also recently joined
forces with UNIFEM. and United Nations Action
against Sexual Violence in Conflict to develop
guidance to better assist military peacekeepers in
protecting women and girls from sexual violence.

However, increasing the number of uniformed
peacekeeping personnel to better respond to
operational priorities remains a challenge. To reverse
the trend, we need troop- and police-contributing
countries to nominate greater numbers of women,
particularly as military observers and police officers.
That will ensure that we reach out better to women in
the local population in our areas of operation. It would
further enable us to respond more effectively to
gender-related challenges, such as sexual violence
crimes. Women peacekeepers also serve as role models
and standard-setters for local women. We have seen
evidence of that across all our missions.

We count on the cooperation of Member States to
enable us to lead by example. It is an unfortunate fact
that we have yet to appoint a woman to a force
commander or deputy force commander position in any
peacekeeping mission. I would like to challenge
Member States to nominate women to future senior
military appointments in our missions and I will
proudly report on that next year.

(spoke in French)

Another important lesson we have learned to date
is that our strategy for advancing women's leadership
in peace processes must incorporate support for
women's civil society organizations. Women in civil
society can critically help women who are elected to
political office to more effectively advance women's
rights in post-conflict situations. In the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, for example, the adoption of a
law on sexual violence in 2006 was facilitated in a
large part through strategic partnerships between
women parliamentarians and women in civil society. In
Liberia, women in civil society have been key allies in
awareness-raising and outreach activities aimed at
recruiting more women to the Liberian National Police.
In conclusion, through the efforts carried out in
the development of policy and of guidance and training
norms, we have sought to better assist peacekeeping

missions in the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). Over the coming year, we will make it a
priority to monitor the effective implementation of all
the guidelines on gender and peacekeeping that we
have issued, while also continuing to revise our
policies to take into account the lessons learned from
our experience on the ground.

Finally, I would like to reiterate the full
commitment of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations to cooperating with the Council as it
oversees the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
during the coming year. I strongly urge the Council to
take women's participation and contributions to peace
processes into account when it decides upon the
mandates of peacekeeping missions, undertakes field
visits, requests briefings from the leadership of
peacekeeping missions, and reviews periodic reports
from our missions. The commitment of Members will
allow for enhanced opportunities for the exchange of
views beyond this single annual gathering.

