The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Murabit for her briefing.

It is my understanding that the Council is now ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2015/774, which contains the text ofa draft
resolution submitted by Albania, Algeria, Andorra,
Angola, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, the Congo,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Denmark, the Dominican Republic, Egypt, Equatorial
Guinea, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Monaco, Morocco, Namibia,
the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Peru,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Senegal, Serbia,
Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Thailand, Tunisia, Ukraine, the United
Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, the United States of America,
Uruguay and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.

I shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show ofhands.

Infavour:
Angola, Chad, Chile, China, France, Jordan,
Lithuania, Malaysia, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Russian Federation, Spain, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
ofAmerica and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)

The President (spoke in Spanish): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted, unanimously, as resolution

2242 (2015).

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
President of the Government of Spain.

Gender inequality is a threat to international peace
and security. That is one of the main conclusions
reached in the work on the issue of women and peace
and security that led to resolution 1325 (2000). I would
like to add that such inequality is an injustice and is
immoral and a hindrance to the progress of humankind.
Resolution 2242 (2015), which we have just adopted, is
the outcome of the collective efforts of States Members
of the United Nations and civil society. We are
establishing a renewed, solid and ambitious basis for
the upcoming 15 years with regard to the women and
peace and security agenda. I would like to highlight the
dedication and enthusiasm that everyone has shown in
this undertaking, and I wish to highlight the leadership
shown by the Secretary-General and express my
gratitude to the United Kingdom, the pen-holder with
whom we have worked in perfect harmony.

I would also like to thank the Executive Director
of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality
and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) and
representatives of civil society for their contributions
during the opening of this debate. Their testimonies
have given us the inspiration for this meeting.

Achieving peace, combatting terrorism and
developing disarmament processes has a greater chance
of being successful if there is growing participation by
women. We are pursuing a dual objective with resolution
2242 (2015). First, we are seeking to enhance the
protection of women and girls in situations of conflict.
We must spare no effort in combating sexual violence,
which is used as a weapon of war and terror. Very often,
in conflicts, it is more dangerous to be a woman than to
be a soldier. Secondly, we are seeking to substantially
increase the role played by women in areas ranging from
conflict prevention to peacebuilding. Experience has
taught us that it is vital to bridge the gaps between what
is approved here and what takes place on the ground.
Women are key to preserving and building peace.
Their contributions are vital in response to the folly of
conflicts. In places such as Colombia, the Philippines,
Central America, Liberia, Nigeria, Afghanistan and so
many others, women present an example of dignity and
courage.

Spain has a praiseworthy past in this area. That
reflects our total commitment to equality between
women and men. At home, we have approved a strategic
plan for equal opportunities and a national strategy
for the eradication of violence against women. We
have a national action plan for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), and we are promoting a gender
focus in peacekeeping missions. Spanish cooperation
also has specific guidelines for establishing a strategic
relationship with UN-Women and the United Nations
Population Fund. Nonetheless, our collective effort with
regard to the women and peace and security agenda
must be renewed and strengthened, and we commit to
do the following.

We will update our national action plan, and we
will approve periodic follow-up reports, which will be
submitted to our Parliament. We will establish a national
focal point and create an international network of focal
points. We will involve civil society in designing and
providing follow-up to our actions. We will enhance
training on gender equality for members of the armed
forces and the state security forces, particularly those
who are deployed on international missions. We will
continue to promote the participation of female soldiers
in peacekeeping operations and ensure that women are
present in mediation teams. We will continue to strictly
implement the zero-tolerance policy with regard to
incidents of sexual violence involving members of
Spanish civilian and military missions abroad. We will
also increase the percentage of our official development
assistance earmarked for women and peace and security.
We will contribute to funding the Gender Unit within
the Department of Political Affairs of the Secretariat in
2016. In addition, in 2016, we will make a contribution
of€l million to the new Global Acceleration Instrument
for Women, Peace and Security and Humanitarian
Action and the multi-agency Fund for Action against
Sexual Violence in Conflict.

We must establish certainty and reasons for hope
to replace uncertainty and unease. The enhanced
protection of women and girls in situations of conflict
and a greater role for women in preventing conflict and
fostering peacebuilding are necessary for building a
fairer, more peaceful and united world. Resolution 2242
(2015) serves as a guide and calls us to act. I invite
all gathered here today to roll up our sleeves and work
together.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Security Council.


