Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): Allow me first to express
my thanks to you, Sir, for convening this debate on a
topic that my delegation is particularly pleased to see
addressed. We join previous speakers in thanking the
Deputy Secretary-General and Under-Secretaries-
General Bachelet and Ladsous and Ms. Bineta Diop for
their statements.

All of the United Nations world conferences
on women have recognized the linkages among
gender equality, development and peace. Today, it is
heartening to observe how much the issue has gained
in terms of visibility and traction. It is now taken up
in various intergovernmental bodies, including the
Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Peacebuilding Commission. Member States and civil
society organizations at the national and global levels
are demonstrating their commitment to tackle the
challenge through concrete action.

Despite the measures taken to prevent and address
violence against women, previous debates in the
Council and reports from the field have made it clear
that it persists. Efforts to address violence against
women are often neither comprehensive, consistent nor
sustained, and insufficient coordination persists among
relevant actors.

Knowledge regarding the scope, prevalence, impact
and cost ofviolence against women remains inadequate.
Greater efforts are needed to collect more information
and data of better quality on such violence. That would
support policymakers in their efforts to design effective
legislative and policy reforms, ensure the adequate
provision of targeted and effective services, monitor
trends and progress in addressing and eliminating
violence against women, and assess the impact of the
measures taken.

In its presidential statement of last month
(S/PRST/2012/23), the Council underlined the primary
role of Governments in enhancing women's participation
in the prevention and resolution of conflict in areas
affected by armed conflict. As noted by the Secretary-
General, many peace processes now regularly include
consultations with women's peace groups, and in
many post-conflict countries, the number of women in
Government has increased.

However, women have, by and large, remained
excluded, especially in efforts to find workable
solutions to conflict. In that regard, one of the most
important tasks should be to increase the presence of
women in decision-making processes. The inclusion of
women at all stages of the peace process will ensure
a more lasting and representative settlement. As such,
we should further promote their participation and
recognize the important contributions that women have
made in that regard.

This open debate serves as an opportunity
to address the importance of women's political
participation, especially in regions and countries
affected by conflict. In that context, the efforts of
the European Union (EU) to launch the second phase
of its civil society programme, entitled "European
Partnership for the Peaceful Settlement of the Conflict
over Nagorno-Karabakh", may also prove useful in
promoting a dynamic dialogue among a broad range
of policymakers, media and civil society on all sides
of the conflict. It also supports the wider participation
of conflict-affected people, including women, in peace
processes.

As a newly elected member of the International
Organization of la Francophonie, we would also like to
welcome the May 2012 agreement between UN-Women
and the International Organization of la Francophonie,
which will further strengthen and reinforce gender-
responsive policies and actions among Member States.

In conclusion, let me mention that Armenia
recognizes and welcomes the key role and critical
efforts of the Security Council in preventing violence
and combating impunity in conflict and post-conflict
situations. We will work closely with the United Nations,
civil society and the international organizations and
institutions concerned to expand and implement the
agenda of resolution 1325 (2000) to better the situation
of women around the world.

