Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Let me,
at the outset, congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
convening of this open debate on women and peace
and security. We express our appreciation for the
Secretary-General's report (S/2009/465) and to
Ms. Rachel Mayanja, the Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on Gender Issues and Advancement
of Women, and Ms. Ines Alberdi, the Executive
Director of the United Nations Development Fund for
Women, for their important presentations today.

This meeting is being held almost ten years after
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) on women and
peace and security, to evaluate what has been achieved
so far regarding the concrete and legal protection of
women in armed conflicts. This requires of us an
affirmation that, despite the light shed in the resolution
on the suffering of women in armed conflict and the
resolution's role in strengthening international
cooperation, there are still many challenges that we
need to overcome to realize the full implementation of
its provisions.

In particular, there is a lack of requisite
information, data and legislation, which are either
missing or not made use of during armed conflicts.
This sometimes leads to impunity for the perpetrators
of crimes against women. Practical, legislative and
judicial efforts must be strengthened to enhance
women's opportunities to exercise their right to live in
peace and security, within a comprehensive range of
policies that achieve equality in rights and duties
among all communities and subsequently lead to
achieving full social and economic development in all
spheres.

Here we have to underline the complementarity
between the pillars of development, peace and security
outlined in the Millennium Declaration. Providing
security for women means strengthening United
Nations capacities in the field of dispute settlement.
This is not confined to dispute management but also
requires focusing on the enhancement of the
socio-economic development of women in a way that
will foster their ability to deal with security challenges.

That is why the adoption of resolution 1888
(2009), which calls for the appointment of a special
representative of the Secretary-General on sexual
violence against women in armed conflict, was a step
in the right direction. We had hoped, however, that his
or her mandate would have included all forms of
violence perpetrated against women in situations of
armed conflict, and not be limited only to sexual
violence while excluding other grave violations such as
killing, maiming and torture.

However, there is no doubt that expanding the
mandate of peacekeeping operations to include the
protection of women from sexual violence has
contributed to the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). Empowering women and increasing their
participation in decision-making processes, including
in designing and implementing strategies, would
contribute effectively to the full implementation of the
resolution. The same applies to the activities of the
Peacebuilding Commission and United Nations
agencies, programmes and funds, which should include
the effective participation of the international
community, civil society and relevant non-
governmental organizations to enhance the role of
Governments and communities in protecting women
and providing them with better services to help them
overcome challenges.

In turn, that requires coordination between the
new special representative of the Secretary-General on
sexual violence against women in armed conflict and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict. There is a great need to
achieve synergy and coordination between those two
high-level United Nations officials, in particular
because they are concerned with the safety of two
important members of the family, namely, women and
children. It should be borne in mind, however, that the
mandate of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict is broader
and more inclusive, as it is not limited to addressing
sexual violence.

In that regard, it is of crucial importance that we
underline the role of education, culture and
empowerment in improving the status of women in
peace as well as armed conflict situations. All schools
must be protected from deliberate bombardment - not
only in places mentioned in the report of the Secretary-
General, such as the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Afghanistan and Pakistan, but also in the
occupied Palestinian territories, where Israel bombed
schools in Gaza. Such actions must be condemned and
investigated as inhuman assaults against peace and
security.

In line with its historical role, Egypt has been
eager to assume its responsibilities in strengthening
regional cooperation among States in the Arab region
and countries of the African continent. The First Lady
of Egypt is leading that campaign through the Suzanne
Mubarak Women's International Peace Movement,
which promotes international and regional awareness
of the gravity of the issue. Its work includes the
convening of numerous meetings and regional
seminars, in cooperation with United Nations
programmes and funds, to enhance the capabilities of
States in designing and implementing national action
plans. Those plans should include the active
participation of women's peace organizations focusing
on youth and the culture of peace. The goal is to
effectively implement resolution 1325 (2000) while
paying particular attention to issues related to the
protection of women and children in conflict situations
by, among other things, promoting international efforts
to combat the phenomenon of human trafficking and
strengthening the effective participation of women in
peacebuilding, peacekeeping and post-conflict
reconstruction in a way that protects their right to live
in peace and provides them with the necessary security
to help them assume their role in developing their
societies while guaranteeing a better future for new
generations.

