Mr. De Klerk (Netherlands): Let me express our
sincere appreciation to the United Kingdom for
marking this first anniversary of the adoption by the
Council of resolution 1820 (2008), on sexual violence
in conflict, by holding an open debate in which the

United Nations membership has the opportunity to
address a subject which deserves the full attention of
all States Members of the United Nations.

I would first like to align myself with the
statement made earlier by the representative of Sweden
on behalf of the European Union.

The Netherlands applauded the unanimous
adoption of resolution 1820 (2008) by the Council last
year. During that open debate (see S/PV.5916), I
expressed our hope that a report of the Secretary-
General would initiate a process to ensure adequate
follow-up by the Council and would address ways to
improve coordination of United Nations activities on
the ground. I also emphasized the importance of
finding ways to monitor the actions taken by parties to
a conflict to fulfil their responsibilities.

One year after the adoption of resolution 1820
(2008) and almost nine years after the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), we have to conclude that we
need to intensify our efforts to end sexual violence by
ensuring real, concrete follow-up to these resolutions.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2009/362)
rightly states that it is up to Member States, the United
Nations system and civil society to rise to the
challenge. After finalizing a national action plan on
resolution 1325 (2000) one and a half years ago, the
Dutch Ministries for Foreign Affairs, Defence and the
Interior and 15 civil society organizations are working,
nationally and internationally, to achieve our common
goals, such as ensuring that a gender perspective is
well integrated in the work of the armed forces,
improving access to justice for victims of sexual
violence, creating zero-tolerance communities and
increasing the active role of women in State-building
in countries such as Afghanistan, Burundi, the Sudan
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

We commend the important work of United
Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict in
the field and recognize the ongoing efforts of the
United Nations system as a whole to improve
coordination of activities on the ground. However,
there is a need to enhance coordination, whether it be
in the field of the rule of law, the provision of
assistance to survivors of sexual violence or the
collection of accurate data. While we are fully aware of
the challenges to data collection and reporting in the
midst of fragile and often volatile post-conflict and
conflict situations, we consider the collection of
accurate information in a safe, confidential
environment very important, in order to ensure an
adequate and coherent response of States and the
United Nations system. In this respect, I also would
like to underline the important role that civil society
organizations play in the field and the need to involve
them in the work of States and the United Nations
system.

Let me highlight some concrete steps which we
consider crucial to ensuring follow-up to the
commitments of Security Council resolution 1820
(2008). First, the Netherlands would like to underline
the responsibility of all parties to a conflict, including
State agents, to protect civilians in accordance with
international, humanitarian and human rights law. This
implies commitment and action from civilian and
military leaders to use their authority to prevent sexual
crimes and to report and punish all perpetrators who
commit these crimes. In this context, we consider the
vetting of armed and security forces, joint patrols to
protect civilians, a duty to investigate for commanders,
and enforceable codes of conducts to be measures that
could significantly strengthen prevention policies.

Secondly, we welcome the efforts of the United
Nations system to ensure that peace negotiations and
agreements contribute to preventing and responding to
sexual Violence. We would strongly encourage
increasing efforts in this regard. We also would like to
stress the role the Council and the Secretariat can play
in ensuring the explicit integration of commitments
made in resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008) into
the mandates of United Nations appointed mediators,
special envoys and special representatives, and in
monitoring the implementation of these commitments.

Let me now briefly address some of the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General's
report.

We welcome the recommendation that the
Council establish a commission of inquiry to
investigate and report on violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law. We also welcome
the recommendation to ensure that the Security
Council Expert Group on the Protection of Civilians
and the sanctions Committees be duly mandated to
address sexual violence.

In this respect, we consider the recent adoption of
resolution 1882 (2009) to be a crucial step forward, as
it ensures that the killing and maiming of children and
rape and other sexual violence perpetrated against
children in situations of armed conflict, are integrated
into the monitoring activities of the Councils' Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict.

In addition, we look forward to receiving the
Secretary-General's proposal for an appropriate
mechanism or procedure to consider and act on
information concerning measures taken by parties to
armed conflict to comply with their obligations and to
prosecute perpetrators of sexual violence.

Finally, we take note of the Secretary-General's
consideration of the advisability of the appointment of
a senior person with responsibility to attend to the
prevention of and response to sexual violence across
the United Nations system. Indeed, there is a need for
structural attention on this issue. The prevention of and
response to sexual violence should be an integral part
of peacekeeping and peacebuilding. In this respect, we
would like to underline the importance of a positive
decision by Member States in September to establish a
strong, coordinated and coherent United Nations
gender entity headed by an under-secretary-general.

Let me conclude by calling upon all Security
Council members to adopt a strong, action-oriented
resolution that will contribute to a coordinated,
systematic and coherent international response to these
heinous crimes.

