Ms. Kadare (Albania) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank the French presidency for convening
today's open debate on such an important subject.

(spoke in English)

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report and recommendations (S/2017/861), and the
Executive Director of UN-Women and the Secretary
General of the International Organization of La
Francophonie for their briefings, as well as Ms. Mina-
Rojas for the reality check that she brought to the
Chamber from the real world.

Albania aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union, and I want
to add the following remarks in my national capacity.

We now have accumulating evidence that
achieving gender equality and empowering women
contribute to the success of peace talks and the
achievement of sustainable peace, accelerate economic
recovery, improve humanitarian assistance, help
counter violent extremism and prevent human rights
violations. There has been genuine progress since
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), and Member
States are progressively integrating their principles and
obligations into their national legal frameworks.

However, the implementation of the normative
framework is lagging behind. Despite the international
community's commitment, the meaningful inclusion of
women in preventing conflicts and negotiating peace
processes is still inadequate. Women continue to be
sidelined during peace negotiations, and even when
they are present it is always the men who decide when
and how to make peace. We Member States should
strengthen our resolve to fully implement the women
and peace and security agenda in order to effect real
change on the ground.

Albania has made significant progress in
empowering women and achieving gender equality.
Today women in Albania constitute 28 per cent of
Parliament and 50 per cent of the Council of Ministers.
Although we have not yet adopted a national action
plan for resolution 1325 (2000), gender is mainstreamed
across the security sector under the umbrella of our
national strategy on gender equality and fight against
domestic violence. We have also integrated the
objectives of resolution 1325 (2000) into our strategies
for human-resources management in the armed forces
and for public order in Albania's State police.

As a result, women's participation in the armed
forces has increased, and today 17 per cent of our
military personnel are women. Albania's current
Minister ofDefence is a woman, as was her predecessor.
In addition, policies and regulations have been
developed with a view to facilitating the promotion of
women in their careers and through the ranks. The State
police has instituted a temporary 50 per cent quota for
women in their recruitment policy in order to accelerate
the increase in women's representation. Women now
represent 14 per cent of the State police, while specific
training programmes have been introduced to promote
them in operational command roles.

We are currently drafting our national action plan
with the support of our Dutch partners, UN-Women,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and the European Union delegation. We are
making sure that the drafting process brings together
not only the relevant Government stakeholders, but
also civil society and women's groups, as that is the
best way to increase ownership and political will for its
future implementation. Regional action plans also play
an important role in promoting peace and security. In
that context, Albania has pledged its full support to the
Italian initiative of creating a Mediterranean women
mediators network, which is a concrete mechanism
that aims to prevent and mitigate conflict through the
increased participation of women in peace processes.

Finally we encourage the United Nations system to
ensure that gender perspectives are integrated across all
its activities. Albania strongly supports the Secretary-
General's efforts and personal commitment to advance
gender equality and women's empowerment. I shall
conclude by quoting his wise words: "Our world needs
more women leaders. And our world needs more men
standing up for gender equality."

