Ms. Kafanabo (United Republic of Tanzania):
My delegation is pleased to participate in this open
debate to mark the fourth anniversary of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace and
security. Allow me at the outset to thank the presenters
for sharing with us information, as well as their views
and experiences on the implementation of the
resolution.

This landmark resolution has provided a
mechanism for the protection of the rights of women in
conflict situations, as well as ensuring their
participation at all stages and levels of peace processes.
As we celebrate the fourth year since the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), we need to ensure the
sustainability of the achievements registered so far and
to put more effort into addressing the challenges we
have encountered or are expecting to encounter as we
advance further in its implementation.

In that regard, we welcome the report of the
Secretary-General on women, peace and security. The
report contains insightful information and provides
recommendations that should be taken seriously by all
Member States. We also welcome the report of the
United Nations Development Fund for Women entitled,
"Getting It Right, Doing It Right: Gender and
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration",
which includes case studies from the field providing
more insights into the situation at hand.

We note with concern that, although significant
achievements have been recorded in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), there are
still major gaps and challenges in all areas. The failure
to provide adequate protection to women during
conflict, as well as in peacekeeping situations, is a
matter of serious concern and merits our concerted
efforts to address the situation. We thus urge the close
cooperation of the United Nations system and other
regional organizations. In the case of Africa,
collaboration with the Africa Union and its new organs
is necessary. It should be noted, however, that
collaboration with regional organizations will require
the capacity-building of those organizations in terms of
technical, human and financial resources.

Implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) will
also require raising the awareness of the conflicting
factions and all the players involved in peace processes
to enable them to understand the provisions of the text
and thus to build consensus on its implementation
requirements. Here we also need to build the capacity
of local communities, including women's groups, to
explain the terms of the resolution in order for them to
advocate on its behalf.

One challenge before us is how to achieve the
effective participation of women at all levels and
stages of peace processes. We urge that the role of
women in these processes should be built into peace
agreements from the very beginning and urge Member
States to increase the number of women participating
in police forces and the military and to increase the
number of women in civilian decision-making
positions. In this regard, we applaud the Secretary-
General's efforts to increase the number of women and
to mainstream gender in peacekeeping operations and
we request continued efforts in that area.

We would like to echo the observation of
UNIFEM. that without women's equal participation and
full involvement in peace-building, neither justice nor
development will be possible in a war-torn society's
transition to peace.

In recognition of women's participation, the
Great Lakes peace process has provided women with a
space in which to discuss their contributions, first
through national meetings in which a large number of
national stakeholders were involved and later at a
regional meeting. The recently concluded regional
meeting in Kigali, Rwanda, has produced a declaration
that will be read to the heads of State when they
convene their meeting in Tanzania in November. We
wish to commend UNIFEM's role in facilitating the
meetings in this endeavour.

When we discuss women, peace and security, we
cannot leave out the impact of HIV/AIDS on women in
conflict situations and in peacekeeping processes. The
disease is claiming the larger part of the productive
sector of our population. This will have adverse effects
on the growth and stability of African economies and
society. HIV/AIDS has impacted conflict situations and
peacekeeping. It has been documented that HIV
infection rates are higher in African armies than in the
rest of the society. Women are therefore vulnerable to
infection through acts of sexual and gender violence
perpetuated against them by the enemy armies, the
national armies and some unethical peacekeepers.

HIV/AIDS may also affect peacekeeping efforts,
as armies may not be able to deploy whole contingents
to peacekeeping missions, thus depriving women of the
required protection. The peacekeepers are also prone to
spreading AIDS in areas where they are deployed and
when they return to their home countries. They are also
apt to be infected by the local population. In all of
those situations, women bear the brunt of the
consequences. It is thus necessary to ensure that
peacekeeping efforts also take into consideration the
fight against HIV/AIDS.

Finally, allow me to reaffirm the commitment of
the Government of the United Republic of Tanzania in
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

