Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): On behalf of the
Republic of Maldives, let me thank the Nigerian
presidency for convening this important debate on
women and peace and security on the eleventh
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report on women and peace and security
(S/20ll/598*). I welcome the remarks this morning by
Ms. Michelle Bachelet, Executive Director of
UN-Women; His Excellency Mr. Lazarous Kapambwe,
President of the Economic and Social Council; and
Ms. Orzala Ashraf Nemat of the NGO Working Group
on Women, Peace and Security, on this important issue.

Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), we
have seen the emergence of a host of other resolutions
focused on ending sexual violence in conflict zones,
calling for greater accountability and the participation
of women. During periods of conflict, women and
children are the first to be affected and are often
targeted, especially with sexual violence. With that in
mind, the Maldives emphasizes the need to monitor the
situation and actions of international security forces in
zones of conflict, such as Afghanistan, Darfur and
Haiti. The Maldives is especially concerned by
allegations of sexual violence by United Nations
peacekeepers in Haiti and Cote d'Ivoire.

Maldives has expressed support for Libya's
National Transitional Council. With its current
transition from conflict to creating a stable
Government, we urge the National Transitional Council
to stay mindful of the specific needs of women and its
obligations towards them. That includes everything
from disarmament and reconciliation to women's
participation and representation. The path towards
democracy is never easy, and women are often the first
to be forgotten.

Today, we know that the empowerment of women
leads to more stable nations with greater social
harmony, economic prosperity and political tolerance.
In order to promote international security, the Maldives
suggests that we move beyond the framework that
limits that discussion to conflict zones. The
empowerment of women and democratic development,
which leads to moderation and peace, enjoy a
symbiotic relationship whereby any sincere efforts
towards one leads to the other.

In the Maldives, through the democratic
movement we began the process of empowering our
population and reaffirming the rights of women. As the
movement took hold, the former Administration was
compelled to make concrete efforts to address national
concerns, and allowed for a national survey on the
abuse of women to be conducted. The results showed
that one in three women in Maldives, irrespective of
class or geography, is abused over the course of their
lifetime. In addition to that, women are becoming
increasingly more isolated through the adoption of
conservative Islamic interpretations and their
participation in the social, economic and political life
of the country is diminishing.

It was democracy that turned the tide of abuse in
the Maldives. Government-led efforts to address issues
related to women resulted in the establishment of call
centres and protective services. Civil society
participation and its advocacy in such efforts have also
been instrumental. In addition, the current Government
has taken steps towards training policemen and
policewomen to respond effectively to domestic
violence and abuse, while encouraging a greater
participation of women in political life.

The President of the Maldives went so far as to
endorse all the female candidates for our recent local
elections, regardless of party affiliation. We are also
proud to note that three of the 12 Cabinet ministers are
women. A Maldivian woman was also elected to the
United Nations Subcommittee on Prevention of
Torture. For the first time, the Secretary-General of the
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation is a
woman, who happens to hail from the Maldives.

By involving women in social, economic and
political life, we are able to create stable nations that
foster moderation, countering Islamic conservatism. A
universal truth about radicalism is the exclusion and
isolation of women. If we are to change the dynamics
of security in the world and to ensure greater global
stability, the only way forward is through ensuring the
participation and active engagement of women without
restrictive social norms.

The Maldives sincerely hopes that members of
the Security Council consider that new paradigm and
its implications for global security.

