Mr. Leroy (Belgium) (spoke in French): Belgium
fully associates itself with the statement made by the
representative of Sweden on behalf of the European
Union and thanks the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2009/362) on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1820 (2008).

A year ago, the Security Council took an
important step in fighting sexual violence by adopting
resolution 1820 (2008). Belgium believes that, today, it
is urgent to take our efforts to the next level. The
situation on the ground seems to be far from
improving, and the international community's
interventions are still too few and far between.
Our goal should be to act proactively rather than
to react after the fact, when it is already too late for the
tens of thousands of women and children victims of
these crimes. To that end, we must, as a matter of
priority, put in place a comprehensive plan of action

that aims not only at ending this intolerable violence
when it takes place, but also and above all at
strengthening once and for all the capacity of States to
prevent such violence in the future. Only the
strengthening of national capacities can enable States
to shoulder their own responsibility to prevent such
crimes.

In this respect, the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo should serve as a warning and
an example. While today we can talk about a genuine
human disaster in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and in particular in the region of the Kivus, the
recent adoption by the United Nations of a
comprehensive strategy to combat sexual violence in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo represents a
glimmer of hope for the future. Belgium will do its
utmost to ensure that the international community
musters the resolve necessary for the strategy to bear
fruit.

The Secretary-General's report offers many
interesting options for the future, and Belgium would
like to address several of these in particular.

We cannot emphasize strongly enough the
importance of combating impunity for sexual crimes.
Impunity is not only fertile ground upon which
violence develops and recurs, but it also undermines
the foundation of any reconstruction and
redevelopment effort. As the jurisprudence of the
Special Court for Sierra Leone and the tribunals for the
former Yugoslavia and Rwanda have shown,
international criminal courts have an important role to
play in combating sexual crimes. Belgium warmly
welcomes the appointment of a special adviser for
gender issues by the International Criminal Court.

International prosecution, however, is not
enough. On the contrary, we must increase initiatives
to strengthen the rule of law, judicial institutions and
penal systems in countries that have the greatest need
of such in order to enable them to dispense justice at
the local level. These countries must be in a position to
dispense impartial justice and to prosecute all
perpetrators, even when they are agents of the State.
Last week, we learned of the conviction by the
North Kivu military court of three officers of the armed
forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo for
crimes against humanity, including the rape of several
young girls. Such examples should be encouraged and
become the rule.

Punishing the perpetrators of sexual crimes is one
thing, but assisting victims is another. Fighting
impunity should be accompanied by programmes to
address the individual and societal consequences of
these crimes over the short, medium and long terms.
The work done by the Peacebuilding Commission in its
country-specific configuration for the Central African
Republic is a good example of the integration of
gender and sexual violence issues into a reconstruction
programme. Such efforts should become widespread.

In that respect, Belgium appreciates the
Secretary-General's idea of appointing a senior person
responsible for the United Nations response to the
issue of sexual violence. However, we believe that
more should be done, and we call for the appointment
of a female mediator for women, peace and security.
The role of this mediator would be to ensure that
women are systematically involved in peace
negotiation processes and that a gender-based
approach, including the issue of sexual violence, is
taken into account in all United Nations peacekeeping
and reconstruction activities.

In order to fight the scourge of sexual violence in
the most effective way possible, our Organization also
needs to guarantee the quality of the information at its
disposal. Belgium supports the Secretary-General's
proposal to improve the collection and coordination of
data by involving all actors not only in the field, but
also in Geneva and New York. Belgium also supports
the creation of a follow-up mechanism within the
Security Council so as to make the most of this
information.

This week's adoption of resolution 1882 (2009),
whereby sexual violence will be considered as a trigger
for the Council's follow-up mechanism on children and
armed conflict, is a step in that direction, and Belgium
welcomes it.

