Ms. Sandler: On behalf of the United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM), I am
honoured to address the Security Council on the
important issue of the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security.

As the Secretary-General, Mr. Guehenno and
Ms. Mayanja have noted, it is clear that our collective
commitment to moving that resolution forward requires
significant strengthening. As they have also noted,
there is progress on which to build. Gender advisers
have been placed in most integrated missions, and
gender-sensitive action plans have been formulated in
security and humanitarian areas of United Nations
work. Security Council members now regularly meet
with women's groups and networks on their trips to
conflict-affected countries. Member States are making
efforts to increase the numbers of women among
peacekeepers and police. The verdicts announced by

the Special Court for Sierra Leone in July showed that
war crimes against women and girls could be
successfully and fully prosecuted.

But the real measure of effective implementation
is not the setting up of systems, plans and processes.
The measure is women's participation in and
contribution to more sustainable peace agreements and
post-conflict reconstruction strategies. The measure is
better protection of women and girls in today's conflict
zones.

UNIFEM. supports the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) in over 30 countries, building
on a vast range of partnerships with Member States,
United Nations organizations, non-governmental
organizations and women's networks. Allow me to
present some insights from our experience.

While there are positive exceptions, women's
access to peace processes has been highly uneven. In
the past year, UNIFEM, in partnership with many
United Nations and non-governmental organizations,
has supported women's networks in Uganda, Kosovo,
Nepal and the Middle East to build capacities and
intensify their lobbying for inclusion in peace
negotiations. In many cases, women are building
dialogue across lines of conflict and have much to
contribute about aspects of sustainable peace that
would otherwise be neglected. But there remain too
few examples of structured access for women to peace
talks. Despite the promises of resolution 1325 (2000),
peace tables remain the province of those who made
the conflict rather than those who have the greatest
motivation to end it.

In countries emerging from conflict, the numbers
of women participating in elections are high - a
remarkable testament to women's eagerness to
participate in post-conflict decision-making, in spite of
the gender-based violence that so many women
encounter in daring to run for office. The numbers of
women winning those contests vary according to
whether electoral systems embrace special temporary
measures as mandated by the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women (CEDAW).

The strongest examples of the positive impact of
those measures come from Rwanda, where women won
49 per cent of Assembly seats in the 2003 election, and
Burundi, where they won 30.5 per cent in the 2005
elections. Where such measures have not been adopted

or have been inconsistently applied, proportions of
national assembly seats won by women have been
disappointing.

Perhaps our greatest collective challenge,
however, is our ability to use resolution 1325 (2000) to
meaningfully address sexual violence as a method of
warfare. Current media reports highlight the horrific
extent of sexual violence in conflicts around the world.
Even so, what gets reported is only the tip of the
iceberg, as the Council recently heard from the
Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. John Holmes.

Resolution 1325 (2000) calls on us to take action
against sexual violence in conflict. UNIFEM. has joined
with 11 other United Nations entities in setting up
United Nations Action against Sexual Violence in
Conflict. United Nations Action is providing strategic
and technical support to United Nations integrated
missions and United Nations country teams to step up
their responses. It is seeking to build global awareness
of the extent and impact of sexual violence in present-
day conflicts and advocating for more effective
responses from international and regional security
institutions in conflict situations.

Vigilance and action are needed to send an
irrevocable message that sexual violence must be
prevented, that impunity for perpetrators is
unacceptable and that providing services to survivors
of such violence is the highest priority.

The days in October when the Security Council
turns its full attention to the issues of women, peace
and security and the presidential statements that the
Security Council issues, all add up to a message of
hope for women whose unique experiences of war and
armed conflict has for too long been ignored.

Given the enormity of the agenda of resolution
1325 (2000) and the need to step up its implementation
to contribute to greater security and protection for
those who are most in need, I would end with two
points that we hope the Council will give due
consideration.

The first point is that the Security Council should
consider calling for more holistic and concerted action
by Member States and regional organizations, with
United Nations system support, to protect women and
girls from gender-based violence, particularly sexual
violence. That means building on the excellent points
made by Mr. Guehenno and stepping up the global
response in the following three key areas: first, the
expansion of services for survivors, including
provision of health services to treat HIV infection and
the many forms of psychological and physical trauma
that women and girls endure; second, focusing on
transitional justice systems to build capacity to
prosecute perpetrators; and third, above all, finding
means to prevent the perpetration of sexual violence by
ensuring that peacekeeping operations make life safe
for women and girls.

The second point is that the Council should
consider calling for more detailed reporting on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and enhance
its own capacity to monitor gaps and achievements in
its implementation. We reiterate the Secretary-
General's call for Member States to establish a
Security Council mechanism to monitor national
implementation.

The issue of women, peace and security is one for
which there is a huge constituency. We at UNIFEM. are
at the Council's disposal to assist in turning the tide of
history to meet the implementation challenge. Security
and peace for women remains a necessary prerequisite
to security and peace for all.

