Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Madam, for convening today's important debate and for
giving it a lot of publicity through Twitter.

Iwelcome the Secretary-General's report (S/2015/203),
which is a vital framework for all of us. I particularly
want to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Bangura for her briefing and her brave and
tireless work alongside the Team of Experts on the
Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict. She is
an example to all of us, and every time she speaks she
gives us new energy in this fight.

I also want to pay particular tribute to Ms. Hamsatu
Allamin. What she saidjust now is important testimony
for all of us. I was particularly struck by how she talked
about how she was using the resolutions of the Security
Council, including resolution 1325 (2000), to make a
real difference on the ground. That is a reminder to all
of us of what this is all about. We are working together,
creating norms and a sense of energy that allow people
to take real action on the ground to change people's
lives in this important and very controversial area.

As you said, Madam President, the timing of this
debate is tragically apt. One year ago yesterday, when
276 schoolgirls were kidnapped by Boko Haram in
Chibok, the abduction shocked the world. Abductions,
enslavement, sexual abuse and forced marriage of
women and girls are central to Boko Haram's method of
operation. As the fight against Boko Haram continues,
we reiterate our support to colleagues from Nigeria and
Chad and to all affected Member States in the region.
This anniversary is a stark reminder of the task that we
face to end conflict-related sexual violence.

The Global Summit to End Sexual Violence in
Conflict, held in summer 2014 in London, led to a
number of ambitious commitments, and I would like to
highlight just three of them: first, the African Union's
launch of a pilot project in the Central African Republic;
secondly, the Democratic Republic of the Congo's
commitment to implement its action plan; and thirdly,
a number of countries signing up to the call for action
on protecting women and girls in emergencies. Those
are just some of the issues that we have worked hard on
with others to implement and deliver real change in the
countries that are worst affected.

The rise of extremist non-State actors such as Boko
Haram and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant is
now one of the greatest threats to our goal, as others
have said. Sexual Violence has become a tactic of their
terror. There are three keys ways that we can fight this.

First, we need to do more to support affected
countries. The needs of survivors are great. The
report (S/2015/203) highlights that more medical,
psychosocial, legal and economic support is urgently
required. Whatever support we provide, we must ensure
that women and girls are at the heart of it. My country is
committed to this approach. In Syria, we are providing
counselling for survivors of sexual and gender-based
violence, as well as clinical care, reproductive health
care and cash assistance to particularly vulnerable
households. In Iraq, our Embassy has established
working groups to promote women's rights and combat
the effects of sexual violence, and we support activities
such as legal assistance and support groups for women.
We have given over $1.5 billion in humanitarian
support to the Syrian crisis. The United Nations has
a particularly important role to play. We strongly
support the Secretary-General's recommendation for
greater links between the issues of women and peace
and security, and fighting extremism. We hope that
this will be addressed in the review of resolution 1325
(2000) this year, and I welcome what the Permanent
Representative of Spain has just said about the energy
and commitment that the Spanish presidency will bring
to this issue in October.

Secondly, national military and security actors
must be responsive to survivors' needs. More focused
training, incorporating gender and survivor awareness,
and better information-sharing between military
and civilians are part of the solution. However, so is
making our police and military more representative of
our societies, with greater recruitment and promotion
of women. Until that happens, we are not going to
make real, substantive and lasting progress on this
issue. United Nations peacekeepers and police can also
do more to address the needs of women and girls. We
need to empower peacekeeping personnel to prevent
and respond to sexual Violence. That must be central
to predeployment preparations at all ranks, and fully
integrated into mission-wide objectives and mandates,
as the representative of France emphasized earlier. We
hope that the peace operations review later this year
will reflect these important recommendations.

Thirdly, we must ensure greater accountability for
all perpetrators and for Governments that do not uphold
their responsibility to protect the vulnerable in society.
Our support, whether through improved training or
more female personnel, can help encourage victims
of sexual violence to come forward and help end the
stigma associated with this crime. We must match
this with more investigations and more prosecutions,
including through the International Criminal Court,
to show that there is no impunity. We also encourage
States to implement the International Protocol on the
Documentation and Investigation of Sexual Violence
in Conflict, launched at the Global Summit held in
London in 2014. This important tool can help national
and international justice and human rights practitioners
document sexual Violence and pursue accountability for
these crimes effectively. The United Kingdom has thus
far supported and trained practitioners of the Protocol
in areas as diverse as Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Nepal and Colombia.
We have also raised awareness with international faith
leaders, bearing in mind their often unique position of
influence with survivors.
Allow me to conclude with this point: if we are
to end sexual violence in conflict, we must tackle
its root causes as well as its symptoms. We all
have a responsibility to end gender inequality and
discrimination in our societies, and in the Council we
have a unique responsibility to prevent conflicts that
allow sexual violence to thrive. Last year, resolution
2171 (2014) affirmed that human rights violations and
abuses, including sexual violence, could act as indicators
for impending conflict. Ifwe are to uphold international
peace and security, the Council must heed and act on
these warnings to prevent conflict taking hold. This is
difficult work. It is not work that the Council is brilliant
at, but it is an area where we can make progress using
the tools that we have, and we need to use whatever
evidence we have to make progress here. By doing so,
we will give women and girls around the world a future
that those at Chibok were denied.

