Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
appreciate the initiative of the Plurinational State of
Bolivia in convening this timely open debate. Peru
is committed to the women and peace and security
agenda. Together with Sweden, we have the honour
of chairing the group of experts that promotes that
agenda in the Council. As such, we fully support
the statements of Minister Wallstrom of Sweden and
Minister Brandt of the Netherlands, who today honour
us with their presence. We would also like to commend
the important briefings of the Secretary-General, the
Executive Director of UN-Women and, on behalf of
women's organizations, Ms. Randa Siniora Atallah.

Peru emphasizes the importance of women's
participation and leadership in the maintenance of
international peace and security and, in relation to
that, the primary responsibility of national States in
promoting their political and economic empowerment.
Since 2000, the Council has adopted eight resolutions
that have served to set an agenda and develop good
practices in that area. Nevertheless, barriers and
challenges persist, forcing us to redouble our efforts
as we approach the commemoration in 2020 of the
twentieth anniversary of the historic resolution 1325
(2000).

The evidence shows that when women participate
more at every level of political life, societies are less
inclined to conflict and more inclined to maintain
and consolidate peace. Women bring perspectives
on future and unity that are essential to building and
sustaining peace. In that regard, we emphasize that
gender equality and women's economic and political
empowerment contribute to reducing their particular
vulnerabilities during conflict and in general to
preventing violence and advancing human resilience,
as well as achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals. An investment in women's empowerment is
an investment in peace and development as well as in
protecting and promoting their human rights. That is
why we want to highlight and support the Secretary-
General's vision and the priority he gives to developing
and implementing this agenda, based on the concept of
sustainable peace. With regard to the role of women in
the maintenance of international peace and security, we
underscore the Secretary-General's views on the need
to promote their participation and leadership in every
peace effort, starting with active collaboration with
women's civil-society organizations. In that regard,
we wan to emphasize the importance of contributing
to financing the women's organizations that have been
asked to participate in the peace processes launched by
the Council.

We also underscore the importance of incorporating
gender perspectives into peace operations mandated
by the Council. In our View it is crucial to train Blue
Helmets in promoting and protecting women's and
children's human rights. In that regard, and in view
of the provisions of resolution 1820 (2008), Peru has
been gradually increasing women's participation in the
armed forces we send to United Nations peacekeeping
operations, and we have already surpassed the minimum
15 per cent required in the resolution.

Still with regard to the agenda on women and peace
and security, our Ministry of Women and Vulnerable
Populations has created a displaced persons registry
that enables us to quickly recognize and address issues
relating to the rights of women and girls who were
affected during the years in which Peru was battling
terrorism. Our Government has also committed to
implementing policies aimed at empowering women
in the political and economic life of the country,
with a decentralized approach that includes the need
to guarantee the election of women to positions
of authority.

I would like to conclude by citing in this debate
the voice of Flora Tristan, a Peruvian citizen who was
one of the great nineteenth-century pioneers in the
vindication of the rights of women:

"All of the world's misfortunes stem from the
oblivion and contempt in which the natural and
essential rights of being a woman have been held
until now".

