Mr. Matenje (Malawi): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Sir, on your delegation's
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October 2007. My delegation is grateful to be given the
opportunity to address the Security Council during this
open debate on the theme, "Women and peace and
security: towards a coherent and effective
implementation of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000)".

We associate ourselves with the statement
delivered by the Permanent Representative of Zambia
on behalf of the Southern African Development
Community (SADC). We would like to add the
following remarks.

Given that peace is inextricably linked to equality
between men and women, the importance of involving
women - in our view the world's most effective
peacemakers - in peacekeeping and peacebuilding,
cannot be overemphasized. In that regard, we note that
resolution 1325 (2000) calls upon Member States to
ensure increased representation of women at all
decision-making levels in national, regional and
international institutions and mechanisms for the
prevention, management, and resolution of conflict.

In Malawi, for example, in support of that call
women have been integrated in political and decision-
making processes at various levels of Malawian
society. Women now occupy prominent positions in the
Government and parastatal organizations and have
demonstrated themselves to be effective leaders by
ensuring that the people of Malawi always remain
focused on activities that are aimed at attaining social
and economic development for the country. In that
regard, women have been instrumental in sustaining
the relative peace and security that Malawi has enjoyed
since independence in 1964, proving the point that
peace does not necessarily mean only the absence of
war or armed conflict.

Accordingly, we urge the United Nations to take
further deliberate steps to increase the participation of
women in the highest-level decision-making positions
in peacekeeping operations, conflict prevention, peace
negotiations, peacebuilding and post-conflict
reconstruction.

We believe that the incorporation of a gender
perspective in those areas is critical for the
achievement of sustainable and lasting peace at both
the national and the international levels and for
achieving the internationally agreed goals, including
the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). This is
even more critical in countries such as Malawi, where
the population of women is larger than that of men and
where the majority of women are engaged in the
agricultural production that drives the economy.

In that regard, we call upon the Security Council
to work in coordination with other United Nations
bodies, particularly the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council, the Human Rights
Council, the United Nations Development Programme,
UNICEF, the United Nations Development Fund for
Women, the Peacebuilding Commission and others, in
seeking measures that would ensure that the MDGs are
achieved in full by 2015 in a peaceful and secure
environment that is fit for all.

We note with concern from the report of the
Secretary-General contained in document S/2007/567
that institutional gaps and challenges such as
inadequate funding for gender-related projects and
insufficient institutional capacity for gender
mainstreaming in peacekeeping and peacebuilding
operations have impeded the full implementation of the
United Nations System-wide Action Plan on women
and peace and security for 2005-2007. However, we
are confident that those challenges and gaps will be
addressed as the United Nations embarks on the
implementation of the United Nations System-wide
Action Plan on women for 2008-2009, which, as we
understand it, is a results-based programming, monitoring
and reporting tool.

Therefore, we hope that adequate and predictable
mechanisms will be introduced to support the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in an
efficient, transparent, accountable, coherent and
sustainable manner that takes into account the special
needs of women and children, particularly in situations
of armed conflict. These include putting an end to
gender-based violence and degrading and inhumane
treatment, which has resulted in millions of women and
children in armed-conflict-afflicted areas losing their
limbs or their lives. We are particularly appalled by
reports of the sexual exploitation of women and
children, particularly by the very same people who are
entrusted with the responsibility to protect them.

We support the recommendations contained in the
Secretary-General's report and in that respect underline
the importance of establishing a Security Council
mechanism to monitor the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) at the national level. We believe
that this would help to address gender-based violence
and abuses of human rights and women's rights during
conflict and in post-conflict situations.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to reiterate
that resolution 1325 (2000) holds out a promise to
women and girls around the globe that the international
community is ready to protect their rights both in times
of peace and in times of war or armed conflict, and to
remove all barriers to their equal participation and full
involvement in the maintenance and promotion of
sustainable peace in the world in general and in their
own communities in particular. Seven years after the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), the United Nations
needs to do more to keep and realize that promise.

