Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing today's meeting, and to express our
gratitude to the briefers for their interesting and
useful information. I would particularly like to thank
Ms. Razia Sultana for her interesting briefing, and I
hope that during Council members' upcoming visit to
Myanmar, in which we will be participating, we will
learn more about the issue.

Since the Security Council began to deal with the
problem of sexual violence in conflict, almost 10 years
ago, much has been achieved. First, it is now generally
understood that sexual violence is a serious challenge
rather than a collateral or secondary manifestation of
individuals' baser instincts, exacerbated by situations
involving armed conflict. There can also be no doubt
that sexual violence is a consequence of conflict,
including as a result of impunity for those who commit
such crimes. In our View, therefore, eliminating sexual
violence, as well as other forms of violence directed
at civilians, can be achieved only by resolving armed
conflicts by peaceful means and eradicating their
root causes.

We have traditionally supported the work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict. In particular, we greatly
appreciate her work on strengthening national capacity-
building and developing dialogue with religious and
other traditional leaders in addressing problems related
to the stigmatization of victims of sexual violence and
their rehabilitation. So far, unfortunately, we have
failed to defeat the evil of violence. The statistics
relating to the increase in sex crimes by members of
terrorist groups is particularly disturbing. We urge
States to cooperate more actively in dismantling the
so-called shadow economy of the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant, which profits from trafficking
in persons and sexual slavery, for instance. We hope
that such crimes will be effectively documented and
investigated, for which primary responsibility lies with
the relevant authorities of the States on whose territory
they are committed.
We would also like to take a separate look at
a number of positions presented in today's report
(S/2OI8/250). Although we share most of its conclusions
and recommendations, I feel it is important to draw
attention to a number of worrying aspects. First, as a
general observation, if Special Representative Patten
is to effectively carry out the tasks she has been set,
she should make sure that she continues to stick strictly
to her mandate. She should not divert her efforts and
resources to the issues of gender equality overall,
migration or violence against women generally. That
does not mean that those problems are not important.
They are, but they are not part of her mandate. Her
focus should be on situations of armed conflict, and
particularly those where sexual violence is occurring
on a large scale.

For several years now, we have been seriously
concerned about attempts to broaden the interpretation
of the scope of the Security Council's mandate on
combating sexual violence in conflict by using a
different term ~ "conflict-related sexual violence". As
we see it, what may at first seem to be mere technical
differences actually run the risk of going beyond
the Security Council's remit and infringing on the
mandates of other United Nations bodies. It is essential
for these purposes to differentiate between acts of
sexual Violence as war crimes or similar criminal acts.

Another trend we would also like to comment on
is the growing emphasis in the report on human rights
issues. We recall that sexual violence in conflict is first
and foremost a violation of international humanitarian
law. That is why both Government entities and
non-Government participants in an armed conflict
are obliged to ensure compliance with norms aimed at
combating sexual violence, and this is something that
should be monitored systematically.

Lastly and most importantly, this year we have seen
ill-advised attempts to use the issue of sexual violence
in conflict to resolve narrow political issues, something
that is reflected in the country section of the report.
In the section on Syria, in particular, the problem
of atrocities against women and girls perpetrated
by fighters from the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant and other terrorist organizations committing
outrageous acts in Syria is very much glossed over. The
evaluations and figures are presented in such a way that
one must extrapolate to get the full picture. How should
we interpret that? How will the militias and terrorists
react to that timidity? Probably with the thought that
their crimes are escaping the international community's
attention and that they can continue them.

At the same time, there is not a word about the
substantive change in the security situation in Syria,
of the fact that a greater part of its territory has been
cleansed of terrorists, or that thanks to difficult,
painstaking efforts, large numbers of civilians, a
significant percentage of whom are women and children,
some of them victims of sexual violence and abuse,
have been liberated from the militias. For example,
during a period of active fighting, some 165,000 people
were evacuated from eastern Ghouta alone. We believe
that a one-sided approach, a lack of full disclosure or a
failure to mention objective realities can only harm the
Special Representative's mandate and the effectiveness
of her efforts to combat sexual violence in conflict.

We would also like to emphasize separately that the
zero-tolerance policy that the report welcomes should not
operate on the principle of us versus them. Any efforts
to exempt national peacekeeping contingents acting
under Security Council mandates, or representatives of
non-governmental organizations working in countries,
from responsibility for committing such acts are
unacceptable. In that regard, we want to point out that
Paris has tried to sweep under the rug the examination
of cases of sexual violence, including against children,
by French soldiers during Operation Sangaris in the
Central African Republic. Despite the fact that the
investigation was supposedly carried out, no one was
punished, as far as one can tell. That is outrageous.

There are also other cases where a double standard
is clearly applied. For example, in considering the draft
of resolution 2410 (2018) on extending the mandate of
the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti,
the United States delegation refused to establish the
importance of ensuring that all accusations of sexual
violence by representatives of non-governmental
organizations accredited with the United Nations
are reported.

In conclusion, I would like to note that we have not
lost the hope that measures taken in the United Nations,
including through today's discussions, will contribute
to the goal of eliminating sexual and all other forms
of violence against civilians in armed conflict and
ultimately to resolving those conflicts to the benefit of
international peace and security.

