Ms. Freimane-Deksne (Latvia): Latvia aligns
itself with the statement made by the observer of the
European Union and would like to make a few remarks
in our national capacity.

I thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2012/732) and Ms. Bachelet, Mr. Ladsous and
Ms. Diop for their statements.

The topic of today's debate is of particular
importance. The sustainable political, social and
economic development of a country is possible only
with a strong civil society that is involved in all stages of
decision-making, including in conflict prevention and
resolution and peacebuilding. Women's civil society
organizations play a particular role in that regard by
voicing women's rights and concerns early on, laying
the foundations for non-discriminatory and inclusive
decision-making processes and, most importantly,
contributing to overall international peace and security.

In order to increase the representation of women's
civil society leaders in peace processes and post-conflict
peace consolidation, formal arrangements - such as
on the security of women human rights defenders,
security prior to and during elections and childcare
arrangements - and capacity-building in leadership,
conflict analysis and negotiation skills should be
provided. Capacity development for women's leaders
and organizations during and after conflict is crucial
for women's further effective participation in the
political and economic life of a country.

Latvia participates in capacity-building in several
conflict situations and post-conflict countries. Women's
leadership, participation and economic empowerment
are among the main priorities of our capacity-
building initiatives. Latvia has shared its experience
and implemented projects in Afghanistan, Iraq and
other countries. In all those initiatives, the Latvian
Government has closely cooperated with women's
civil society organizations, and activities in that regard
continue. Women's non-governmental organizations
in Latvia are also implementing their own capacity-
building projects, for example by facilitating the
establishment of women's resource centres in Central
Asia, sharing expertise in the prevention of human
trafficking and providing assistance to victims in Iraq.

Latvia believes that women's political leadership
and economic empowerment are key to ensuring
women's participation in the prevention of conflict,
conflict resolution and long-term recovery efforts. They
are also part of UN-Women's main thematic prioritie
and, as a member of the UN-Women Executive Board
beginning in January 2013, Latvia will contribute to
their implementation. To reaffirm Latvia's commitment
to promoting the empowerment of women at both the
national and international levels, Latvia expressed
its intent to join the Equal Futures Partnership at the
launch event hosted by Secretary of State Clinton on
24 September, as well as to announce new commitments
in that regard in the spring of 2013.

We fully agree with the statement made by
Ms. Bachelet in the Security Council in April
(see S/PV.6759) that we should build on women's role
as agents of conflict resolution and sustained recovery,
without focusing exclusively on the way conflict
victimizes women. The role of women is important
in the whole crisis cycle, from the prevention and
resolution of conflict to peacebuilding, post-conflict
reconciliation and reintegration. Women leaders and
women's organizations can provide important input
in decreasing the challenges facing women in conflict
zones and can function as early-warning mechanisms
to prevent backsliding on women's rights and to sustain
progress in women's protection.

The international community's involvement
in scaling up women's community initiatives and
improving their access to national and international
dialogue and mediation processes is of particular
relevance. The Security Council recognized as much
in its presidential statement on this topic last year
(S/PRST/2011/20). Women civil society representatives
should be systematically invited to participate in
international dialogues, contact groups, international
engagement events and donor conferences, as well
as regularly consulted on conflict resolution and
peacebuilding efforts. The Security Council should
provide regular and even responses to women's
peace and security concerns by, inter alia, inserting
specific instructions for women's engagement in the
establishment and renewal of mandates, ensuring
regular reporting on women's human rights violations
by United Nations peacekeeping and special political
missions and continuing to use Arria Formula meetings
and other formats to facilitate open dialogue with
women's civil society representatives.

Moreover, the United Nations itself should
live up to its own standards by ensuring women's
adequate representation in peacekeeping operations
at different levels and by improving training on gender-
specific issues for military and police in peacekeeping
missions. The United Nations gender expertise
is crucial for capacity-building and for increased
engagement of women's civil society representatives
in peace-making and peacebuilding processes, as
demonstrated by recent examples in South Sudan,
Somalia and Yemen. In that regard, Latvia welcomes
the formalization of the gender expert position in the
Mediation Support Standby Team and the inclusion of
gender advisers in all multidimensional peacekeeping
operations and political missions. We look forward
to the results of the review on how gender expertise
is structured and deployed within the United Nations
system.

In conclusion, let me reiterate Latvia's commitment
to the promotion of gender equality and the participation
of women and their civil society organizations at all
levels and in different contexts of decision-making.
We encourage further coordinated work by United
Nations institutions and Member States in effectively
implementatinig resolution 1325 (2000).

