Ms. Wilson (Australia): I will start by joining
others in expressing our condolences to Russia for the
shocking attack on its Ambassador in Turkey yesterday.
Our thoughts and sadness are with family and loved
ones and the Russian people at this terrible time.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
earlier by the representative of Liechtenstein.

Australia is deeply concerned about trafficking
in persons. We know that armed conflict and
instability - and the resulting economic
desperation - amplifies the risk of human trafficking
for vulnerable people, especially women and children,
people with disabilities, migrants and displaced people.
Sadly, refugee and internal displacement camps are
particularly fertile ground for human traffickers. With
the highest-ever number ofpeople displaced in the world
today, there are now a great many who are particularly
vulnerable to trafficking, and we must work to protect
them from this scourge.

We have a shared responsibility to disrupt this
evil trade and address its root causes. No one State
or organization can do it alone. Australia encourages
United Nations efforts to strengthen coordination to
develop a more strategic and coherent international
response. We consider that Alliance 8.7 is a useful
vehicle for bringing key United Nations agencies,
Member States and non-governmental stakeholders
together, to accelerate efforts to effectively combat
trafficking. We should also ensure that the 2017 review
of the Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in
Persons makes a practical contribution.

Preventing and combating human trafficking and
slavery is a priority of the Australian Government. We
are working with countries in the Asia-Pacific region to
stamp out these barbaric and criminal practices and to
find innovative development approaches that stimulate
opportunity and hope for people as close to their homes as
possible, in order to reduce their vulnerability. Through
the Bali Process on People Smuggling, Trafficking in
Persons and Related Transnational Crime, Australia is
working with Indonesia, with which we co-Chair the
Process, to reinvigorate efforts to establish regional
cooperation on these issues. In March 2016, we adopted
the Bali Declaration, which represents strengthened
political commitment to protecting vulnerable people
who are on the move in our region.

In May, the Bali Process held a regional forum on
using financial investigation tools and techniques to
investigate, disrupt and prosecute human-trafficking
cases. In terms similar to those set out in the Secretary-
General's report (S/2016/949), it highlighted the
benefits of using "follow the money" techniques in
human-trafficking cases.

In May next year, we will launch the Bali Process
Business Forum, which will highlight the importance of
involving business in addressing and preventing human
trafficking. The Forum will bring together private
sector leaders from the 45 member countries of the Bali
Process to focus on best practices in eradicating human
trafficking and slavery and to make recommendations
to ministers.

We must remain focused and continue to work
together diligently to stamp out trafficking in persons,
prosecute those who perpetuate this heinous crime,
address the needs of victims and protect those who are
most vulnerable.

