Mr. Takasu: I would like to commend the
leadership of the United States for organizing this open
debate, and I thank you, Mr. President, for inviting me
to participate in my capacity as Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

The landmark resolution 1325 (2000) on women,
peace and security calls upon all parties involved to
ensure the protection of and respect for the human
rights of women and girls and provides a solid
framework for women's equal and full participation in
every stage of building peace and ensuring security.
The challenge we face is to generate stronger political
will and spur greater concrete actions.

Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
steady progress has been made in helping more women
to participate in post-conflict decision-making.
Significant percentages of the national parliaments of
many post-conflict countries are now women. More
women are taking leadership positions in the executive
branch. Several female Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General have been appointed. The
international community has been gaining more
understanding of the unique impact of armed conflict
on women and girls and a growing recognition that
women's participation is essential to ensuring conflict
resolution, inclusive reconciliation, peacebuilding and
sustainable peace.

However, we have been less successful in
protecting women and girls from gender-based
violence in situations of armed conflict. Many women
still suffer from a sense of insecurity. They remain
particularly vulnerable to sexual violence and
exploitation, both in the midst of conflict and in its
immediate aftermath. We need only look at the
situation of sexual violence and abuse in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo or Darfur to
understand the horrific magnitude of the problem and
how urgently we must address it. We must admit that
our collective response to gender-based violence has
been inadequate thus far, and this failure to respond is
magnified over time, because the effects of sexual
violence linger long after the fact, undermining and
threatening the potential for peace and stability. Every
effort must be made to promote the human security of
women and girls in a fragile situation by physically
protecting and empowering them.

In order to take effective measures to meet those
challenges, there are several actions that the Security
Council may wish to consider. First, collecting actual
data on the impact of sexual violence on women and
girls and on perpetrators is an important first step to
establishing a strategy to meet their needs on the
ground. Secondly, ending impunity and prosecuting
those responsible for such sexual crimes cannot be
overemphasized and will facilitate communal
reconciliation in post-conflict situations. Thirdly,
gender-sensitive training programmes for peacekeeping
and humanitarian personnel must be strengthened, at
both the national and international levels. Fourthly, the
mandate of peacekeeping operations could reflect more
concrete actions in implementing resolution 1325
(2000), in order to mainstream a gender perspective
and provide protection from gender-based violence.

The Peacebuilding Commission, which is a very
new body, has been ensuring, through its advocacy role
and resource mobilization efforts, that a gender
perspective becomes an integral part of any
peacebuilding process. Significant efforts have been
made to engage women and gender equality groups at
various levels of the Commission's work, fully

reflecting the priorities and issues of relevance to
women's groups. Gender perspectives have been
included as a critical and priority issue in the integrated
peacebuilding strategies for Burundi and Sierra Leone.
Commitments to be undertaken by the Governments
and the international community are clearly articulated
in order to combat gender-based violence, ensure
greater participation of women at all levels of decision-
making and build the capacity of women's groups and
national gender-equality institutions.

The working group on lessons learned also
considered the issue of gender and peacebuilding
earlier this year and concluded that the gender issue
should be viewed not just as a women's issue. It is an
imperative in any peacebuilding effort, including
security sector reform. We cannot effectively deal with
this complex problem if the burden of responsibility
for doing so rests only with women. The existence of
legal frameworks and policies is not enough, because
they will not end violence by themselves. Compliance,
implementation and enforcement are critical. The issue
should be tackled in a holistic manner, including not
only security and justice sector reform, but also basic
social services such as education and health services,
employment and income generation, in order to
empower women and girls.

In countries emerging from conflict, national
Governments and other local stakeholders are ready to
address the root causes of conflict, including the
marginalization of women. But they often do not have
the sufficient resources and capacities to do so
effectively. On the ground, that requires a range of
integrated efforts for multiple stakeholders such as
government institutions, United Nations entities and
civil society organizations. We need stronger support to
improve the operational capacity of all of those players
in order to fully meet gender equality commitments.

We must also work with local women's groups to
fight prejudice and stigma and advance efforts to end
impunity for such crimes. The roles of
parliamentarians, non-governmental organizations and
the media are also important to enhance the
accountability of the authorities and those in power for
their actions - or, sometimes, their inaction.
With that recognition, I assure the Council that
the Peacebuilding Commission will continue to make
every effort to raise the international profile of the
needs of women and girls in peacebuilding efforts and
to mobilize the necessary support and resources in a
coordinated and integrated manner.

It is my sincere hope that today's open debate
will help to generate more political will and greater
action. We must all do our part to match the fine words
of the Security Council's resolutions, with concrete
actions that make a real difference for the women and
girls whom the Council has pledged to protect and
empower.

