Mr. Lwin (Myanmar): I would like to express our
appreciation to you, Sir, for organizing this important
debate on women and peace and security. I also thank
you for giving me the floor to take part in this open
debate.

I wish to thank the Chinese delegation for its very
useful concept paper (S/2008/655), which focuses on
women's equal participation and full involvement in all
efforts for the maintenance and promotion of peace and
security.

We live in a changing world in which States
Members of the United Nations increasingly recognize
that achieving durable peace requires the full
involvement and equal participation of women in
conflict resolution and subsequent peacebuilding.
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), adopted eight
years ago, and the Beijing Declaration and Platform for
Action, adopted at the Fourth World Conference on
Women in 1995, underscore the convention that peace
is inextricably linked with the equality of women and
men.

In situations of armed conflict, women and girls
are among the most vulnerable. Even after the war has
ended, the deteriorating economic situation heightens
women's vulnerability to being trafficked. Women are
also likely to experience discrimination and domestic
violence on their return to their village or town of
origin. In those circumstances, we must act together to
redress the situation and ensure that there is zero
tolerance with regard to violence against women and
girls.

Myanmar fully supports a zero-tolerance policy.
Throughout our history, women have always enjoyed a
special place in the family and society. Our traditions,
culture and values reflect our efforts to promote gender
equality. Successive Governments have also
endeavoured to protect women and girls from gender-
based violence, including sexual exploitation and
abuses. The Myanmar National Committee for
Women's Affairs was established in 1996 to implement
the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action.
Subsequently, the Myanmar Women's Affairs
Federation was formed in 2003 to protect women from
discrimination and to ensure their full enjoyment of
their rights.

Myanmar shares the view that the best way to
protect civilians, particularly women and children, in
armed conflict is to prevent such conflicts. My country
has experienced first-hand the devastating effect of
insurgency. Only recently, owing to the national
reconciliation policy of my Government, we have

emerged from under the dark clouds of conflict. The
insurgency that has ravaged the country for four
decades is virtually over, as 17 out of 18 major
insurgent groups have come back into the legal fold.
Today, only remnants of the last insurgent group and
narcotrafficking armed groups remain as outlaws.
Peace and stability now prevail in almost all corners of
Myanmar. It has resulted in significant improvement in
the daily life of civilians, in particular women and
children.

My delegation joins the international community
in its condemnation of sexual assault and other forms
of violence committed against civilians in armed
conflict, particularly women and girls. We must work
together to prevent that.

The combined efforts of our countries, the United
Nations system and civil society over the past eight
years have contributed to changing, to some extent, the
lot of women in many conflict and post-conflict
situations. Political will and resources will be needed
to turn the small gains achieved into significant steps.

