Mr. Qassem Agha (Syria) (spoke in Arabic):
We have noted with interest the report (S/2016/361)
of the Secretary-General presented by his Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Zainab Bangura. We appreciate Ms. Bangura's
efforts in that regard, in particular following her visit to
the Syrian Arab Republic last April at the invitation of
the Syrian Government, which has worked to cooperate
and coordinate with her Office and with the United
Nations to ensure the success of her important task.
We have also worked to set the facts straight and refute
all allegations made via media propaganda, which
is complicit in the shedding of Syrian blood - an
approach adopted by some members of the Security
Council for pure political objectives and to demonize
the Syrian Government.

The Government of Syria hosted Ms. Bangura and
afforded her all the necessary facilities. It opened all
doors to its corrections and rehabilitation facilities. It
gave her opportunities to meet numerous prisoners who
had committed killings, looting and other acts against

Syrian law. All of that was out of the Government's desire
to cooperate with the Special Representative. While we
see some improvement in this report in the approach
adopted by the Special Representative with regard to
Syrian women victims of sexual violence, we would
nevertheless like to make the following observations.

First, the report does not look into or recount the
plight of Syrian women and girls living in refugee camps
in neighbouring countries - something that is crucial.
In that regard, we must express our deep concern at the
ongoing rape of women and the phenomenon of sexual
slavery in the camps. We also express our deep sorrow
at the continuing trafficking in the human organs of the
vulnerable - above all, as that is taking place before
the eyes of the entire international community.

Rapes of Syrian women and children, sexual
harassment and trafficking in organs also take place
in Turkish camps. In particular, according to Turkish
news agencies, such crimes have taken place in the
Nizip camp, Gaziantep governorate, which, ironically,
the Turkish governorate considers a model camp. That
was reported by the Dogan news agency as well, while
the BirGiin newspaper has reported that approximately
30 children between the ages of8 and 12 were raped, as
well as the forced recruitment of young people to join
terrorist groups.

Secondly, we reiterate our request that Ms. Bangura's
team carry out investigations into the plight of the
hundreds of women and girls who have been abducted
by the terrorist group Jaish Al-Islam in Adra, in the
rural part of Damascus, which has also committed
heinous crimes in that town. Jaish Al-Islam has paraded
those women handcuffed in iron cages in the town of
Duma. That is in addition to other enslaved women
taken from areas surrounding Latakia and others killed
in cold blood in the Za'ara massacre, which armed
takfiris carried out a few weeks ago outside Hama. In
our letters to the Security Council, we have appealed
time and again for information on the outcome or status
of those abducted women.

Thirdly, the report completely disregards the plight
of Syrian women in the occupied Syrian Golan and the
gross practices against Palestinian women in occupied
Arab lands, who are subjected to the most heinous
violations of human rights, exclusionary policies and
other forms of degrading treatment. Thousands of
Palestinian women and girls have fallen victim to the
atrocities committed by the wanton regime ofthe Jewish
entity in Gaza and other occupied Palestinian territories.

I am convinced that the members of the Council
are well aware of the case of the Palestinian woman
who gave birth to her child as she waited hours at a
checkpoint of the Israeli occupation forces. I could cite
numerous other examples of human rights violations
perpetrated by the immoral Israeli regime, which kills
and detains children, refuses to allow some 50 Syrian
women in the occupied Golan to visit their siblings and
other relatives in Syria, and provides ongoing and open
support to the terrorist Al-Nusra Front.

To conclude, Syria is committed to supporting all
international efforts to put an end to all forms of sexual
violence to bring the perpetrators and inciters to justice,
and to break the silence and unjustified disregard of
many United Nations specialized entities. We stress
our desire to continue to cooperate in a depoliticized
context. The authorities concerned are ready to provide
further assistance with names or incidents to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General so as to ensure
the appropriate implementation of her noble mandate.

