Mr. Aboul-Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
report of the Secretary-General, submitted to the
Council today, refers to the fact that women do not
enjoy equal standing with men in any society.
Moreover, in societies where the culture of violence
and discrimination against women and girls prevails,
prior to the outbreak of internal conflict, the situation
deteriorates during the course of such conflict. If
women do not take part in decision-making in a given
society, they are not likely to share in decision-making
concerning the conflict itself or the establishment of
peace after the conflict.

In that regard, Egypt wishes to express its
profound concern at the increasing rate of violence
against women and children during armed conflict and
the negative economic, social, psychological and
physical consequences of such violence. That is why
Egypt wishes to contribute effectively to eliminating
all injustice against women. Last September, Egypt
convened and hosted a conference at Sharm el-Sheikh
in order to establish a new international movement for
women and peace under the auspices of Mrs. Suzanne
Mubarak, the First Lady. Several prominent
international personalities took part in the conference.
The conference was aimed at launching a series of
activities with a view to convening a general
international conference in 2004 that will deal with the
issue of women and peace. The conference affirmed the
need to recognize women as an effective element in
settling disputes and their contribution to efforts to
establish peace.

Several positive steps have recently been taken
that have helped focus attention on the needs and the
status of women in areas of conflict through the
development of special units, which have been
included in United Nations peacekeeping operations,
particularly in Africa. We thus appreciate the positive
role played by the gender units in the United Nations
Mission Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL). We
hope to see that role expanded with the deployment of
phase III of MONUC in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Furthermore, we
hope that the units will be maintained when the
Security Council reduces the size of UNAMSIL after
the establishment of security and stability in Sierra
Leone.

As we deal today with ways and means of
protecting women during conflict and promoting their
role and participation following the settlement of
conflicts, we cannot ignore the cries of help from
Palestinian women living in the most dire and inhuman
circumstances. We refer here to the suffering of
Palestinian women and their deteriorating status under
occupation. This matter is very important to us in
Egypt. Palestinian women - wives, mothers and
daughters - are not only killed alongside men as a
result of Israeli military action; they are also wounded
as a result of indiscriminate shooting by both the Israeli
occupation army and settlers.
Moreover, they are subject to the loss of their
means of livelihood, to oppression and intimidation,
and they must endure the consequences of changes in
social relations and structures as a result of the death of
family members.

That is why the Egyptian delegation deems it
imperative that the Security Council deal with the
situation of Palestinian women under occupation by
stressing the imperative need for total Israeli
withdrawal from the occupied Palestinian territories
and for the restitution of the land to its rightful owners,
within the framework of a just and comprehensive
peace based on United Nations and internationally
binding resolutions and on the principle of land for
peace.

I wish once again to reiterate Egypt's firm stance,
which we have often expressed before the Council, on
the importance of protecting women and children
during armed conflict within a broader context - that
of the protection of all civilians.

In this respect, I would like to underline two
important points.

First, the Council must maintain the delicate
balance between its own work and that of the other
bodies of the United Nations, in keeping with the
Charter of the Organization, particularly the need to
respect the fundamental role of the General Assembly
in dealing with humanitarian, economic and social
questions and human rights issues, including those
related to women.

Secondly, we would like to reaffirm that
international humanitarian practices must not
contradict the principle of respect for and
implementation of the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations or the provisions of international
humanitarian law.

While we welcome the Council's readiness to
respond rapidly in cases where civilians are targeted
and where deliberate action is taken to block the
delivery of urgent humanitarian assistance to those in
need, we would like to reaffirm that such action should
be taken within the framework of the provisions and
the articles of the Charter.

In this respect, if the Council is unable, for
reasons beyond its control, to assume its
responsibilities, perhaps we could benefit from the
General Assembly resolution entitled "Uniting for
peace".
We would like also to reiterate the importance of
respecting the various international conventions and
agreements relating to women when we discuss the
issue of women, peace and security. Foremost among
these instruments is the Fourth Geneva Convention of
1949 relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War and its two Additional Protocols of 1977,
which together represent the legal basis for the
protection of women and girls during armed conflict.
Also important are the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and the
outcome of the Beijing Conference and its Platform of
Action. Together, these conventions constitute the basis
for international efforts to include the gender
dimension in every aspect of the work of the
Organization and to recognize the vital role of women
in the establishment of international peace and security.

Egypt welcomes the fact that the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court (ICC) includes the
gender dimension in its articles. Thus its definition of
war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide
includes gender-based violence, rape, forced
prostitution, trafficking in persons, and torture and
other forms of inhuman and degrading treatment,
including enslavement.

Egypt also welcomes the fact that the Statute of
the ICC has ensured gender-sensitive justice that
includes the adoption of necessary measures to protect
victims and witnesses, equitable representation of male
and female judges, and the availability of legal
expertise on such specific issues as violence against
women.

