Ms. Mohammed: Before I comment, I would like
to say that it is quite refreshing to have the opportunity
to actually engage, and I hope we will have more such
opportunities during this presidency. A number of
questions were asked, which I will try and answer in
general, with just a few country-specific comments.

First, regarding the Sudan, the implementation of
the 17 August Constitutional Declaration, which was
mentioned several times, needs to be encouraged and
accompanied. But, most important, the sanctions need
to be lifted in order for the Sudan to be able to move
forward and, of course, we must continually encourage
it to support more women's participation. Last week,
the Council had such an opportunity by hearing first-
hand from some of the actors that are actually on the
ground (see S/PV.8649), and such engagements should
be encouraged in order to raise their voices.
On South Sudan, something that has also been
mentioned a couple of times is the need for accelerating
the implementation of the revitalized peace agreement.
The international community needs to maintain
pressure. That also has to be supported, and the fact
that there is a major humanitarian crisis in that country
should not be overlooked. Women and children are the
ones who suffer the most in that situation.

Regarding Somalia, which I believe was also
mentioned a couple of times, and the resumption of
the dialogue between the central Government and the
federal member states, as I mentioned briefly last week
also within the framework of our cooperation with
the United Nations (see S/PV.8650), we have started
exploring the development of a political strategy to
facilitate coherence in our engagements in the country.

I would also like to express appreciation for the
four points that were mentioned by Indonesia regarding
the primacy of peaceful settlements and disputes,
particularly the fact that we work with a united front
and, by confronting some of these common challenges,
we will be able to have more of an impact. Regarding
encouraging more female peacekeepers, I think that
the Deputy Secretary-General has addressed that
point. However, I would also like to re-emphasize that
whatever support and encouragement we give, we have
to also consider the fact that there are some basic needs
of that women peacekeepers have and that must be
taken into consideration in Somalia. We heard from the
African Union Special Envoy for Women, Peace and
Security about basic needs, such as bathroom facilities
that are exclusive to women and having privacy - for
example, sanitary towels and being able to have access
to communications to speak that to their families on a
regular basis. These are simple things that can easily be
overlooked but make a huge impact in supporting them
or encouraging them to actually stay on the ground,
including when they are deployed.

My second to last point regards what the Deputy
Secretary-General said about girls' education, which,
I believe, clearly translates to women's economic
empowerment. We have seen that in so many different
country situations where it can be seen how, by educating
girls, eventually even the mothers are educated by
proxy just based on the experiences they have on the
ground. So that should definitely be fully encouraged.

Finally, I believe the Peacebuilding Commission
provides an opportunity. It is currently engaged in the
greater Horn of Africa. I hope that with the upcoming
review, opportunities such as with regard to coherence,
financing and ownership will be explored, particularly
at the regional level and working with the regional
mechanisms and regional economic communities.

