Ms. Noori: I wish to thank you, Mr. President,
for allowing me to take part in today's open debate. I
appreciate the opportunity to share my thoughts and
observations about the role of women in peacebuilding
in Afghanistan.

From my point of view, there are two
Afghanistans. The United Nations sees one
Afghanistan, which is progressing and developing. Yet
there is another Afghanistan that the international
community does not see. It is violent, unstable and, in
many ways, very scary for women. That is why it is
absolutely critical to remain fully engaged in
Afghanistan.

We have heard some very good news from my
country. A record number of women will be members
of Parliament. But we must also recognize the many
challenges women face. We Afghans and the rest of the
international community must close the gap between
the two Afghanistans so as to bring true democracy,
security and peace to the country as a whole.

We have seen much progress after the fall of the
Taliban. In Afghanistan, we have a Constitution that
finally recognizes equal rights for women and gives
women full rights to political participation. This is
ground-breaking and gives all Afghan women hope.

We now have a Ministry of Women's Affairs. At
the provincial level, there are local women's councils.
Afghanistan has elected its first woman Governor, in
Bamyian province, in the central region. Three
ministerial-level positions are held by women. The
Constitution also sets a quota for Afghan women's
representation in Parliament and guarantees them
50 per cent of the presidential appointments to the
Upper House.

The numbers are impressive and significant, and
we are hopeful. But numbers alone cannot not paint a
full picture of the realities facing women on the ground
in the country.

Women candidates needed their husbands as well
as family approval to run for office. Independent
female candidates often lacked the money and support
necessary for campaigning, unlike those supported by
warlords and political parties. Warlords and their
followers threatened independent women candidates
with violence and even assassination. The warlords
also threatened women voters to keep them from
participating in the political process, to stop them from
choosing their future leaders. Women voters received
threatening phone calls, e-mails and even flyers
delivered in the middle of night that said, "Do not vote,
or else your husband, your children or you yourself
may lose your life."

It took great courage to run for office and to vote.
In the hidden Afghanistan - the one that is not in front
of cameras or United Nations monitors - exercising
one's rights can be a life-or-death choice.

As I weave my life through the two Afghanistans,
I see islands of peace. There is growing stability and
political participation in the areas where there is a
strong presence of the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF). But just a few steps away,
local and national Government officials ignore the
status of women and women's rights when they feel no
pressure from the international community.

In those areas, the Constitution and international
norms do not rule. Traditional tribal rule shapes how a
woman is treated and what her rights are - if she has
any at all. I hear stories from local communities about
forced marriages and child marriages. Women are not
given a choice in those arrangements; they are
considered property to be exchanged between families.
Sometimes, daughters and sisters are used to settle
disputes between families.

I also hear stories about severe domestic
violence, but women feel they have nowhere to go.
They cannot go to the authorities because they will be
jailed for making complaints against family members.
There are no safe shelters outside the city of Kabul.

Last year, in a Red Crescent hospital in Kabul, I
met a 17-year-old woman who was three months
pregnant. She suffered such great violence at the hands
of her husband and in-laws that she poured petrol on
herself. She died from her petrol burns. This year, there
were 75 reported cases of self-immolation in the city of
Herat in western Afghanistan alone.

The poppy eradication programme and the halt to
illegal narcotics trafficking in the country has had a
negative impact on women. Many farmers are waiting
for a sustainable alternative to poppy crops. In the
meantime, women are suffering.

Let me explain. Again and again, I hear of poppy
farmers who sell their daughters to repay their debts to
drug traffickers. The forced loss of poppy crops has
left farmers unable to repay the drug traffickers who
lent them money to buy seeds. To settle their debts, the
farmers are turning to a traditional Afghan practice of
handing over sisters and daughters.

I urge the international community to support the
rule of law, not the rule of individuals, warlords or
fundamentalists in my country.

There cannot be one Afghanistan for men and
another for women. Right now, 10 per cent of the
reconstruction money channelled through the National
Solidarity Programme is set aside for local women's
councils for projects identified as women's priorities.
Yet, as I travel to rural areas, I discover that many
women's councils are either unaware that they should
have access to that money or, when they are aware of
that fact, I often find that the priorities of the men's
councils supplant those of the women's councils.
Often, women politicians and council members are
used as window dressing, while men continue to
dominate the setting of the agenda.

There are specific needs of women that must be
addressed. Eighty per cent of the female population is
illiterate. We need schools that educate girls as well as
women. An addition, one in six Afghan women dies in
childbirth due to complications during pregnancy. We
need female health professionals and health clinics to
address the basic physical, emotional and
gynaecological needs of women.

We need to identify a new generation of Afghan
women leaders and give them tools and resources to
develop their potential. That way, when women
candidates run for office, they will not need to rely on
money from warlords or fundamentalists but can be
successful independent candidates.

However, I have heard from the Ministry of
Women's Affairs that we can not train Women for
Women International participants on the Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women (CEDAW), which Afghanistan ratified in 2004.
We were told to wait until the Ministry of Justice and a
council of Islamic judges approve the Convention.

The agenda of Afghan women remains
unfinished. Presidential and parliamentary elections are
good markers for progress, but peace and security in
Afghanistan will take a long-term commitment by the
United Nations and ISAF. We urge the Security
Council to consider extending the mandate of ISAF
and expanding its work throughout Afghanistan.

Continued insecurity also undermines the safety
and progress of women. We urge the Security Council
and international organizations, such as the United
Nations Development Fund for Women, to support
Afghan authorities and women's groups in
peacebuilding in Afghanistan. We should have a full
partnership that develops the capacity of women and
protects their human rights.

We urge the Security Council and the
international community to fully implement alternative
livelihood initiatives for farmers through the poppy
eradication programme and recommend that the United
Nations and the international community work with the
Afghan judicial system so that judges, police and local
leaders act in accordance with the rule of law, not
traditional law, which undermines women's rights.

Lastly, I recommend that the Security Council
and the international community help civil society,
especially women's groups, promote Government
accountability.

We do not want the international community to
abandon Afghanistan before we have secured a stable
future for all women, men and children. Peacebuilding
in Afghanistan must continue. We need women. We
cannot ignore women when rebuilding a nation. When
women are left behind, there can be no peace, and
Afghanistan will continue to be weak.

Let me conclude by saying that without strong
women, we cannot build a strong nation.

