Mr. Chuquihuara (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):

My delegation thanks you, Madam President, for
the initiative of holding an open debate on the role of
women and the theme of peace and security. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2011/598*), as well as to note the importance of the
statements made throughout the day.

Resolution 1325 (2000), adopted 11 years ago,
represents a fundamental milestone, because ever since
its adoption the issue of the role of women in peace
and security has occupied an important place on the
agenda of the Security Council. As a result, it has taken
on an important and essential role in the achievement
of international peace and security. The resolution has
served as the point of departure for subsequent
developments on this issue in the Security Council
when it comes to ensuring the participation of women
in peacekeeping and peacebuilding and, most
especially, with regard to combating sexual violence
against women and girls. For that reason, along with
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, resolution 1325 (2000) and
resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009), 1889 (2009) and
1960 (2010) provide the international community with
a normative framework for considering the needs of
women in conflict and post-conflict situations.
As we all clearly acknowledge today, women are
decisive actors in every stage of long-term
peacebuilding processes, which is why we concur with
the Secretary-General on the need to encourage
women's participation as an integral part of efforts to
establish, maintain and build peace.
In that context, my delegation would like to point
out that my country is a contributor of military
observers. I am pleased to announce that, this
November, Peru will deploy women on the ground in
peacekeeping operations.

We have already said repeatedly that we should
never allow sexual violence to be seen as the inevitable
consequence of armed conflict. We therefore welcome
the zero-tolerance policy on sexual violence and abuse
that the Secretary-General has been introducing into
peacekeeping operations. We also believe that training
and consciousness raising for military personnel
deployed on the ground are fundamental to enable
them to respond in a timely and appropriate fashion
when faced with situations of sexual violence.

Because combating the impunity of gender
violence is fundamental to peacekeeping processes,
States need to strengthen their judicial systems so that
such cases can be brought to trial. In that regard, it will
continue to be equally important to pursue the
ratification of the Statute of the International Criminal
Court.

Women are decisive actors in the three pillars of
achieving lasting peace, namely, economic recovery,
social cohesion and political legitimacy. In that respect,
it is essential that emphasis be placed in all post-
conflict phases on strengthening the rule of law as well
as the economic and political empowerment of women
in order to guarantee their full insertion in the
community.

My country resolutely supports the work
currently being carried out by UN-Women and
encourages it to continue its decisive contribution to
the implementation of resolutions relating to peace and
security, as well as to follow-up with regard to the
indicators that the Secretary-General presented in
October 2010. Similarly, my country values the work
of the Special Representative on Sexual Violence in
Conflict and the Special Representative on Children
and Armed Conflict on aspects related to women, peace
and security, in particular with respect to the
prevention of sexual violence.

Peru believes that the high-level review of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) proposed for
2015 will be an opportunity to comprehensively review
the progress made by the United Nations system and by
Member States in the priority areas of prevention,
participation, protection, relief and recovery, as well as
on the recommendations put forward by the Secretary-
General or by a working group established to
implement the resolution.

We have moved forward in recognizing the
importance of women's participation in peace and
security. However, we still face many challenges. What
is most important is to join forces so that women and
girls are able to exercise their right to live without fear,
without violence and with respect and equality of
opportunity.

