Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): I would like to echo
previous speakers in welcoming the initiative of the
United States presidency to hold an open debate in the
Security Council on the agenda item "Women and
peace and security". Our thanks go to Under-Secretary-
General Guehenno and Ms. Smythe for their valuable
observations.

The item under consideration is of key
importance for our country. At the same time, it is in
the limelight for all members of society. In that regard,
I would like to thank the Secretary-General and all
those who contributed to the preparation of the report
on women, peace and security, document S/2002/ 1154.
The report presents valuable recommendations for the
consideration of Member States. Azerbaijan agrees
with them and supports their operationalization.

The twenty-first century has witnessed both a
dynamic movement towards worldwide implementation
of the principle of gender equality and the proliferation
of various kinds of conflicts where women have to an
alarming degree become victims and targets of
atrocities and aggression. Analyses of both trends have
proven that notions of peace and the advancement of
women are inextricably linked in a number of
dimensions. This interconnection is strikingly evident
in situations of armed conflict, the consequences of
which most severely affect women and children both
physically and psychologically.

Nevertheless, while trying to mainstream the
gender perspective into each stage of the conflict
resolution process, one cannot ignore the striking fact
that women suffering as a result of various forms of
violence are more hesitant than men to avail
themselves of rehabilitation programmes.

Moreover, the report of by the Secretary-General
on the impact of armed conflict on women and girls,
prepared in accordance with resolution 1325 (2000),
indicated that women and girls are disproportionally
targeted in contemporary armed conflicts and constitute
the majority of all victims.

We concur with the Secretary-General's
recommendation on the necessity that we must
recognize the extent of the violations of the human
rights of women and girls during armed conflict and
ensure that this is duly taken into account in the
planning and implementation of peace support
operations. In that regard, local and international non-
governmental organizations acting to protect and assist
those affected by armed conflict could serve as reliable
sources of information. To that end, cooperation
between international organizations, including those of
the United Nations system, and the Government
concerned is an indispensable element in ensuring the
dynamic of a positive change in the attitudes and mind-
sets of affected women and girls upon whom peace and
security depends.
In our view, one of the most outrageous impacts
of armed conflict takes place when civilian women and
girls are taken hostage by parties to the conflict. In
such a situation, women and children hostages are
exposed to various forms of violence ranging from
torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
or punishment to rape, slavery and trafficking in
women and children for the purpose of their sexual
exploitation, forced labour or other services. Here, I
would like to mention that the Commission on the
Status of Women of the Economic and Social Council
already condemned these illegal acts committed against
women and girls in its resolution 46/1 entitled "Release
of women and children taken hostage, including those
subsequently imprisoned, in armed conflict". That
organ condemned such violent acts - which are in
contravention of international humanitarian law -
against the civilian population in areas of armed
conflict, and called for an effective response to such
acts, in particular the immediate release of women and
children taken hostage, including those subsequently
imprisoned in armed conflict.

We are pleased to note that during the past decade
international legal frameworks that provide protection
for women and girls affected by armed conflict have
been developed. It is encouraging that the statutes of
the two international tribunals created by the Security
Council to address crimes committed in the former
Yugoslavia and in Rwanda, the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court and the statute of the
Special Court for Sierra Leone have been expanded to
include gender-based violence, such as rape, enforced
prostitution and trafficking during armed conflict,
torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment,
and enslavement.

At the same time, we believe that other forms of
violence affecting women and girls in situations of
armed conflict, including hostage-taking, must also be
recognized and adequately acknowledged by an
appropriate legal body, specifically the International
Criminal Court. That would allow women and girls
who are victims of violence in situations of armed
conflict, to have the opportunity to pursue claims for
compensation for injuries and other physical and moral
damages.

Another dimension of the impact of armed
conflict on women and girls is the situation of women
and girl refugees and internally displaced persons.
Coping with problems of women refugees requires the
integration of specific gender-sensitive concerns into
the full spectrum of emergency assistance, in particular
the transition from relief assistance to development.
Women refugees can be effectively involved in the
process of identifying the needs of affected populations
and distributing humanitarian assistance in the field.
Their active participation in tailoring gender-sensitive
rehabilitation programmes relevant to their own
livelihood, food security and health would provide
better relief and employment opportunities for women
refugees.

All the aforementioned points bring me to the
conclusion that, despite women's increased
vulnerability and exposure to violence during armed
conflict, their role in giving and sustaining life has
gradually developed their unique skills and instincts for
contributing to peace and development. Therefore, I
believe that it must be our common goal to ensure that
the concerns of women are fully incorporated into our
efforts to maintain peace and security.

