Mr. Mlynar (Slovakia): My delegation associates
itself with the statement delivered earlier by the
observer of the European Union.

I would like to thank you and your delegation,
Mr. President, for organizing today's important debate
on women and peace and security, with a special focus
on preventing sexual violence in conflict through
empowerment, gender equality and access to justice. It
is crucial that the Security Council continue to address
various aspects of conflicts within the framework of
thematic debates. Today's debate also contributes
significantly to the systematic advancement of the
women and peace and security agenda in the work and
decision-making of the Security Council.

Slovakia considers prevention to be the cornerstone
of United Nations efforts aimed at peacebuilding and
sustaining peace. The women and peace and security
agenda, together with the goals ofinclusivity and gender
equality, definitely fits into the Secretary-General's
broader prevention agenda. The women and peace and
security agenda will also be instrumental in achieving
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), especially
SDG 5 and SDG 16, which recognize gender equality,
as well as peace, justice and strong institutions, as a
global development priority.

We would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his recent report on special measures for protection from
sexual exploitation and abuse (A/72/751), and commend
his commitment and leadership, not only where the
women and peace and security agenda is concerned
but also as shown by his efforts to implement a zero-
tolerance policy with regard to sexual exploitation and
abuse. Having the right information is often the first
step towards achieving our goals. For that reason,
we welcomed the launch of a dedicated website, in
August 2017, and the system-wide response to sexual
exploitation and abuse, as well as the development of
a repository of national laws on sexual exploitation
and abuse by the Special Coordinator on Improving
the United Nations Response to Sexual Exploitation
and Abuse.

The high-level meeting convened last September
provided important momentum, with the establishment
of the Circle of Leadership on the prevention of and
response to sexual exploitation and abuse in United
Nations operations. The President of Slovakia, His
Excellency Mr. Andrej Kiska, is a proud member of
the Circle.

Slovakia has also signed the voluntary compact
on preventing and addressing sexual exploitation and
abuse and made a financial contribution to the United
Nations Trust Fund for victims of sexual exploitation
and abuse last year. We encourage all Member States
to show their solidarity with victims and commit to
eradicating the scourge by signing the compact and
providing financial support as needed and where
possible. We are of the View that a meeting proposed
by the Secretary-General to be convened on the
sidelines of the general debate during the next session
of the General Assembly will contribute to building
momentum and raising the visibility of issues relating
to the empowerment of women and the fight against
sexual exploitation and abuse.

Slovakia fully supports the approach of the
Secretary-General, reiterated in his most recent
report (S/2018/250), which is based on prioritizing
the rights and dignity of victims. Member States, in
particular troop-contributing countries (TCCs) and
police-contributing countries (PCCs) must continue
to work closely with the United Nations in order to
combat impunity and hold perpetrators accountable.
Slovakia is a TCC and PCC that fully cooperates with
the Secretary-General.

The Security Council should look more closely
at the possibility of referring cases deemed to be
particularly important to the International Criminal
Court, for example those involving gender-based
crimes. The solid case law of international criminal
tribunals relating to sexual Violence can and should
also be used in national proceedings against alleged
perpetrators. It is equally important to address the root
causes of the scourge. The Secretary-General has quite
rightly stated in his report that weak State institutions,
in particular justice systems, exacerbate those factors
and can contribute to a climate of impunity. In a broad
sense, justice systems, including investigative bodies,
must adopt non-discriminatory and gender-sensitive
approaches. We must not forget the importance of
providing easily accessible legal aid to victims. In that
regard, civil society plays a crucial role.

As co-Chair of the Group of Friends of Security
Sector Reform, Slovakia wishes to recall resolution
2151 (2014) on the issue of security sector reform, which
underscores the importance of women's equal and
effective participation and full involvement in all stages
of security sector reform processes. A gender-sensitive
security sector is key to developing security sector
institutions that are non-discriminatory, representative
of the population and capable of effectively responding
to the specific security needs of diverse groups,
thereby playing a crucial role in prevention. Reforming
the security sector must also include the reform of
recruitment processes and an improvement in the
delivery of security services to address and prevent
sexual and gender-based violence.

In conclusion, the international community is
facing unprecedented challenges to global peace and
security. Civilians, including women and girls who
are often the most vulnerable, pay the highest price as
they face systematic violence and oppression. There
is no doubt that we must redouble our efforts to effect
changes on the ground, in particular in favour of women
and girls and societies in regions and countries affected
by conflict.

