Mr. Bernardini (Italy): Allow me to begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for organizing this open
debate of the Security Council and by complimenting
the Secretary-General, his Special Representative on
Sexual Violence in Conflict and the representative of the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security
on their important statements. I also wish to assure the
Special Representative of the Italian Government's full
support for the fulfillment of her mandate.
Italy aligns itself with the statements delivered on
behalf of the European Union and the Group of Friends
of Women, Peace and Security. I wish to make the
following remarks in a national capacity.

The Secretary-General's report on sexual violence
in conflict (S/2013/149) gives us a comprehensive
picture of a daunting challenge for the international
community. In far too many conflict-related situations,
women, men and children are not protected from such
international crimes. We are particularly concerned
about the serious human rights violations in northern
Mali, including rape; the heightened risk of rape
for refugees and internally displaced persons; the
perpetration of rape and sexual violence in detention
centres in Syria; and the alarming number of incidents
of sexual violence in Somalia. We also note with
concern emerging trends such as the perpetration of
sexual violence against men and boys, the plight of
children born as a result of a rape, and the practice of
forced marriages by armed groups.

There are key early-warning and conflict-
prevention tools that the international community can
use to prevent such heinous acts. For example, timely
briefings to the Security Council by the Secretary-
General's Special Representative and by UN-Women;
the roll-out of United Nations system monitoring,
analysis and reporting arrangements; and the inclusion
of women's protection advisers in peacekeeping
missions and political missions.

At the same time, we need a powerful response.
Again, the Security Council needs to step up pressure
on perpetrators of sexual violence in armed conflicts
through the adoption of targeted measures by the
relevant Sanctions Committees. When there is no ad
hoc committee, the Council should close any protection
or impunity gaps. The Council should incorporate
measures on sexual violence in all the relevant country
resolutions and in the authorization and renewal of
the mandates of peacekeeping and special political
missions.

The commitments ofthe parties to a conflict should
be monitored and followed up, and a zero-tolerance
policy should be taken towards sexual misconduct by
peacekeeping, political and peacebuilding personnel.

Internationaljustice has placed a welcome emphasis
on combating sexual violence as a complement to
national efforts, in particular under the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court. Comprehensive
justice strategies are essential, including accountability
and reparation, following a victim-centered approach.
The Security Council should also contribute to ensuring
that there no safe havens for the perpetrators of sexual
violence in armed conflict.

Cooperation with civil society organizations,
particularly women-led civil society organizations,
should accompany those actions. Governments must
ensure the protection of women's human rights
defenders, who face particular risks in conflict
situations.

In March, the Commission on the Status of
Women approved agreed conclusions with a strong
condemnation of all forms of violence against women
and girls, including sexual and gender-based violence.
The Arms Trade Treaty, adopted by the General
Assembly just this month, obliges States parties to
take into account the risk of conventional arms being
used to commit or facilitate serious acts of gender-
based violence. The Group of Eight made a strong
commitment to addressing impunity and preventing
sexual violence in conflict. Italy has always supported
all such commitments, which must now be followed by
concrete actions.

As a supporter of the landmark resolution 1820
(2009), Italy is convinced of the evident connection
between ending sexual violence and promoting peace
and security. That is why the Italian national action
plan on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
includes specific provisions to address sexual violence
in conflict. The 2013 Italian development cooperation
strategy includes capacity-building activities and the
provision of assistance to survivors in Democratic
Republic of Congo, Lebanon, Libya, Palestine, the
Sudan and Syria. The Centre of Excellence for Stability
Police Units, the Vicenza-based training centre, created
by the Italian Government in 2005, systematically
includes the prevention of sexual violence in their
courses for peacekeepers.

Let me conclude by urging everyone not to forget
that the primary responsibility for addressing sexual
violence still lies with States, as the Secretary-General
indicated in his call for national ownership and
leadership. As responsible Governments, we owe that
to the survivors of sexual violence and to the families
of victims. Italy stands ready to assist and support such
efforts.

