Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): As a number of
speakers have noted today, the Charter of the United
Nations makes clear that the United Nations was
established to protect the dignity and worth of the
human person. We therefore join our other colleagues
in thanking you, Mr. President, for convening
today's debate.

I emphatically appeal to all speakers not to
politicize this issue - one of the worst afflictions we
face in modern times. I think it behooves all of us to
treat the issue as a common problem that we are all
committed to mitigating and eventually eradicating.
For the avoidance of doubt, let me say incredibly
clearly that the United Kingdom salutes the courage of
Ms. Sultana in her fantastic work - I am very glad
that we had the chance to hear about it before the
Security Council undertakes a mission to Bangladesh
and Myanmar - and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for her efforts and the very
comprehensive briefing that she gave us today.

I think it is really positive that so many Members
of the United Nations want to speak in today's debate.
With that in mind, I will be brief. Like others, we
are committed to preventing, but also responding to,
sexual violence in conflict. We launched the Preventing
Sexual Violence in Conflict Initiative some years ago,
which shows how central tackling sexual violence is to
conflict prevention and peacebuilding. Five years on
from the global summit that launched that campaign,
the United Kingdom plans to hold an international
meeting in 2019 to maintain a global focus. We look
forward to working very closely with everybody in the
Chamber to achieve our common goals.

I agree with our Russian colleague that sexual
violence is one of the violations of international
humanitarian law that also applies to non-State actors,
which I think is incredibly important. We adopted the
General Assembly Declaration of Commitment to End
Sexual Violence in Conflict and the Group of Eight
Declaration on Preventing Sexual Violence in Conflict
in 2013. I hope that, as work progresses in this area,
we might be able to build on those two important
documents. IfI may, I would like today to focus on
three specific issues.

The first issue is the importance of education,
in particular for girls. Women and girls are
disproportionately affected by sexual violence in
conflict, as we have heard from many speakers,
including the Ambassadors of Kazakhstan and of
C6te d'Ivoire. That is not to detract from the point
that men and boys can also be victims, but it is women
and girls who suffer most. Therefore, by extension,
creating a global environment where gender equality
and women's rights exist and discriminatory attitudes,
behaviours and practices do not will obviously help to
achieve that goal. The British Foreign Secretary has set
a personal target for British diplomacy of helping other
countries achieve 12 years of quality education for all
girls. We are investing our development assistance in
girls' education, as we know that it contributes to a
safer and more prosperous world, reduces conflict and
increases stability.

My second point regards survivor stigma, which
the Polish representative very eloquently set out. I will
therefore not repeat what has already been said, but
just say that we completely agree with the focus that he
attributed to this area. The United Kingdom's Principles
for Global Action: Preventing and Addressing Stigma
Associated with Conflict-related Sexual Violence in
Conflict is a practical guide that we have drawn up to
raise awareness among policymakers of the challenges
concerning this issue. We truly hope that the principles
can be applied in all contexts where sexual violence
has occurred.

Finally, I will broach justice and accountability,
which other speakers have also touched upon. The
survivors of sexual violence and children born as
a result of rape must receive justice for what has
happened to them. That is a critical element of our
prevention efforts. There has been some important
progress - for example, at the Kavumu trial in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo late last year,
when 11 Congolese militia members were convicted of
crimes against humanity for murder and rape against
37 young children. But there is much more to be done.
Although Kosovo and the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant are not mentioned in the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2018/250), there continues to be a gap in
justice and accountability for sexual violence cases
from those conflicts.

In conclusion, we join others in urging all Member
States to implement the international protocol on the
documentation and investigation of sexual violence
in conflict. That provides guidance on achieving
accountability for this truly abhorrent crime, which we
must all pledge to tackle.

