Mr. Adom (Republic of Cote D'Ivoire ) (spoke in French): I would like to begin by congratulating the
United Kingdom on its assumption to the presidency
of the Security Council and assure you, Madam, of
the full support of the Republic of Cote D'Ivoire and
our wish for your success. I also extend my warm
congratulations to my friend and brother Jerry Matijila
and his entire team for their remarkable management of
the work of our Council last month.

My delegation welcomes the holding of today's
briefings on the joint solidarity mission organized by
the United Nations and the African Union in the Horn
of Africa in October. We thank Deputy Secretary-
General Amina Mohammed and Ambassador Fatima
Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African Union
to the United Nations, for the quality of their reports.

The recent positive developments observed in the
Horn of Africa eloquently reflect the determination
of the authorities of the countries of the region to be
part of the momentum aimed at achieving stability and
promoting sustainable development. However, despite
the progress made, all countries of that region of Africa
still face major challenges related to peace, security
and development. Women are undeniably one sector
of the population that pays a high price for the pursuit
for stability.

The Republic of Cote D'Ivoire therefore welcomes
the joint mission, which took place in a context of
questions concerning cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union and the contribution
of women to peace and security. Beyond its political
nature, the visit was a tangible sign of the need to
coordinate the efforts of both institutions to address the
multidimensional challenges of the region, including
the participation of women in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding activities.

While strengthening women's contribution to
peace and security is contingent on their increased
participation in political decision-making, conflict-
prevention mechanisms and policies for peacebuilding,
their financial empowerment and their inclusion in the
fabric of the national economy are a requirement for their
meaningful contribution. To that, we add the difficulties
regarding education, health and empowerment and
independence of women and young girls to strengthen
their social standing, thereby ensuring their more
proactive participation in socio-political conflict-
prevention mechanisms and for peacebuilding.

The recent visit of the members of the Security
Council to the Horn of Africa; the clarifications offered
last week by the Special Representative ofthe Secretary-
General for the Horn of Africa, Parfait Onanga-
Anyanga; and all that has been said this morning offer
hope for a better future in the Sudan and South Sudan
and relations between Ethiopia and Eritrea, Somalia
and Djibouti, Kenya and Somalia and so on.
A virtuous and hopeful momentum has been
launched in the Horn of Africa. Our Council should
work to strengthen it and ensure its inclusive character
with a growing place not only for women but also for
young people. To that end, the Council's vigilance and
sustained attention must be ongoing.

