Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I wish first to thank the
South African presidency for having convened this
very important open debate and for focusing the debate
on the implementation aspect of the women and peace
and security agenda.

Twenty years have passed, and extraordinary work
has been done in transforming the perception of the
role of women in peace processes. However, we are
concerned that women continue to be underrepresented
at all stages of peace processes and remain vulnerable
during and after conflict. Much needs to be done to
fully translate the objectives of the agenda into tangible
results on the ground. Moving forward, we wish to
highlight the following points.
First, it is necessary to strengthen and sustain
the political will of Member States. Unwavering
commitments and concrete actions on the part of all
nations are decisive factors for the success of the
agenda. Cooperation among the United Nations and
regional organizations could help to enhance its
implementation. Within the United Nations system,
effective coordination and coherence is essential,
taking into account the cross-cutting nature of gender
equality and women's empowerment. The General
Assembly, the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council, each with a unique role, need to work
together in a complementary manner and in compliance
with their respective mandates.

Secondly, we strongly emphasize the participation
of women at every stage of peace processes, including
post-conflict reconstruction. The aspect we want to
take as an example is mine action, which has often
been overlooked in our discussions. In Viet Nam, an
estimated 800,000 tons of residual explosive remnants
of war remain, severely affecting millions of people,
particularly women and children. To highlight the
problem, the Government of Viet Nam pays special
attention to the participation and contribution of
women in mine action, as women are the best educators
in terms of imparting knowledge to their children, their
families and the wider community. The Vietnamese
Women's Union plays an important role in this regard.
With the support of international partners, the Union
has actively engaged women in the process of raising
awareness on mine risks, giving assistance to Victims
and restoring mined lands to help ensure the safety
of and development for local people and sustain
their livelihoods.

Last but not least, we call for greater attention to
be paid to monitoring and measuring our progress. A
holistic approach to the implementation of the agenda
needs a comprehensive set of indicators to assess its
performance. Such indicators were developed 10 years
ago but have not been used to their full advantage. The
upcoming anniversary is a good opportunity to find
ways and means to bring the indicators into full play.

In conclusion, Viet Nam reaffirms our strong
commitment to the women and peace and security
agenda and will work closely with Member States
and other relevant stakeholders towards a meaningful
commemoration of the agenda next year.

