Mr. Vieira (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I wish to
begin by thanking Spain for organizing this open debate
and by thanking Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, the
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict for
their briefings.

(spoke in English)

We would also like to offer our deepest condolences
to the Russian Federation following the assassination of
Ambassador Andrey Karlov in Ankara yesterday. Brazil
strongly condemns all acts of terrorism, regardless of
their motivation.

Human trafficking is among the most despicable
crimes known to humankind, as it affects the most
vulnerable, such as migrants and internally displaced
persons, especially women and girls. When committed
in conflict situations, human trafficking might even
amount to a war crime. Brazil is particularly appalled
by the incidents of human trafficking committed by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, Boko Haram
and other terrorist organizations, which are frequently
associated with sexual enslavement.

Trafficked persons are treated as objects, not
as human beings. They are often subject to organ
harvesting, sexual exploitation, domestic service and
forced marriages. Brazil supports efforts aimed at
recovering the dignity of the victims of this heinous
crime and ensuring that they have access to justice.In
that regard, we welcome the appointment of Ms. Nadia
Murad Basee Taha as Goodwill Ambassador for
the Dignity of Survivors of Human Trafficking. By
courageously speaking out and fighting for those who
have endured these unlawful and degrading actions, she
serves as an example for other victims and inspiration
for us all.

The international community can do much more to
combat this scourge. Closer cooperation among States
and international agencies can help rescue victims
and bring traffickers to justice. We must redouble our
efforts to fulfil the Sustainable Developments Goals
pertaining to the issue. We must equally acknowledge
that long-term solutions can arise only from multilateral
approaches to peace and security that set dialogue
and mediation as priorities and place vulnerable
populations at the centre of concern. Insufficient
regard and resources for sustaining peace in crisis or
post-conflict situations, as well as an ill-conceived bias
for military solutions, help fuel rather than mitigate the
instability behind the current movements of refugees
and migrants.

Although human trafficking occurs in scenarios
plagued by armed conflict, there are no intrinsic or
automatic linkages between those two phenomena. As
stated in the Secretary-General's report (S/2016/949),
obviously the interrelationship between them may arise
under specific circumstances, but it should in no way be
deemed universal. It is important to acknowledge that
human trafficking is also regrettably taking place in
situations that do not constitute a threat to international
peace and security, such as situations of displacement
following natural disasters. The remedies to overcome
this scourge outside the context of conflict situations
might be different from those to be applied in armed
conflicts.

For the United Nations to effectively address human
trafficking in all its forms, the Security Council should
be mindful ofthe mandate and technical expertise of the
General Assembly and ofthe Human Rights Council, as
well as of the crucial role of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime in this realm.

In any case, the international community should
exercise the utmost caution not to confuse the
criminalization of trafficking in persons with the
criminalization of migration itself. Our actions should
aim at protecting the rights of, and providing assistance
to, those people who are forced to leave their homes and
fall prey to human traffickers, so as not to victimize
them yet again. In that context, Brazil wishes to recall a
fundamental assertion made by the Special Rapporteur
on the promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism in
his most recent report, to the effect that

"push-back operations, criminalized irregular
migration and abandoned pledges to accept refugees

. contribute to the establishment of chaotic and
covert movements of people, including through
trafficking, which might ultimately assist those
intent on committing acts of terrorism." (A/7I/384, para. 11)

The international community has a responsibility
to act to find a solution to the refugee crisis. It is
incoherent to defend the responsibility to protect and
the protection of civilians all the while turning our
backs on those fleeing conflict and persecution. Brazil
also reiterates that the criminalization of irregular
migration is unacceptable, since it ultimately fuels
human trafficking and disrespect for the fundamental
rights of migrants. As my country's experience in
granting humanitarian visas for Haitians since 2012 has
shown, one of the most effective means of dismanting
criminal human trafficking networks is by providing
regular and safe ways of entry for those forced to move.

Let us all work together towards ensuring that
human trafficking can be brought to a definitive end
and that its victims can resume their lives with dignity
and, most of all, hope.

