Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): At the outset,
Mr. President, allow me to express our sincere
appreciation for your initiative to convene this
ministerial meeting of the Security Council on this
important occasion. Our appreciation also goes to the
Secretary-General for his important report
(S/2010/498) on the steps and measures taken to
implement resolution 1325 (2000). We also appreciate
the role played by the United Nations machinery,
including both the Security Council and the General
Assembly, and all United Nations Member States that
are taking effective steps in that regard. We express our
appreciation for the briefings we heard at the beginning
of the Council's meeting today.

This year we are commemorating 10 years since
the adoption of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000), on women, peace and security, which reflected,
and still reflects, the responsibility of the international
community to ensure, protect and advance women's
rights in conflict and post-conflict situations and in
peace processes.

Egypt has always been supportive of resolution
1325 (2000) and its full implementation. It has long
played a historic role in ensuring the protection of
women in armed conflict situations. Egypt was even
among a number of States that contributed to the
formulation of the Declaration on the Protection of
Women and Children in Emergency and Armed
Conflict, which was adopted by the General Assembly
as resolution 3318 (XXIX) as early as 14 December
1974. That important Declaration, which has gone
unnoticed in Security Council resolution 1325 (2000)
and all subsequent relevant Security Council
resolutions and statements, condemned and prohibited
all attacks and bombings on civilian populations,
particularly women and children, thus planting the
early seeds of dealing effectively with women's issues
through the subsequent Security Council resolution
1325 (2000) and beyond.

A strong and sustained campaign is led by our
first lady, through the Suzanne Mubarak Women's
International Peace Movement, to support and foster
international and regional action to overcome the
dangers to which women are exposed in situations of
armed conflict and post-conflict situations and to
ensure gender equality and the empowerment of
women. The Movement has organized a series of
regional and international seminars and workshops,
with the support of United Nations entities, in order to
effectively implement national action plans to
implement resolution 1325 (2000), with a special focus
on promoting a culture of peace and enhancing

women's role in peacemaking, peacekeeping and post-
conflict peacebuilding. Among these significant
activities, an international forum entitled "Towards
enforcing Security Council resolution 1325 (2000)"
was held in Cairo in 2006, where very practical
recommendations were approved. Egypt will continue
to support Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) and
will host an international conference on the
implementation of the resolution in November this
year. This parallels our national efforts and our efforts
as Chair of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) to pay
greater attention to the advancement of women and
gender equality and to solidifying and enhancing UN
Women. This was evident in the establishing of the
NAM. First Ladies Summit, which started its activities
in 2009 during the NAM. summit at Sharm el-Sheikh,
and which held another meeting in Rome early this
year to deal with the participation of women on issues
of food security.

The Secretary-General's report, prepared at the
request of the Security Council, contains a set of
proposed indicators to track the implementation of the
resolution. These indicators, which we believe the
Council should approve, should apply only to the
situation of women in conflict and post-conflict
situations within the scope of application of resolution
1325 (2000). Generalizing these indicators and
attempting to impose them as a common basis for
reporting by States Members of the Organization,
United Nations agencies and institutions would require
thorough consideration and approval by the General
Assembly as well. Moreover, Egypt strongly believes
that any attempt to extend the scope of application of
the proposed indicators beyond conflict and post-
conflict situations, or any attempt to provide a wider
definition of conflict and post-conflict situations would
be a clear encroachment by the Security Council on the
competence of the General Assembly and would
negatively affect the mandate, competence and
effectiveness of UN Women, the entity that we all
struggled to create to deal effectively with the
promotion and protection of all women around the
world through ensuring gender equality and
empowerment of women. It would also cause clear
duplication in the work and activities by legally
binding international instruments such as the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women and other significant
documents and instruments, including the Programme
of Action of the United Nations International
Conference on Population and Development, held in
Cairo in 1994, the 1995 Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action and many other documents.

Egypt trusts that the Security Council supports its
activities as much as it supports resolution 1325 (2000),
and we look forward to continued dialogue between the
Security Council and the General Assembly, in a spirit
of cooperation and coordination that would ensure the
full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), along with
the enhancement of the role of UN Women and other
bodies working to support women's activities.

