Mr. Corman (Turkey): I would like to start by
thanking the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report (S/2010/604) and briefing, which contain
valuable recommendations for addressing challenges
regarding women and peace and security. The report is
indeed most useful for understanding the conflict-
related sexual violence in many parts of the world and
assessing the progress of the implementation of the
resolutions on this topic.

I would also like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Le Roy, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Wallstrom and the Military Adviser,
General Gaye, for their insightful briefings. I would
like to express once again that we welcome the
appointment of Ms. Wallstrom as the first Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict as a concrete step in the

implementation of resolution 1888 (2009) and that we
fully support her efforts. Last but not least, let me
thank the United States delegation and you personally,
Madame President, for your commitment to the cause
of women around the globe and for your most
commendable efforts in once again mobilizing the
Council and enabling the adoption of another important
resolution on this issue today.

Today, with this follow-up resolution, 1960
(2010), we are sending yet another strong message to
the world that sexual violence, especially against
women and children and particularly in situations of
armed conflict, is not acceptable and that such acts will
not be tolerated. As shown in the report of the
Secretary-General, sexual violence is not a by-product
or a side issue; it is deeply interconnected with the root
causes of conflict, is used widely as a tactic of war and,
sadly, continues even after the conflict has ended.

Thus the fight against sexual violence is not only
a matter of human rights but is, and should be, at the
heart of our efforts to stop and resolve conflicts. For
that reason, we completely share the Secretary-
General's assessment that sexual violence should be a
priority consideration not only for humanitarian actors
but also for peacemakers, peacekeepers and
peacebuilders.

Despite some small progress achieved so far, we
cannot fail to note that much remains to be done. Many
structural and institutional impediments remain, which
we should overcome in order to meet the challenges
before us. Likewise, equally strong measures are
needed to increase the participation of women in the
work of peace, including post-conflict recovery efforts
and peace processes, since that will help overcome the
negative consequences of sexual violence, such as
shame and stigma.

We have to redouble our efforts in the fight
against impunity, and targeted measures should be
imposed against the perpetrators of sexual violence and
rape. In that regard, the most significant added value of
the resolution we have just adopted derives from its
action-oriented nature. It not only condemns those who
perpetrate acts of violence against women but also
calls for action against them. In that vein, we believe
that when it comes to tackling conflicts and promoting
peace and security, resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820
(2008), 1888 (2009) and 1889 (2009) should all
become a regular part of the work of this Council.

We are also confident that the newly established
UN Women will further strengthen our work by
helping the United Nations pursue its efforts in a more
systematic and coordinated manner in areas related to
women and peace and security.

I wish to conclude by underlining that Turkey is
fully committed to exerting every effort to ensure the
effective implementation of resolution 1960 (2010), as
well as all the other resolutions on women and peace
and security.

