Ms. Banzon (Philippines): First, permit me to
join previous speakers in thanking the Government of
Romania for convening this important open debate.
Through you, Mr. President, I should also to thank our
speakers today for their comprehensive presentations.

The short video presentation showed us the
multiplier effect that results from the protection and
empowerment of women as active agents of peace and
as effective peacebuilders. Security Council resolution
1325 (2000) is not merely a resolution; it is a
movement wherein women's participation in securing
peace has been acknowledged as a critical factor of
success in conflict prevention and resolution.

There is still a huge gap when it comes to making
women part of peacebuilding in the public and official
sense. We need to make the flesh and spirit of
resolution 1325 (2000) tangible on the ground.

In the Philippines, the gender dimension of
conflict is being addressed, particularly in peace
negotiations and in peace and development efforts. To
ensure that the voices of women are heard, the
Government's peace panels included two women in the
core negotiating team. In the southern part of the
country, the Mindanao Commission on Women has
formulated a Mindanao women's position paper on the
peace agreement between the Government and the
Moro Islamic Liberation Front. Recently, women
leaders in Mindanao have been pursuing projects to
empower the women of southern Philippines to be
channels for respect for cultural diversity and for the
building of a more inclusive Mindanao society.
The Philippines framework for dealing with the
issue of women and conflict covers three areas: first,
ensuring the protection of women's human rights by
addressing violence against women, by providing
health services and by promoting human rights
education; secondly, promoting economic
empowerment by urgently addressing the lack of
access to water, electricity and other basic needs, as
well as by stimulating economic opportunities for
women; and thirdly, fostering effective governance by
promoting awareness of gender and peace concerns
among local Government units and by improving
women's participation in decision-making processes.

In short, our fundamental strategy for
implementing resolution 1325 (2000) lies in enabling
more women to systematically participate in conflict
prevention, management and resolution and in post-
conflict peacebuilding, while at the same time
rehabilitating their communities and ensuring basic
services and livelihoods. The Philippines ensures the
full participation of women in local peace processes by
building capacities and mobilizing peace
constituencies. For example, women in indigenous
communities are serving as intermediaries in local
peace dialogues and as mediators in the restoration of
broken peace pacts. They are also engaged in
mobilizing community participation in the formulation
of ancestral-domain development plans and
reconciliation processes.

We would also like to add that the Philippines is
particularly encouraged to note the findings of a recent
national survey on the Filipino people's perception of
women as peacemakers. A principal finding of the
survey is that a majority of Filipinos agree with the
statement "A successful peace process in Mindanao
needs the participation of women along with men". The
same statistical study also shows that both Filipino
men and women nationwide share the same strong
advocacy of women's representation in Government
peace panels. Also interesting is the conclusion that
over half of the nationwide sample agrees that a
woman has more talent than a man for finding a way to
settle a conflict without resorting to violence.

The Philippines welcomes the establishment of a
United Nations system-wide action plan to implement
resolution 1325 (2000), which has been explained
comprehensively by Ms. Mayanja. We note that many
of the components of that action plan are not entirely
new and have already been operational for some time.
What is new about the plan, however, is the
orchestration of all the actions towards realizing 1325
(2000). The action plan is valuable not only in
providing a coherent picture of our efforts to achieve
the resolution's goals, but also in pinpointing areas that
we might have missed and functions that could be
overlapping. The system-wide action plan would
therefore contribute much to the efficiency and
accountability of the United Nations system on gender
mainstreaming in the field of peace and conflict
resolution.

The Philippines believes that the system-wide
action plan is but a means to an end. Member States,
led by Security Council members, must be conscious of
the critical transition from the gains of gender
mainstreaming in peacekeeping missions to the
achievement of sustainable capacities at the local level.
The action plan must therefore function as a vehicle to
transplant investments in gender mainstreaming long
after the peace missions have dissolved. It would
therefore be important for the United Nations field
presence to be in close contact with national and local
authorities, as well as with local non-governmental
organizations, to ensure that gender mainstreaming
successes filter through to the most basic governance
and civil structures. In that regard, we were happy to
hear Mr. Guehenno report that gender units in
peacekeeping operations have been supporting the
capacity development of national counterparts in
Government and non-governmental sectors.

As developments on the ground continue to be
fluid, the Philippines would like to see the action plan
used also as a tool for gathering accurate information
on the status of women in conflict areas, including the
scope and gravity of gender-based violence and
progress on the empowerment of women in the area of
peace and security. Certainly, that information would
serve to guide the Council on the way forward in
implementation and monitoring. The action plan should
also remain responsive to changes in the environment
and should be updated, as necessary.

In conclusion, the Philippines looks forward to
the establishment of the proposed peacebuilding
commission; resolution 1325 (2000) should be among
the basic pillars of its work. Essential to the work of
the peacebuilding commission would be its
coordination with civil society, including women's
organizations, both at the Headquarters level and at the
country level.

The current state of the restructuring and
rationalizing of the organization and work of the
United Nations presents a rare opportunity to boost the
work of mainstreaming gender in peace efforts. The
Philippines will continue to contribute to the work of
strengthening the gender perspective in all stages of the
peacebuilding process.

