Mr. Laajava (Finland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Nordic countries: Denmark,
Iceland, Norway, Sweden and my own country,
Finland.

Let me start by thanking the Nigerian presidency
for having organized this debate and the Secretary-
General, Under-Secretary-General Bachelet and the
President of the Economic and Social Council,
Ambassador Kapambwe, for their valuable remarks. I
wish to convey special thanks for the insights of Orzala
Ashraf Nemat on behalf of civil society.
Fully recognizing the contribution of women and
increasing their effective participation before, during
and after conflict is a priority for the Nordic
Governments, and we thank you, Madam President, for
the choice of the theme of this year's debate.

Last year, we celebrated the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000). The emphasis was on
commitments for action and systematic follow-up. We
thank the Secretary-General for his excellent report
(S/2011/598*), which includes concrete data based on
the indicators the Council agreed to last year and a
very good strategic framework to guide the United
Nations in the way ahead.

Exactly a week ago, the Security Council
resolution on Yemen (resolution 2014 (2011)) called
upon all concerned parties to improve women's
participation in conflict resolution and encouraged
them to facilitate the equal and full participation of
women at decision-making levels. Yesterday's
resolution on Libya (resolution 2016 (2011))
emphasized the importance of the full and equal
participation of women and the respect for the human
rights of all. We welcome these very strong calls.

During this eventful year, women have taken to
the streets and squares across North Africa and the
Middle East and demanded change, equality, freedom
and justice alongside men. We call on the Security
Council to ensure that women's voices are heard and
reflected in planning, actions and results. Provisions on
women's full participation and on the protection and
promotion of women's human rights should be
included in all relevant country-specific resolutions,
and they should be systematically followed up when
the special envoys and Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General report back to the Council.

The conflict-prevention and mitigation efforts of
women through civil society and governmental
channels deserve our increased financial, political and
technical support. Civil society participation serves a
double aim: it fosters inclusive dialogue and
development. It also builds the capacity of women to
engage in more formal processes. Increasing the
number of women in Government structures, for
example in the security and justice sectors, makes such
institutions more democratic, gender-responsive and
accountable. This contributes to conflict prevention.

Women must be fully involved from the very
beginning of peace processes so as to enhance the
quality and sustainability of peace agreements.
Mediation and negotiation teams should have
specialized gender expertise and carry out inclusive
consultations. Further efforts are urgently needed to
nominate and appoint more women mediators and to
address the obstacles women face. Increasing the
number of women in international organizations and in
national diplomatic services is one tool for enlarging
the pool of qualified women. At the same time,
guidance and expertise is needed for mediators to
integrate a gender perspective in ceasefire and in peace
agreements. The Nordic countries welcome the work of
UN-Women and fully support its joint strategy with the
Department of Political Affairs on gender and
mediation as an effective tool.

In post-conflict planning and budgeting, there
should be targeted actions and sector-specific gender
experts for all relevant areas, such as security sector
reform and economic recovery. The Secretary-
General's seven-point action plan on peacebuilding
(see S/2010/466) provides detailed recommendations
on that. We welcome the work done so far. However,
much remains to be done, and we encourage the United
Nations to implement all of the recommendations
without delay. As donors, we commit to do our part
both by supporting women's participation in
post-conflict donor conferences and by directing
funding for initiatives that contribute to gender
equality.

A year ago we made commitments to advance the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). I would like
to report briefly on three areas in which the Nordic
countries have concretely implemented their
commitments.

The first area is national action plans. All Nordic
countries have established national actions plans based
on a holistic view of peace, security, development and
human rights. Several line ministries, governmental
agencies and civil society organizations work together
to ensure timely and effective implementation and
promotion of resolution 1325 (2000). The Nordic
national action plans are results-oriented, and their
implementation is guided by a set of indicators to
measure real progress.

The Nordic countries have engaged in twinning
and cooperation with partner countries, including
Afghanistan, Kenya, Liberia, Nepal and the
Philippines. We provide technical and financial support
for the development of their new structures. But we
also learn from them and hope that in this way our
activities will be more responsive to the needs and
priorities of countries with recent experience of
conflict or fragility. Together we foster political will
for women's rights in every part of the world.

The Nordic countries have greatly benefited from
the advice and partnership of civil society. We support
the work of local and regional non-governmental
organizations from Afghanistan to the Great Lakes
region and from Nepal to the Sudan.

Secondly, we are pleased to report a clear
increase in the number of women among the military,
police and civilian peacekeepers deployed. We also
committed to train our personnel on gender equality
and human rights. The mixed police teams deployed in
Haiti, Liberia and Afghanistan have all received
training on resolution 1325 (2000). Some have been
specifically trained to address sexual and gender-based
violence. We have developed a human rights manual
for all crisis management personnel and supported
gender-sensitive security sector reform in Palestine and
the Balkans.

Thirdly, we have increased our efforts to fight
impunity, with due attention to the rights of victims.
Justice, including meaningful reparations for victims,
is essential in restoring the confidence of the people in
their Government. There should never be amnesty for
the most serious crimes, including sexual violence,
which can constitute war crimes and crimes against
humanity.

We remain staunch supporters of the International
Criminal Court and have been at the forefront of the
work linking its complementarity principle with
development activities that strengthen rule of law at the
national level. We have also led the discussions around
the review of the Court's strategy for victims, and we
support its Trust Fund for Victims.

I thank you, Madam President, for this
opportunity to share some of the Nordic countries'
views and recommendations. We stand ready to
continue to work with the Council and with the United
Nations towards full implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).

