Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): I, too, wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for putting this matter before the Council
and for being a champion of this issue throughout the
year. As a country that co-sponsored resolution 2242
(2015), which was adopted yesterday, we are fully
committed to being engaged with the matter.

I also would like to thank the Secretary-General
and the other high-level briefers for their briefings of
yesterday.

We strongly believe that women's rights and
gender equality are not only a human rights topic, but
also an important peace and security issue. Although
maintaining international peace and security is central
to our Organization and especially for the Council, today
we face far too often situations when the fundamental
norms of international, humanitarian and human rights
law, as well as other universally recognized principles,
are blatantly abused. Georgia condemns in the strongest
terms, all cases of violations of women's rights and

discrimination, both in wartime and in peacetime,
whether committed by State or non-State actors.

Despite the broad understanding of the nature of
the problem and the numerous efforts made at all levels
to address them, we have yet to see tangible progress
on the ground. Women and girls continue to fall victim
to acts of violence, murder, maiming and arbitrary
detention committed by parties to conflicts across the
globe. Boko Haram's abduction of hundreds of women
and girls in Chibok and the kidnappings in Syria and
Iraq committed by Daesh and other terrorist groups
are glaring examples of the types of gross violations
to which women in armed conflict are subjected.
The areas controlled by non-State actors and terrorist
groups, as well as territories under illegal foreign
military occupation, are zones of grave risk for women,
with imminent threats to their lives posed by actors that
operate in total denial of internationally recognized
legal norms.

We need to act adequately and make use of all
United Nations tools and mechanisms to respond to the
existing challenges. We need to embark on a elaborative,
holistic approach, but at the same time remain sensitive
to nuance and detail. We need to address women's
rights at the international and regional levels but
simultaneously remain focused on individual countries.

As we celebrate the fifteenth anniversary of
the adoption of landmark resolution 1325 (2000) on
women and peace and security, Georgia has its own
story to share with the international community. By
adopting a national action plan on women and peace
and security for the period 2012-2015, Georgia became
one of 49 countries to have a separate policy document
devoted to this important issue. The Government of
Georgia plans to renew the aforementioned action
plan in the very near future. Moreover, 2015 has
been declared the Year of Women in Georgia, as we
remain committed to robust actions to reform our
domestic gender legislation, including by undertaking
a number of legislative changes and introducing new
laws, which are in line with international standards and
fully correspond to our commitments. In that regard,
the adoption of an anti-discrimination law was an
important, milestone achievement.

In 2013, the Parliament of Georgia adopted a
domestic Violence action plan for 2013-2015, followed
by a national action plan on gender equality for
2014-2016, in compliance with the Council of Europe's
gender equality strategy for the same years. The plan
is aimed at combating gender stereotypes and violence
against women and guaranteeing equal access tojustice.
In addition, Georgia recently signed the the Council
of Europe convention on preventing and combating
violence against women and domestic violence, and we
plan to ratify it in the very near future.

As this year marks the twentieth anniversary of
the adoption of the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action, I would like to reiterate Georgia's strong
commitment to the advancement of women. Recently,
alongside 87 Member States, Georgia committed
to further improving gender equality for the full
implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action at the Global Leaders' Meeting on Gender
Equality and Women's Empowerment.

As an illustration of our strong commitment to
the advancement of women, in collaboration with the
United Nations and the European Union, on 9 and
10 November we plan to organize an international
high-level conference on meeting gender equality
challenges and opportunities in the European
Neighbourhood Policy in Tbilisi, Georgia. We believe
that the empowerment of women stands at the centre of
sustainable development. In that regard, we once again
welcome the stand-alone and cross-cutting gender
equality Goal 5 of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly 70/ 1), adopted at the
Sustainable Development Summit last month.

Unfortunately, the human rights situation, in
general, and the situation with regard to women's and
children's rights and gender equality in particular,
remain a serious challenge in the Georgian territories
that are under illegal Russian military occupation.
Specifically, women in the occupied regions continue to
suffer grave violations of their fundamental rights and
freedoms, such as the freedom of movement, the right
to education in their native language and other political,
economic, civil, social and cultural rights to which
they are entitled under the Constitution of Georgia,
the United Nations Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women and other
international mechanisms. The humanitarian situation
in the occupied territories requires immediate attention,
especially since no international organization has been
allowed to monitor the human rights situation there. We
therefore call on the Russian Federation once again to
abide by the August 2008 ceasefire agreement.

In conclusion, I would like to extend my gratitude
to United Nations agencies, especially to UN-Women,
for their invaluable assistance in the process of the
empowerment of women in my country. Alongside
other United Nations Member States, Georgia once
again reiterates its commitment to further promoting
gender equality and the enjoyment of all human rights
and freedoms by all women.

