Mr. Spatafora (Italy): The presence of Minister
Osei-Adjei among us is an honour; it shows the
significance that the Ghanaian presidency attaches to
an issue of crucial importance, for reasons that we all
know.

I should like, first of all, to thank the Secretary-
General for his very focused statement. I also wish to
thank Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for his
briefing. It would be very useful if we could have
copies of his talking points, because he discussed
several points that I have to build upon. I thank Special
Adviser Mayanja for the passion that she expressed in
her briefing, which I shall also revisit. I thank
Ms. Sandler, Ad Interim Executive Director of the
United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM), for her briefing. Italy is a true believer in
and a strong supporter of UNIFEM, which is a shining
example in the galaxy of funds within the United
Nations system. If UNIFEM. were not there, we would
have to create it. Finally, I thank Ms. Torry,
Coordinator of the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security, for her briefing, which was very
passionate. I will also come back to that in a
presentation that is cool, but all the more compelling
because of its coolness.
In view of the constraints on our time, I shall
touch on just a few points, dispensing with my talking
points.

One of the points made by Mr. Guehenno was the
way in which we enhance and have clearly in mind the
relationship between protection and empowerment.
That is a double track, and we must make progress on
both tracks. I will not elaborate on that here; it has
been very eloquently addressed by many preceding
speakers.

Another point - which, as we have heard from
those around this table, is very sensitive - is that, as
Mr. Guehenno said, it is time to review the segmented
approach. We could also put it the way that the
Secretary-General and Ms. Mayanja did: we must
decide whether or not to create new bodies or new
mechanisms. I do not want to belabour this point. But I
fully agree that it is now time to review the segmented
approach. What we need is, to quote Mr. Guehenno
once again, a mutually reinforcing, more coordinated
and integrated approach.

Thanks to the commitment of the Secretary-
General and the Secretariat, including, inter alia, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and UNIFEM,
much progress has undoubtedly been made, as has been
pointed out. But, as has also been said, much remains
to be done. I think, however, that we have to go deeper
into this point - the relation between progress
achieved and what remains to do.

I am not so sure that I would agree with what
Ms. Sandler said, namely, that the presidential
statement that is to follow is a message of hope. It is,
of course, useful, but I wonder - looking at it and at
what we do from the point of view of those who are the
victims on the ground, of those who suffer - if, after
six or seven years, what we produce, namely,
presidential statements, meetings, plans of action and
so on - could be perceived as a message of
frustration, as a message of despair, rather than as a
message of hope, because what we manage to do is to
do only presidential statements.

What I think and hear - and I think Belgian
Special Envoy Chevalier hinted at this - is that we
know very well what have to do. In a certain way, we
do not need more information. Of course, I fully agree
that having more information is very useful. But if we
really wanted to, we could act today on the information
that we have. We do not need more information. We
need to know how we can have an impact on the
ground, because the benchmark of our credibility, the
benchmark of our success comes, as Ms. Torry has told
us, from the NGO point of view, that is to say, from the
ground. In the last six years has the suffering
diminished? Has the number of victims diminished? I
am not so sure, listening to what has been said - and I
thank the French delegation for what we heard just
now. The number of victims in Kivu alone in just the
past few months is 27,000, if I remember well. Clearly,
I think, we have had a setback.

So, I think the prism through which we have to
look at what we must do is the awareness that there has
been a setback, notwithstanding everything that we
have done, or everybody's efforts, or the evidence of
progress. But, at the end of the day, what counts is that
there has been a setback, seen from the point of view
of the people who suffer on the ground. It is from that
point that we will have to start to act.

