Ms. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October. Colombia appreciates the convening of this
open debate to commemorate the tenth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
especially congratulate Under-Secretary-General
Michelle Bachelet on her appointment as the first
Executive Director of UN Women. I am grateful for her
presence here today and for her comprehensive
statement.

In his report on women and peace and security
(S/2010/498), the Secretary-General acknowledges that
significant progress has been made in several areas.
However, he also warns that much remains to be done
to realize the vision of resolution 1325 (2000). In
particular, the report refers to the need to redouble
efforts to ensure that women can play their rightful role
in conflict prevention and resolution and in
reconstruction processes. Similar efforts are needed to
protect women from abuse during conflict, including
gender-based violence.

In order to meet the various existing international
commitments with regard to the promotion and
protection of the rights of women, including Security
Council resolutions on women and peace and security,
Colombia has at its disposal a significant
constitutional, legal and institutional framework and
gender-based strategies that cover social, economic and
cultural aspects.

Among recent developments, I would like to
mention that, as recognition of the particular needs of
women and with a view to ensuring a life free of
violence, in December 2008 we adopted law No. 1257
of 2008. That law sets out standards of awareness,
prevention and punishment for forms of violence and
discrimination against women. It extends the concept
of Violence against women to any act or omission that
causes death, injury or physical, sexual, psychological,
economic or patrimonial injury because of gender, as
well as threats of such acts, coercion or arbitrary
deprivation of liberty, whether in the public or private
spheres.

In addition, under decree No. 164, of 25 January
2010, the national Government set up the Inter-Agency
Group to Eradicate Violence against Women, a body
that will facilitate comprehensive, targeted, accessible
and quality care to women who are victims of violence
and will act as a forum to coordinate and organize the
various entities engaged in that task.

Furthermore, the Presidential Advisory Office on
Gender Equality, the United Nations Development
Fund for Women, the United Nations Population Fund
and the International Organization for Migration
jointly run the Integrated Programme Against Gender
Violence, which seeks to help prevent, treat and
eradicate gender-based violence affecting Colombian
women both publicly and privately. The Programme
underscores the most frequent and severe cases
nationally and gives particular attention to displaced,
indigenous and Afro-Colombian women.

In peacebuilding, State bodies work together in
joint efforts to guarantee the protection of women from
risks that affect them in areas where there are illegal
armed groups. Furthermore, ensuring inclusion of the
gender perspective and the full participation of women
in the prevention of violence is being promoted. In that
regard, with the support of the European Union and
citizen participation, the Peace Laboratories
programme is being promoted in areas affected by
violence. That initiative explores paths of dialogue and
coexistence, peaceful mechanisms for resistance and
protection of the civilian population. Women are
beneficiaries and/or agents of projects that promote
peace in those areas.

Moreover, guidelines for the displaced population
are being drawn up with a targeted gender approach.
Their goal is to provide effective care that responds to
the specific needs and impact that displacement has on
women. The guidelines are based on three guiding
aspects: participation a focus on law, and a gender-
perspective approach.

The national policy for the socio-economic
reintegration of people demobilized from illegal armed
groups seeks full inclusion of the gender perspective
approach in institutional actions. Likewise, there is a
programme for the prevention of domestic violence in
families with reintegrated persons.

Although Colombia has a significant legislative
framework and public policies that mainstream the
gender perspective and variables, there persist
challenges such as full integration, a review of
indicators on the basis of international standards and
the adoption of specific measures against gender-based
violence.

For their part, the bodies responsible for
implementing the Organization's policies and mandates
on women and peace and security within the United
Nations system must strengthen coordination and
cooperation and avoid duplication of work. My country
trusts that the new gender framework adopted by the
United Nations and, in particular, the new entity UN
Women ensure consistency in the Organization's
activities.

Strengthening the role and capacity of women
and respect for their rights are priority areas for the
Government of Colombia. As a member of the Security
Council's Group of Friends of resolution 1325 (2000),
my country reaffirms its commitment to implementing
policies, plans and programmes that broaden and
strengthen the role of women in peacebuilding.

