Ms. Fritsche (Liechtenstein): We thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate and for
the personal efforts of Secretary Rice on the issue of
women and peace and security, in particular in the
framework of the Women Leaders' Working Group.

We appreciate the careful preparation of today's
meeting, including the early submission of a draft
resolution. However, even though we are happy to
sponsor the draft resolution, we would have preferred
for the debate to have an impact on its drafting. We
hope that future open debates will follow that example.

My delegation has supported resolution 1325
(2000) in its entirety ever since its adoption, and we
believe that it has had a positive impact on the ground.
Nevertheless, we agree with the assessment in the
concept paper that progress towards achieving its
major goals has been slow and uneven. In particular,
the United Nations must appoint more women to senior
positions with regard to preventive diplomacy,
mediation and peace operations. This would have a
clear impact on the topic under discussion today.
Appointing more women to leading positions would,
without any doubt, have a catalytic effect and empower
women affected by armed conflict. It would strengthen
the perception that women are stakeholders, as opposed
to mere victims or aid recipients.

A few years ago, during my time as Permanent
Representative in New York, I had the honour of
heading a group of like-minded ambassadors aiming to
increase the presence of women in such positions. The
success of our cooperation with the Secretary-General
in that regard then was very modest indeed and, several
years later, it is sad to note that very little progress has
been made, in spite of repeated expressions of good
intentions from all sides. Nevertheless, we believe that
resolution 1325 (2000) has, overall, had a positive
impact on the work of the United Nations in this field,
while its full potential has yet to be explored.
Sexual violence is one of the most important
aspects of resolution 1325 (2000) and merits a separate
discussion. While sexual violence has always been a
part of armed conflict, its systematic and targeted use
in numerous situations today is not just a by-product of

hostilities or merely a war crime. It has become a
method of warfare that aims to destroy the social fabric
of communities in order to achieve political and
military goals. The General Assembly addressed this
trend as early as in 1995 by adopting resolutions on
rape and sexual violence in the context of the conflict
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, but the trend has continued
unabated. The increasingly systematic use of sexual
violence is part of a larger pattern. One of the main
consequences of the changing nature of armed conflict
is the increasing victimization and targeting of civilian
populations, which puts women and girls at particular
risk.

The protection of civilians must be an inherent
task for all peacekeeping missions. This applies in
particular to acts of sexual violence. Peacekeepers are
currently providing protection, including against sexual
violence, only on an ad hoc basis and under a flexible
interpretation of their sometimes vague mandates.
Future mandates must provide clear guidance, in
particular to commanders, on how to protect civilians,
including girls and women, from sexual violence.
Resolution 1794 (2007) can serve as an example in this
regard. Furthermore, predeployment and on-mission
training programmes must instruct police, security and
humanitarian personnel on how to recognize and react
to incidents of sexual violence.

Sadly, girls and women in affected regions often
associate uniformed personnel with sexual violence. It
is therefore crucial to deploy more women in civilian
components of peacekeeping missions, empower local
women leaders and increase their role in all
peacekeeping efforts.

Most important, those who are supposed to
provide protection must never themselves become
perpetrators. All acts of sexual violence committed by
peacekeepers, including sexual exploitation of local
woman and child prostitution, are unacceptable. Such
acts heavily undermine the credibility and
effectiveness of any given peace operation, but also of
our Organization as a whole. Zero tolerance can be the
only answer to such incidents. Indeed, the ultimate
goal must be for the attitude and behaviour of
peacekeepers towards women to serve as a model for
local communities.

Very significant progress has been made over the
past few years with regard to the issue of impunity.
Both ad hoc tribunals established by the Council have
made highly significant contributions in this respect. In
the Akayesu case, the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda established that rape, under certain
circumstances, can constitute an act of genocide. The
codification of sexual violence as internationally
punishable crime occurred in the context of the
adoption of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court in July 1998. The explicit inclusion of
sexual violence in the provisions dealing with war
crimes and crimes against humanity was one of the
many significant steps forward reflected in the Rome
Statute.

Today, almost 10 years later, the Court is fully
operational and is currently dealing with situations
where sexual violence is rampant. One of them is the
situation in Darfur, which the Security Council has
referred to the Court. It is therefore clear that the parts
of the draft resolution dealing with the question of
impunity are indeed incomplete without a specific
reference to the International Criminal Court. We think
that the text would have sent an even stronger message
if it had included such a reference. We also think that
the Council should call for cooperation with all
international tribunals and courts that deal with sexual
violence.

