ArchbishopChullikatt:Attheoutset,Mr.President,
allow me tojoin other delegations in congratulating you,
Sir, and the United Kingdom delegation on presiding
over the work of the Security Council this month.
Today's discussion provides a welcome opportunity for
the wider membership to collaborate on the means to
end the ongoing proliferation of sexual violence.

The Holy See, while operating within the family
of nations, constantly strives to promote peace,
security and the rule of law as a base for enhancing
development, freedom and the dignity of all peoples
and each person, from conception to natural death.
While firmly opposing recourse to armed conflict as
a means of resolving international or national disputes,
the Holy See recognizes the tragic and sad evidence
that, in many parts ofthe world, war is still an appalling
reality.

The international community as a whole and this
body in particular have a grave responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security and,
where conflict occurs, finding the means for restoring
a peace based on justice and solidarity.

Within that framework, the Holy See appreciates
the Security Council's commitment to enhancing
international awareness of - and the resolve to
address - the victimization of women and girls, as
well as men and boys, by the heinous acts of sexual
violence so often found in situations of armed conflict.
A just response to sexual Violence must be motivated
not by revenge, which would simply perpetuate a chain
of hatred, but must rather seek to build the common
good. That responsibility demands that perpetrators
be held accountable for their actions in order to deter
future violence, while at the same time repairing the
damage done to victims and the community as a whole
by providing the necessary reparations, support and
care, in recognition of their human dignity and worth.

A truly human-centred approach to providing
assistance to victims and their communities includes
respect for life at all stages of development. In that
regard, we regret that resolution 2106 (2013), adopted
today, bypasses that noble concept and instead seeks to
promote a potentially destructive notion of health care
under the banner of sexual and reproductive health,
which too often is used as ajustification for taking life
rather than upholding it. The death of innocent unborn
children only visits further violence on women already
in difficulty.

Through its institutions, particularly female
religious institutions, the Catholic Church is firmly
committed to compassionate outreach to victims, to
alleviating their sufferings and accompanying them as
far as possible on the way to recovery and rehabilitation,
and to resuming their own lives in freedom and dignity.
We hope that future discussions of the issue will remain
focused on the topic under discussion in a holistic
manner, rather than being diverted towards promoting
political or ideological agendas that serve only to harm
human dignity and are already under discussion in
other United Nations forums.

Secondly, respect for the rights of victims and
offenders requires that penal processes be guided
by a meticulous search for truth and conducted in a
timely manner. Those accused must be able to defend
themselves, and judges given the independence
necessary to enable them to avoid ruling for reasons
other than justice itself. Public pronouncements of
guilt by the media or political groups, at the national
or international level, before tribunals reach their
decisions, can seriously hamper our collective efforts
to combat the scourge of sexual violence.

Thirdly, in recognition of the principle of
complementarity, international tribunals must support
the role of national systems as the primary authority
in holding individuals accountable. To that end, States
must be provided with the necessary technical and
legislative resources for addressing sexual violence in
conflict settings and for upholding humanitarian law
and internationally agreed human rights standards.
Such respect for national authorities helps to restore
trust in national and local judicial systems and enables
victims and affected communities to participate more
fully. It is only when such national systems prove
unable or unwilling to shoulder their responsibility to
defend innocent victims and the common good that the
international community has an obligation to intervene
to protect victims and safeguard human dignity.

That obligation does not fall on States alone;
international organizations such as the United Nations
must also adhere to it. This is particularly important in
the area of peacekeeping operations, so that those sent
to protect people from violence do not become a source
ofit themselves. In that regard, my delegation welcomes
the measures outlined by the Secretary-General in his
report on "Special measures for protection from sexual

exploitation and sexual abuse" (A/65/742).

I would like to thank you once again, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting and focusing our discussion
on such an important topic.

