Mr. Nina (Albania): We appreciate the opportunity
to take part in this open debate on the review of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000) to assess progress at the
global, regional and national levels in implementing the
resolution. We also welcome the adoption by consensus
yesterday of resolution 2242 (2015), which we were
very pleased to co-sponsor.

We would also like to thank the Spanish presidency
of the Security Council for the very interesting concept
note (S/2015/749, annex) issued in preparation for the
debate.

As pointed out in the concept note, we concur
with the view that Member States have the primary
responsibility to ensure the implementation of the
global commitments and obligations in the context of
the women and peace and security agenda.

Albania is not a post-conflict country. It has been
striving, however, to achieve higher standards in facing
new challenges and emerging asymmetric threats
on our path to consolidating democracy, peace and
security, and respect for human rights.

My Government is convinced that peace and
security cannot be achieved without joint efforts by
both women and men, given the inextricable links
between gender equality and international peace and
security.

In implementing resolution 1325 (2000), the
Government of Albania identified and focused its
efforts on several key objectives that take account of
the need to enhance women's leadership; increase
the participation of women in political and public
decision-making; increase the participation of women
in the police and armed forces; and enhance the relevant
programmes for professional training on gender issues
and violence against women.

Recent legal acts such as those entitled "Protection
from Discrimination" and "Military Discipline in the
Armed Forces of the Republic of Albania" provide for
appropriate legal and disciplinary measures in cases
of sexual harassment, sexual violence and gender-
based violence committed by military personnel in
discharging their duties. All military structures under
the armed forces and the Ministry of Defence have their
own gender equality focal point. There are currently
nine focal points altogether: seven women and two men.

On the normative framework, the national action
plan on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
adopted in 2011, provides for enhanced institutional
gender capacities, which made it possible, starting that
year, for eight women to participate in international
peacekeeping operations.

The 2013 directive from the Ministry of Defence
provided for gender equality and gender mainstreaming
as annual priorities, achieving later that year the
objective of 17.7 per cent representation of women in
the armed forces.

Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
significant threats to global peace and security have
emerged, the most prominent of which is the rise of
violent extremism. The Balkans Regional Summit
on Countering Violent Extremism, held in Tirana on
19 and 20 May 2015, recognized that women are both
vulnerable to radicalization and have an important role
to play in countering violent extremism.

The Summit further committed to integrating
women into efforts to counter violent extremism and
underscored the need to work together in the region to
better understand the precise nature of violent extremist
threats at the local and regional levels, including by
promoting research, analysis and information-sharing
on the drivers of Violent extremism in all of its forms
for all segments of society, including women and youth,
and on how best to counter those drivers.

Civil society has also played a very important role
in implementing resolution 1325 (2000). In recognizing
this role, my Government has systematically
engaged and supported women's organizations in the
implementation of the 1325 agenda. We emphasize
in this context the importance of developing and
implementing the relevant national strategies and plans
of action, in close cooperation with civil society.

In concluding, allow me to underline the need for
the Security Council to strengthen its commitment
to the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda through a more coherent and
systematic approach. Let us not forget that resolution
1325 (2000) was adopted following a decade of terrible
failures in protecting women, including on the territory
of the former Yugoslavia. This fifteenth anniversary
of the resolution should mobilize us in addressing key
challenges of the women and peace and security agenda,
including the lack of consistent implementation.

