Mr. Cardi (Italy): Allow me to begin by thanking
you, Madame President, for organizing today's open
debate of the Security Council. I also wish to thank
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Zainab Bangura, for her work, as well as the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2014/181) and
the speakers for their important contributions to the
discussion.

Italy aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union and wishes to make
the following remarks in its national capacity.

Two months ago, Italy released a revision of
its national action plan on the women and peace
and security agenda with a view to accelerating the
implementation of the plan over the next three years.
The revised plan not only reports on our progress but
also shows the efforts made to adopt a more effective
approach. The paradigm of our new national action
plan towards the realization of that agenda is based
on three concepts - coordination, integration and
mainstreaming.

First, with respect to coordination and integration,
our reference point at the national level is the
Interministerial Committee on Human Rights, which
coordinates within the various administrations all
activities relating to women and peace and security
issues. To facilitate communication and share
information, we are also setting up a specific online
roster of experts who will be made available to relevant
civil society organizations and Government ministries.
Lastly, our revised national action plan introduces a
self-evaluation exercise, by which we are committed
to a periodic self-monitoring of all initiatives. An
assessment report will be issued by the end of the year.

Secondly, with regard to mainstreaming, for some
years now, we have been mainstreaming gender-related
issues into all socioeconomic initiatives, and at the
international level we have definitively overcome the
limitations of separate targeted gender-emancipation
programmes. We are convinced that by using that
cross-cutting approach we will be more effective in
preventing all forms of violence.

We have promoted gender mainstreaming across
the armed forces, in training programmes carried out
by Centre of Excellence for Stability Police Units in
Vicenza, and in our police force, and by establishing
a specific gender-perspective unit at the Ministry of
Defence. I would also like to state that close to eight per
cent of Italian peacekeepers are women, which is above
the average ratio in peacekeeping operations.

Italy has been a strong advocate of initiatives on
women and peace and security since the beginning,
having been, inter alia, in 2010, the first country to
call for the women and peace and security agenda
to be introduced into the framework of the universal
periodical review mechanism. In 2015, the Security
Council will hold a high-level meeting to review the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). It will be a
moment - the moment - where we will have to provide
responses to the recommendations made and shape the
way forward. For the sake of brevity, in that respect, I
will make only two suggestions about weaknesses in
implementing the agenda, where we think still more
engagement is needed.

First, with respect to the lack of information,
as the observer of the European Union has stated,
we need to enhance data sharing, which can provide
critical support for the advancement of the agenda
by providing a clearer picture of the reality on
the ground and subsequently by exerting political
pressure where needed. Secondly, with respect to the
lack of accountability and the persistent impunity of
perpetrators, reversing the social dynamics so that
we can move from the stigmatization of the victims to
the criminalization of the perpetrators is an attainable
goal. In that fight, the International Criminal Court
has a unique role to play in complementing the efforts
of national courts when they are unable or unwilling
to bring perpetrators to justice. That is an aspect that
we tend to overlook and which does not always clearly
emerge in United Nations reporting.

In the firm beliefthat all ofthe elements ofresolution
1325 (2000) must be systematically addressed in the
work of the Security Council, Italy stands ready to act.
We cannot afford to let those issues fall off the United
Nations agenda. Women and peace and security must
continue to remain a political priority for the Security
Council.
