Mrs. Marcelino (Portugal): I would like to
thank the United Kingdom presidency of the Security
Council for convening this ministerial open debate on
trafficking in human beings and for following up on the
debate organized last year by Spain. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio Guterres,
the United Kingdom's Independent Anti-Slavery
Commissioner, Mr. Kevin Hyland, and Ms. Ilwad
Elman for their comprehensive briefings.

Portugal aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of the European Union.

Trafficking in human beings is an offence to
the dignity and integrity of the human being and is
one of the most serious violations of human rights.
Every year, millions of men, women and children are
victims of being trafficked for various kinds of abuses
and exploitation.

It is a complex reality, often involving transnational
organized criminal networks that prey on the
vulnerabilities and weaknesses of trafficked persons.
Trafficking in human beings is often exacerbated
in situations of conflict and humanitarian crisis
and isaggravated by factors such as poverty, gender
inequality, unemployment, weak rule of law and
poor governance. All that renders those caught in the
crossfire disproportionately vulnerable to trafficking.

We note with concern the increasing trend of
trafficking in persons, particularly women and girls, in
situations of conflict-related sexual violence used as a
tactic of war by violent extremist groups.

To be effective, any intervention must be based
on common and well-coordinated efforts. Bilateral,
regional and international comprehensive cooperation
among countries of origin, transit and destination,
including effective information-sharing, is crucial to
addressing human trafficking resulting from conflict.
This is a global issue that demands collective action.

The crime of trafficking in persons is generally
under-recorded and under-reported. We must fight the
culture of impunity for those who commit those crimes;
the responsible must be held accountable and brought
to justice. Portugal urges all States that have not yet
done so to accede to and ratify the Protocol to Prevent,
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially
Women and Children, supplementing the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime. My delegation looks forward to the high-level
review of the United Nations Global Plan of Action to
Combat Trafficking in Persons, later this year.

Portugal has made significant efforts to prevent
and combat trafficking in human beings through
the implementation of several national plans on
human trafficking, developed with cross-sectoral
involvement including the private sector and civil
society organizations.

In 2008, Portugal created the Trafficking in
Human Beings Observatory to collect and analyse
data on trafficking. The third national plan against
trafficking in human beings (2014-2017), currently
being implemented, contains 53 policy measures. The
third national plan against trafficking in human beings
reflects my country's commitments, in particular within
the framework of the United Nations, the Council of
Europe, the European Union and the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries.

The efforts made by Portugal in combating
trafficking in human beings have been recognized
in several international forums, most recently by the
Group of Experts on Action against Trafficking in
Human Beings of the Council of Europe.

To conclude, in brief, trafficking in human beings
is one of the most heinous crimes against human
dignity. Preventing it and punishing the perpetrators
and all those involved is critical to ensuring dignity
and freedom for all, in line with the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and with our collective
efforts towards the consolidation of peace and security.

