Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Fourteen years after the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), Chile thanks the presidency of Argentina for
having convened this debate on this topic, in particular,
the situation of internally displaced women and girls.
We thank the Secretary-General, the Executive Director
of UN-Women, the Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, the Special Rapporteur on
the human rights of internally displaced persons and,
especially, Ms. Suaad Allami, whose words encourage
us to continue implementing the resolution. Chile will
continue to contribute to such implementation through
its second national action plan, which we hope to launch
soon. My delegation associates itself with the statement
to be delivered by the representative of Austria on
behalf of the Human Security Network.

The idea that the empowerment of women and
girls and gender equality are central to the task
to maintaining international peace and security is
increasingly gaining support. National action plans,
the emerging development of indicators and the
developments in legislation, such as the Arms Trade
Treaty and Recommendation No.30 of the Committee
on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women,
are evidence of that. The appointments of Bineta Diop
as first Special Envoy for Women, Peace and Security
of the African Union, and of Major General Kristin
Lund as first Force Commander in the history of the
United Nations, urge us to continue to advocate for a
larger number of women in positions of responsibility.

However, aspirations still do not reflect the reality

and there is still a large gap between legislation and

implementation. In fact, discrimination and violence,

in addition to the lack of access for women to
decision-making bodies, mean that they continue to be
underrepresented in peace processes and State-building.
The continuing sexual and gender-based violence and
targeted attacks on women and girls, including students
and human rights defenders, are alarming. We recall
with regret those who have been murdered for defending
their rights, as is the case of those living in the Middle
East and North Africa.

It is therefore urgent to develop and implement
mechanisms to ensure the prevention and protection
of women, as well as their full participation on an
equal footing with men, in ceasefire agreements,
peacebuilding processes, the establishment of the rule
of law and justice and security sector reform. That is a
necessary requirement for achieving peaceful, just and
inclusive societies. Peacekeeping missions, sanctions
committees and other subsidiary organs of the Council,
commissions of inquiry, the Peacebuilding Commission
and other related mechanisms must consider a gender
approach in their work and train and include advisers
in that area.

Obstacles to the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and subsequent resolutions will be overcome
only through an effective commitment to empowerment,
women's participation and human rights, a resolute
leadership, gender and age-disaggregated data and
consistent and adequately funded multisectoral
measures. Such efforts must go hand in hand with
accountability and the fight against impunity.
The International Criminal Court is an important
complementary tool.

Talking about her visit to South Sudan, Special
Representative Zainab Hawa Bangura reported
with dismay the insecurity and unimaginable living
conditions that displaced women face in Bentiu.
Together with Australia and with the support of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
Chile organized an Arria Formula meeting on the
protection of the internally displaced on 30 May, where
we noted the increase of that phenomenon and its
devastating impact on women and girls. That is why the
situation of the internally displaced and refugees, who
are particularly vulnerable to forced marriages, sexual
slavery and other forms of sexual violence, often used
as a tactic to induce displacement, must be at the core
of the Council's decisions.

We must prevent, protect against and alleviate
such situations, ensuring adequate access for
women to health-care services and justice, as well as
accountability. Displaced women must be protagonists
in early warning, mediation and prevention initiatives
and their participation must be ensured in efforts
to address the root causes of conflict. The system
must also continue its support to countries that host
refugees. We highlight the importance of deepening
information exchange among all actors in the field,
strengthening the training of peacekeeping personnel
and providing innovative multisectoral responses that
include the special needs of displaced women and girls.
Encouraging and promoting the role of civil society in
that area is vital. Women must be provided with the
necessary tools and the training to be able to lead such
resiliance.

The year 2015 will be crucial for that agenda. We
hope that the development of the post-2015 development
agenda, in which gender equality and the empowerment
of women must be a separate goal, the twentieth-
anniversary review of the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action, and the strategic reviews of United
Nations sanctions and peacekeeping in 2015 ensure that
they include commitments and priorities in the context
of resolution 1325 (2000). The commemoration of the
fifteenth anniversary and the independent global study
on resolution 1325 (2000) will provide a road map
to accelerate implementation and ensure the role of
women in developing solutions.

In conclusion, President Michelle Bachelet has
agreed with the Executive Director of UN-Women to
convene a high-level event, to be held in Santiago in
February 2015, to contribute to the debate on women's
participation in decision-taking. We conclude with the
words of Caddy Adzuba, a prominent African activist:
Women, who until now have been victims, must be at
the negotiating table because they know what they have
suffered and what they must demand.

