Mrs. Morgan (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): 1 thank
the delegation of the United Kingdom for bringing
this important matter to the attention of the Security
Council. Also allow me to express our gratitude to the
Secretary-General and to his Special Representative on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Bangura, for
their briefings. My country welcomes the adoption today
of resolution 2106 (2013), which sends a resounding
message concerning the fight against impunity and
the need to focus our efforts on the prosecution of that
crime as a fundamental aspect of prevention.

My country deplores and condemns the recent,
numerous cases of sexual violence recorded by the
Secretary-General in his current report (S/2013/149).
Mexico recognizes that the perpetration of acts of
sexual violence in a post-conflict society impedes
the restoration of peace and the security of the
population, as well as the establishment of solid
governmental institutions. The support of the agencies
of the Organization and of regional organizations
are fundamental elements in eradicating the social,
cultural, economic and political dynamics that give rise
to this these types of acts.
Mexico commends the efforts and actions of the
United Nations, its agencies and the Governments
of States in conflict. However, much remains to
be done in order to ensure full access for victims to
systems of justice and reparation and to ensure that
the perpetrators of the acts are brought before the
corresponding tribunals. To that end, it is fundamental
that States provide the necessary training and skills
for armed and security forces in order to combat the
perpetration of those crimes. Of equal importance is
the training of magistrates and other agents ofjustice
in order to ensure effective, independent and impartial
judicial systems that are well versed in that area.

International criminal justice and mixed tribunals
are undoubtedly an indispensable complement to
those efforts. Mexico welcomes the progress that has
been made in the implementation of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.

The Security Council must continue to use all
resources at its disposal in targeting the perpetrators
of acts of sexual violence through the adoption of
selective and phased measures through its sanctions
committees, the ad hoc and mixed tribunals, and the
special chambers of national tribunals.

Mexico emphasizes the relevance and usefulness of
the International Criminal Court and its complementary
competency in order to investigate and prosecute the
perpetrators of international crimes, including the war
crime of sexual violence. We encourage those States that
have not yet done so to accede to the Rome Statute as
soon as possible in order to achieve the universalization
of that important instrument. We encourage States to
cooperate so that the Court is able to effectively fulfil
the mandate for which it was established.

Allow me to conclude by reiterating that Mexico
is convinced that there can be no lasting peace without
justice and that there is no room for amnesty for
international crimes, such as that of sexual violence in
conflicts.

