Mr. Riecken (Austria): Austria aligns itself with
the statement made earlier on behalf of the European
Union.

We thank today's briefers, and are grateful to the
delegation of India for rescheduling this open debate
on the important topic of the contributioni of women's
civil society organizations to conflict prevention and
resolution. We particularly welcome the participation
in this debate of the representative of the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security.

Women and women's civil society organizations
are all too often excluded from participating in peace
efforts and negotiations. The very instructive data,
collected against the indicators, contained in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2012/732) clearly shows
the need for improvement in the meaningful inclusion
and participation of women from an early stage in all
efforts towards conflict prevention and resolution,
including peace negotiations and peacebuilding.
Measures to improve women's security are crucial to
ensuring their political and economic participation
in post-conflict settings. We are concerned about the
information in the Secretary-General's report on the
high number of attacks on human rights defenders in
some of the countries and territories reviewed in the
past year. We fully support the Secretary-General's
recommendation that the Security Council pay special
attention to protecting women human rights defenders.

We should also step up our efforts with regard to
women in decision-making positions. While temporary
special measures, including electoral gender quotas,
can be an effective tool for increasing women's political
participation both as voters and as candidates, we agree
that more attention must be paid to addressing the
structural factors that discourage women's candidacy
and electoral participation.

Much has been achieved in the 12 years since the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). However, as the
Secretary-General has pointed out, we clearly need
to do more. The number of women in United Nations
peacekeeping operations and political missions,
including in senior positions in field missions, as
well as appointments of women mediators, must be
enhanced. We encourage the Security Council to
include the consideration of issues related to women
and peace and security in all its thematic and country-
specific discussions, as well as to address it in missions'
mandates.

In accordance with presidential statement
S/PRST/2010/22, 1 would like to inform the Council
about the measures taken by Austria in the past year
to implement resolution 1325 (2000). Austria has
completed the revision of its national action plan on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). The revised
plan, adopted in January, is guided by the United Nations
indicators on women and peace and security. Civil
society was closely involved in the revision process.
This year Austria also adopted its third national action
plan on combating trafficking in human beings. Women
are particularly vulnerable to becoming victims of this
sort of organized crime, mainly for sexual exploitation.

Austria has developed an interdisciplinary training
course on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
The training course is tailored to the requirements
of command personnel active in international crisis
management. It will be held for the first time in December
at the Austrian Peace Center in Stadtschlaining, with
participants from 20 Member States and international
organizations. Modules on women in armed conflict
will make up an important part of the course, with
the objective for participants to develop a gender-
sensitive needs analysis and practical solutions aimed
at effectively addressing those needs. Nine mission
gender advisers have been trained and their deployment
began to the Balkans in 2011. After a first assignment
to Kosovo, which proved extremely successful, Austria
will continue that engagement in 2013. Furthermore,
Austria will continue with its support to UN-Women
and has offered support for developing a national action
plan for partnering countries with a view to launching
concrete cooperation early next year.

