Ms. Bangura: I wish to thank the Government of
France for hosting this open debate and the Council
for the priority accorded to this issue. I am grateful to
the Secretary-General for his personal presence and
unwavering support. I appreciate also that Lisa Davis
of MADRE is able to join us today to give voice to civil
society, which is a moral compass for this mandate. I
am grateful that Maria Grazia Giammarinaro, Special
Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, is also here.

As highlighted by the Secretary-General, in the
past decade we have witnessed a fundamental shift
in the way this issue is understood and addressed
as a peace and security concern, and there has been
unprecedented progress. Yet, even as we make gains,
new and critical challenges have emerged. Today, as
we deliberate here, women are being traded in an open
slave bazaar in Raqqa. Price lists exist to regulate their
sale, like livestock at a farmers' market. A so-called
fatwa has been issued by Da'esh that codifies sexual
slavery, in attempt to justify sexual violence through
holy scriptures. Social media platforms are being
used to facilitate trade and trafficking - women and
children are offered in the same online forums as rifles
and rocket-propelled grenades.

"This one is young, beautiful and good in bed. I
need at least $7,500 for her. You won't regret it."

That is part of the message thread under a photograph
of a girl painted with bright red lipstick. She cannot be
older than 12 years of age. Eventually, the winning bid
was $7,700, offered by a Libyan fighter of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant.

When I visited the Middle East last year, I met with
girls who had escaped captivity. Some of them told
me that they had been the objects of as many as eight
separate transactions during two years of captivity,
before finally escaping or being ransomed by their
families. But thousands more are missing - in Syria,
Iraq, Nigeria and elsewhere.

The report (8/2016/361) before the Security Council
today is the eighth dedicated account of conflict-related
sexual Violence.

The report before the Council today (S/2016/36l)
is the eighth dedicated account of conflict-related
sexual violence. Cumulatively, these reports build a
historic record for a crime that has long been omitted
from official accounts of war and peace. As the report
outlines in harrowing detail, we are confronting new
and previously unforeseen threats. Just as we make
inroads with national security forces, the problem of
sexual violence committed by non-State actors acquires
ever-more difficult and disturbing dimensions. Let
us consider the fact that of the 48 parties listed in
the annex of the Secretary-General's report, 37 are
non-State armed actors. Yet, the instruments that we
have as a United Nations system are primarily to engage
Member States.

Therefore, new tools and approaches will be
required to enforce the compliance of these actors,
who often vary dramatically in character, composition,
motivations, capacity and modus oparandi. We face
both political and operational challenges in this regard,
but if we are to eradicate sexual violence in conflict,
this mandate must focus on the persistent perpetrators
and will require the support of the Security Council
to do so. At the same time, we must confront the new
reality that sexual violence today is used not only as a
tactic of war, but also as a tactic of terrorism.

Without exception, the first sign of rising violent
extremism has been the restriction of women's rights.
Extremists know that to populate a territory and control
a population, one must first control the bodies ofwomen.
Sexual violence is not merely incidental, but integral to
their ideology and strategic objectives. They are using
sexual violence as a means of advancing political,
military and economic ends. They have used rape and
forced marriage as part of the systems of punishment
and reward through which they consolidate power, and

to build a so-called State cast in their own image and
beliefs. The same litany of horrors echoes across the
accounts of Nigerian girls who fled Boko Haram, the
tales of Somali women liberated from Al-Shabaab, and
the depictions of women's lives in northern Mali under
the extremist group Ansar Eddine.

When we think of terrorism, we think of
the destruction of property, killing, bombing or
hostage-taking. But we cannot deplore the public
violence of terrorism while ignoring the Violence
terrorists inflict on women and girls in private, behind
closed doors. We must also confront the reality that
after all they have endured in captivity, many victims of
Da'esh and Boko Haram face the additional heartbreak of
being shunned by their own communities ifthey return.
Sexual violence is still the only crime that stigmatizes
the Victim rather than the perpetrator. We must not
only bring back our girls; we must bring them back to
an environment of support, equality and opportunity.
Social and economic reintegration is imperative and
must become a more integral part of our programmatic
response and post-conflict development frameworks.

The war of conquest of extremist groups is being
fought on - and fought over - the bodies of women
and girls, generating millions of dollars in revenue. This
is not just objectification; it is commodification. It is
the revival of the slave trade in our own times and lives.
The promise of access to wives and sex slaves is used to
attract recruits and serves as a form of compensation for
fighters. Each time a woman is traded, the transaction
generates a profit. It is part of the political economy of
terrorism, just like the sale of oil, antiquities or drugs.

If these groups are beyond the reach of judicial
deterrence, then we must focus on divesting them of
resources and degrading their capacity to communicate,
travel, trade and do harm. This must form a part of
our global, regional and national strategies to counter
terrorism and violent extremism. As the report notes,

"counter-terrorism strategies can no longer be
decoupled from efforts to protect and empower
women and girls and to combat conflict-related
sexual violence" (ibid, para. 1).

Through our sanctions infrastructure, we must raise
the cost of these crimes, because the human costs
defy calculation;

Through strategic communication, a counternarrative
must ring out loud, clear and consistent that the human,
sexual and reproductive rights of women and girls
are non-negotiable. Traditional and religious leaders
must use their moral authority to negate any attempt
to legitimize rape on religious grounds. Our response
must recognize and address the nexus of conflict-
related sexual violence with cross-border trafficking to
fund conflict and terrorism. Our normative framework,
including the resolutions of the Council, must keep
pace with the changing global security context and the
new dimension of sexual violence deployed as a tactic
of terrorism.

The report also sheds light on other emerging
concerns that are not yet adequately treated within the
ambit of the resolutions on sexual violence in conflict.
This includes the plight of children born of wartime
rape, who also live in shadow and shame. They are
often undocumented and stateless; indeed, there may
be thousands of such children living on the peripheries
of their communities, who are fertile ground for
radicalization and recruitment. Failure to recognize
these children, to nurture and protect them represents a
long-term threat to peace and security;

We have begun focusing more attention in the past
few years on sexual violence against men and boys,
which is a particular concern in the context of detention
and interrogation. But unfortunately, male survivors
are still a blind-spot in our monitoring, not to mention
service response;

The mass migration crisis has heightened the risk
of sexual violence, including in places of supposed
refuge. We understand more clearly than ever before the
acute vulnerability of refugees and internally displaced
persons not only within camps or settlements, but at
every stage of displacement, and how sexual violence
may be a significant push factor for displacement.

This year, in the case of Burundi, which appears
in the Secretary-General's report for the first time, we
have received information of the targeting of women
and girls on the basis of actual or perceived political
affiliation or ethnic identity, with rape employed as a
tool of political repression by arms bearers, including
members ofnational security forces. Sexual crimes used
as part of the repertoire of violence during contested
elections or public demonstrations are a long-standing
concern of the Council, from Kenya in 2007 to Guinea
in 2009 and Cote D'Ivoire in 2011. It represents another
dimension of this agenda that will require continued
vigilance and tailored responses.

My emphasis since taking office has been
on fostering national ownership, leadership and
responsibility, which has required focused engagement
in the affected countries. The advances of a number
of national Governments that we support through our
Team of Experts are encouraging and show that this
is not a mission impossible. In the past two years,
we have gained a more intimate understanding of
how the resolutions of the Council can be turned into
solutions on the ground. At the same time, we also
have clearer sight of what is missing in the normative
framework of resolutions that are our conceptual and
operational guide.

That is why I ask the Council, on basis of the
report, to continue deliberations in the coming weeks
and to consider a new draft resolution that will give
us the tools for a comprehensive and multidimensional
response that takes into account the rapidly shifting
international peace and security landscape. I believe in
the unity of purpose of the Council to give us what is
needed to eradicate this crime once and for all.

The past decade has seen greater progress and
political momentum to end war-time rape than in the
rest of human history combined. I believe that we
are on the brink of converting a centuries-old culture
of impunity into a culture of accountability and
deterrence. But at this crucial juncture, we cannot
afford to be complacent or lose our focus; we must meet
the new challenges on the horizon and we must keep the
searchlight of international scrutiny on this historically
silenced crime. When survivors tell us that "our bodies
are worth less here than a dead rat", it diminishes our
collective humanity.

Ultimately, all our words and laws and resolutions
will mean nothing if Violations go unpunished in
practice and we are unable to increase the cost and
consequences for committing such crimes.

To the victims and perpetrators alike, I would
send a simple but unequivocal message - that justice
may be delayed, but it Will not be denied, and that the
international community is steadfast and committed to
living up to its sacred duty to prevent these crimes and
care for survivors.

