Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
open debate on the subject of women and peace and
security. Twelve years have passed since the Council
adopted resolution 1325 (2000) on this issue. A global
plan of action has been adopted in connection with the
resolution, along with normative indicators to gauge
progress and a timeframe for achieving objectives at
the regional and international levels.

The Sudan began taking steps to enhance the
status of women as far back as 1954. Sudanese women
participated in the first Sudanese Parliament in 1954.
That early achievement was carried forward, with
women serving as full-fledged members of the next
Sudanese Parliament in 1964 as well. Building on that
trend, the Sudan has applied the principle of equal pay
for equal work since 1967.

Yet more gender-related legislation has been
enacted since then. For example, the principle of
gender equality in pension age was established in 2003.
The status of women took a qualitative leap forward in
the domain of political participation in 2008, when an
election law was enacted stipulating that women must
hold at least 25 per cent of the seats not only in the
Sudanese federal Parliament but also in all 10 state
Parliaments. In the Sudan, there is a federal Parliament
in the capital city of Khartoum and there are 10 state
Parliaments, one in each of the 10 federal states.
Twenty-five per cent of the membership of all these
parliaments is held by women through direct, free
elections.

We cherish and take pride in that progress in the
Sudan. It indicates the importance we attach to
promoting the status of women in our country. The
Vice-President of the federal Parliament of the Sudan
is a woman, and a full 66 per cent of our civil service
is composed of women, making men a minority in the
service. In the judiciary, there are 80 female
magistrates, some of whom have become Supreme
Court justices. In the field of diplomacy, many women
have taken on the title of Ambassador and represent the
Sudan in many of our diplomatic missions.

On the basis of these examples and this short
introduction to the progress we have made in
enhancing the role of women in the Sudan, let me now
move on to the main focus of our discussion here
today. We reject and stand firm against all practices of
injustice and violence against women. In 2007, we
adopted a national strategy that was developed in
consultation with all relevant official and civic bodies,
including governmental entities and representatives of
civil society, including the civil society representative
who sits on my right side here today. We appreciate her
role in this regard.

The national strategy adopted in the Sudan
encompassed six areas of focus for measures to
enhance and upgrade the status women, including
peacebuilding and the preservation of rights,
participation in decision-making, economic
development, education, health, the environment, and
dispute settlement. The strategy has been applied at all
federal and state levels. The Government of the Sudan
has established numerous specialized centres at all
levels to coordinate the efforts of women in the fields
of peace and development and to provide opportunities
for consultation on promoting gender equity and the
principles of equality.

I would also like to note that specialized national
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
resettlement programmes in the Sudan give special
priority to the situation of women, in coordination with
the relevant United Nations agencies. We take this
opportunity to acknowledge in particular the valuable
collaboration we have had with UN-Women and that
agency's role in translating the contents of the
aforementioned plan of action into reality.

Today's debate on the subject of women and
peace and security has included a presentation of the
Secretary-General's report on sexual violence in
conflict (S/2012/33). Among the 20 States it mentions,
the report also refers to my country. I wish to say the
following in response.

We welcome the reference contained in the report
to the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, describing
it as a step forward in the comprehensive peace process
in Darfur.

As is well-known, Darfur is one of the regions of
the Sudan that is affected by conflict. The report
includes a call on the non-signatory movements to
cease hostilities and join the forward march towards
peace. I mention this for the benefit of those who are
unaware that violence against women in Darfur is
fundamentally and actively caused by the armed
movements that are intent on preventing the
establishment of peace and security in Darfur. To
camouflage those facts, they sometimes dress in
military uniforms in order to convey the erroneous
perception that the official military is responsible for
perpetrating such violence.

We had expected the report to reflect the calm
security situation and the decrease in violence,
although that reality had been previously reflected in
reports of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
presented at various meetings of the Security Council.

Paragraph 54 of the report contains a reference
indicating that some of those who perpetrate violence
against women, as I mentioned, have been dressed in
military uniforms. That reflects an inaccurate
perception that can only be dispelled by
unambiguously confirming that the perpetrators
belonged to armed rebel movements.

Last year, the President of the Republic of the
Sudan, Omer Hassan A. Al-Bashir, invited a number of
heads of State and Government, senior national
officials and officials of international organizations to
celebrate the inauguration of the Transitional Authority
in Darfur - the successful result of the peace accords
signed in Doha. Clearly, that development has
contributed to the calm situation. The Security Council
must now send strong signals urging the movements to
join the promise, and punish those that refuse to join
the march towards peace in the Darfur area.

Last month, there was another positive
development with the Sudan's establishment of its
national human rights commission. A woman with
more than 30 years of judicial experience was
appointed commissioner. A special court was also
established in Darfur. A prosecutor general was
appointed to examine all alleged violations perpetrated
in Darfur since 2003, including violence against
women. That is also an concrete, positive development.
All of the perpetrators of violence against women will
be brought to justice in fair trials, and will be punished
accordingly.

In conclusion, I would like to say that the
situation of women in armed conflict is inextricably
connected with the coordinated and integrated tackling
of the root causes of conflict. We therefore reiterate the
need to address the root causes of conflict. The
Security Council, as custodian for the concept and
maintenance of international peace and security, must
address the root causes of conflict, and not only the
obvious manifestations. War is war - whether it erupts
due to economic reasons or natural disasters - and it
affects the most vulnerable and the poorest members of
society, including women.

In that connection, we appeal to the Council to
bring further pressure to bear on the armed rebel
movements in Darfur, Blue Nile and Southern
Kordofan states to accept the principle of negotiation

with a view to achieving a permanent solution through
peaceful means, as the Government of the Sudan has
agreed to do as it endeavours to achieve a solution.

We hope that the measures to be taken by the
Council will rely on the country reports presented by
States, as well as accurate information contained in the
periodic reports of the Secretary-General, and not on
reports produced by certain mass media sources or by
non-governmental organizations. In that regard, we
encourage the United Nations and its missions to
organize workshops and direct consultations with
officials of conflict-affected States, with a view to
exchanging expertise on matters relating to the
situation of women in armed conflict.

