Ms. Alsaleh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I apologize for taking the floor for a second
time during the meeting. However, I wish to respond to
the statement made by the representative of the Israeli
entity.

It is indeed unacceptable for the representative
of the Israeli occupation to speak of Israel's respect
for human rights. She is proud that her country has
signed the Declaration of Commitment to End Sexual
Violence in Conflict. Accusations are meted out to
Arab countries and the countries of North Africa
concerning ways and means to eradicate sexual
violence, at a time when Israel continues to practice
all forms of violence against thousands of women and
young girls - Arabs and particularly Palestinians
under Israeli occupation - including acts of killing,
rape, violence, arbitrary detention and sexual abuse in
detention.

Perhaps the representative of the occupation
needs to be reminded that she represents an occupying
Power - a raping Power - one that has occupied
Arab territories for over 65 years and cannot be called
humanitarian, human or even credible. She ought to be
ashamed at the mere mention of one crime perpetrated
by her regime against a particular Palestinian woman
who was forced to give birth to her child at a checkpoint
and died without being allowed access to any medical
care.

The occupying Power respects none of the human
rights of the people under its occupation. Innocents
are being killed, including women, children and the
elderly. Homes are being demolished on the heads of the
inhabitants, and acts of apartheid and ethnic cleansing
are carried out.

Let her keep her dispiriting thoughts to herself.
We need no sermons from the representative of that
discriminatory regime that violates the dozens of
resolutions that have condemned it and its abhorrent
practices against the Arab peoples, as well as aggression
against its neighbours.

I would advise her to cease shedding crocodile
tears for the men and women of Syria. Syria needs
no such poison. Rather, it awaits the liberation of the
Syrian Golan from the Israeli occupation.

