Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank the President for organizing today's open debate,
which gives us the opportunity to address the Security
Council on conflict-related sexual violence - a subject
on which my country has been very active due to its
deep conviction that we should keep fighting against all
forms of violence against women and girls.

I would also thank both Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon and Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura for their
briefings, and Ms. Rhoda Misaka, representative of the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security,
for the statement she made on behalf of civil society.

Sexual violence is a repugnant and criminal
phenomenon that is closely linked to insecurity and the
impunity associated with a weak institutional framework
for the rule of law. Those issues have been very present
in earlier debates of the Council, as well as those, in
other contexts, in the General Assembly, including the
work in progress on the post-2015 development agenda.
States have adopted measures to confront the scourge
and to protect women and children, who are the most
vulnerable to sexual violence in situations of armed
conflict. However, in each new report, the Secretary-
General takes stock of horrendous situations caused by
offenders, particularly those that appear as systematic
violators in the annex of the report (S/2014/181).

In addition, the United Nations has taken concrete
measures, including, inter alia, the creation of the
position now occupied by Ms. Bangura, the application
of provisions for monitoring, analysis and reporting
arrangements, and the deployment of women protection
advisers to numerous peacekeeping operations. Despite
those achievements, however, the phenomenon persists,
as we have sadly observed in such recent cases as Syria,
Mali, the Central African Republic and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

For that reason, the Council should not stop insisting
that States in conflict or post-conflict situations give
priority to reforming the rule of law and strengthening
the capacity of national institutions, including civilian
and militaryjustice systems, because those weaknesses
are the primary obstacles to ensuring accountability.
That leads to a widespread impunity, which in turn has
negative effects on access to justice and the safety of
survivors.

In our own internal conflict, which ended more than
17 years ago, there remain victims and consequences
of the atrocities committed, and that has helped us to
produce legislation on violence against women and
girls so that they can live in a stable and democratic
society. Preventing violence against women is a priority
for the Government of Guatemala, and in recent years
legislation has been adopted and institutions and
policies created to complete that mission.

Finally, one of the legacies of our own presidency
of the Security Council in October 2012 was the
presidential statement S/PRST/2012/23, which
addressed the need to eliminate obstacles to women's
access tojustice in conflict and post-conflict situations.
We are pleased to have made a contribution to the work
of the Council in the matter.
