Mr. Sparber (Liechtenstein): Since the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), remarkable progress has been
made in the women and peace and security agenda.
However, gender inequality and discrimination against
women remain major challenges of our time. To allow
women to be agents of change and to contribute to a more
peaceful, sustainable and prosperous world, we need to
ensure that they can fully enjoy their rights and realize
their potentials. We need to create an environment
that is enabling, inclusive and free of discrimination
and unfair social norms and attitudes. Only then can
we hear the voices of women human rights defenders,
women political leaders, women justice and security
sector actors, women peacekeepers and mediators,
women journalists, activists and civil society leaders,
and these voices are indispensable to sustaining peace
and security.

We call upon the Security Council to invite
more female briefers, including from civil society.
We welcome efforts to integrate gender perspectives
and promote women's meaningful participation and
representation in the United Nations work on conflict
prevention, conflict resolution and sustaining peace,
including the Secretary-General's Uniformed Gender
Parity Strategy 2018-2028. As part of our pledges for
the upcoming twentieth anniversary of the women and
peace and security agenda, Liechtenstein will sustain
the strong focus on the participation, prevention and
protection pillars in the context of its international
humanitarian and development cooperation.

Gender inequality, including harmful gender
stereotypes and abusive power dynamics, is at the root
of sexual and gender-based violence. While women and
girls are disproportionately affected, there are also men
and boys among the victims. The annual report of the
Special Representative of Sexual Violence in Conflict
(S/2019/280) and reports by the Liechtenstein-based
non-governmental organization All Survivors Project
document rape, gang rape, forced nudity and other
forms of inhumane and degrading treatment of men in
Burundi, the Central African Republic, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, South Sudan, Sri Lanka and the
Syrian Arab Republic, primarily in detention settings.
The most recent report by the Secretary-General on
children in armed conflict in Afghanistan (S/2019/727)
documents that the majority of reported cases of sexual
violence affected boys.

Among the most recent achievements of the women
and peace and security agenda is resolution 2467 (2019)
and its survivor-centred approach. It focuses on groups
that are particularly vulnerable or may be specifically
targeted in conflict-related sexual violence. It requests
that the monitoring, analysis and reporting focus more
consistently on the gender-specific nature of sexual
violence in conflict and post-conflict situations against
all affected populations in all situations of concern,
including men and boys. That is of utmost relevance,
as sexual violence against men and boys continues to
be underreported owing to a lack of legal frameworks,
cultural taboos and fear of stigmatization. In addition
to implementing resolution 2467 (2019) and the
resolutions it builds upon, we call for the inclusion
of conflict-related sexual violence as a designation
criterion in sanction regimes.

Accountability is an essential part ofthe fight against
conflict-related sexual violence. The international
criminal justice system has done groundbreaking
work in that regard. Earlier this year, the International
Criminal Court (ICC) found the warlord Bosco
Ntaganda, of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
guilty of 18 counts of war crimes and crimes against
humanity. It is a milestone verdict, as sexual violence
crimes committed against men were held to the same
standards as those committed against women. It clearly
affirms that such crimes constitute acts of rape and
were not classified under labels of lesser severity.
While the verdict brought justice to survivors in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in other countries
affected by conflict, including Syria and Myanmar,
perpetrators of sexual violence continue to enjoy
impunity and victims and survivors are left alone. We
call upon the Security Council to refer these situations
to the ICC and we will continue our strong support for
the accountability mechanisms created by the General
Assembly and the Human Rights Council, respectively.
We remain committed to strengthening criminal justice
and accountability for sexual and gender-based violence
in conflict, including by supporting the important work
done by UN-Women and Justice Rapid Response.

