Ms. Diop: Allow me to congratulate you, Madam
President, and through you the Republic of South
Africa, on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of October as we commemorate
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). I thank you for
inviting me, as Special Envoy of the Chairperson of the
African Union (AU) Commission, to brief the Council
on the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda in Africa. I convey the best wishes of
Commission Chairperson, His Excellency Mr. Moussa
Faki Mahamat, for a successful women and peace and
security month under your leadership.

Twelve days ago, the AU Peace and Security
Council held its annual open session on women, peace
and security. The institutionalization of this issue is
a clear indication of the attention that the Peace and
Security Council accords to the women and peace
and security agenda. Indeed, the Peace and Security
Council adopted the Continental Results Framework for
Reporting and Monitoring on the Implementation of the
Women, Peace and Security Agenda in May 2018, with
the aim of supporting member States in accelerating the
implementation of the agenda and of making the report
part of the global discourse on advancing the agenda.
During the open session, I presented the first report of
the Chairperson, based on data provided by member
States using the Continental Results Framework. The
Executive Director of UN-Women was also present and
addressed the Council on that occasion. Highlights of
the report include the following.

Africa continues to lead in the adoption of
national action plans on women, peace and security.
There are presently 25 countries in Africa that have
adopted national action plans, constituting 30 per cent
of all such plans globally. In addition, South Africa
organized recently a validation forum and I am sure
it will soon adopt its own national action plan. The
recent development of national action plans in Africa
incorporated lessons learnt from the first-generation
national action plans. The lessons include the security
sector ministries taking a leading role and the
recognition of sector-wide responsibility in financing
the agenda.

Despite the existence of advanced instruments,
implementation continues to lag behind. Out of the
25 countries, only 7 have reached the 30 per cent
threshold of women's participation in parliament and
only two have reached parity at cabinet level. Violence
against women continues unabated, including the use
of women and girls as suicide bombers, as seen in the
Sahel and the Lake Chad basin. Female peacekeepers
require gender-sensitive strategies for deployment, as
evidenced in yesterday's presentation by South Africa
on the plight of women who have been deployed in
peacekeeping missions but who are resilient and still
want to contribute to building peace in our continent.

The report calls on Member States to use the
Continental Results Framework, identify gaps, build
on good practices and scale up actions, especially in
the light of the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000), the AU Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative
and Beijing +25 forum. Among key practices is the
inclusion of women at the peace table. When we take
a look, we see that they are not present. When we
look at the discussion concerning the Sudan currently
under way in Juba, we see that women are missing.
That is why the AU Commission has established the
Network of African Women in Conflict Prevention and
Mediation, commonly known as FemWise, to enhance
the role of women in mediation at all levels, including
the community level. Women mediators have been
deployed to AU liaison offices in conflict-affected
countries. At the same time, the AU Gender Peace
and Security Programme is deploying gender advisers
to enhance capacity on gender equality and women
empowerment.

As for strengthening the nexus between peace and
development, the AU and the United Nations, with the
support of Germany and UN-Women - and I thank
my sister Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka - have joined
forces to build a movement of women leaders, the
African Women Leaders Network, to play a decisive
role in the transformation of the continent, in line with
the Agenda 2063 of the AU and the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. Through joint solidarity
missions, the AU and the United Nations have adopted
an action-oriented approach with the aim of listening
to women at the community level and bringing their
actions to the forefront. Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed led our delegation. That was the
third time we went to the field. She will brief the
Security Council in the coming days on the outcomes
of the latest mission to the Horn of Africa that Visited
Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia and Somalia.

Community-supported peace operations is an area
in which I think we need to do more. The African
Union Military Observer Mission in Somalia, which I
was with last week, has provided technical expertise
to the Government of Somalia on drafting its national
gender policy and community watch programmes for
the prevention of violent extremism.

Time does not permit me to talk about
implementation and what we have found at the country,
regional and continental levels, but let me conclude my
remarks with a few recommendations.
Member States need to scale up the adoption of
national action plans for the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda, with a clear
accountability framework. We need to measure through
data collection and the sharing of good practices;
otherwise, we cannot know what we have achieved.
With a view to the twentieth anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000) next year, the African Union Commission
aims, together with the United Nations, to have at least
50 per cent of United Nations Member States adopt a
national action plan, so that we can follow effective
implementation on the ground.

Women's organizations experience the realities of
women and girls in our various countries on a daily
basis. They take care of survivors, providing legal
services, psychological support and economic recovery.
They are there to restore the dignity of women who
have been affected by conflict. It is crucial to provide
support to those organizations in working hand in hand
with Member States, the United Nations and the AU
in addressing the gaps identified in the delivery of the
women and peace and security agenda.

In a recent intergenerational dialogue on women's
leadership held in Kenya, we heard the demands of
young people, like Alaa Salah, for a bigger say and role
in building peace in Africa. We need to hear them, we
need to include them, and we need to let them take the
lead on women and peace and security.

Let me again thank the Secretary-General for
supporting the women and peace and security agenda.
He came to Africa in January and he supports FemWise
and the African Leadership Forum. He has the support
of his brother Moussa Faki Mahamat. Let me also
recognize Norway, the United States, Ireland and South
Korea, just to name a few that have been supporting
our agenda, AU member States - for instance South
Africa - as well as UN-Women, the United Nations
Development Programme, and the United Nations
Population Fund, among others.

No more words. The time to act is now.
