Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan):
We join other delegations in commending the United
Kingdom for its outstanding, persistent and welcomed
championing of this critical issue. We welcome the
Foreign Secretary to New York, and we are also grateful
to the Secretary-General and to Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Zainab Bangura for their
comments and insights this morning.

I will not delve into the scope of the mandate
of Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Bangura, a United Nations official whom we admire
greatly and support, nor even speak of the very
necessary role of the International Criminal Court,
which, for us, is a logical given. What I hope to do in
the next few minutes is pose a most basic question and
make three broad suggestions.
I begin by asking this: do we, as a collective
membership, bound together in this Organization and by
its Charter, have the credibility to offer strong opinions
on this subject matter? Do we have the credibility when
together we have all refused to undertake the complete
range of actions necessary to ensure that sexual abuse
and exploitation by our own peacekeepers, United
Nations peacekeepers, be reduced to zero?

Can we not be accused by others of brazen hypocrisy
when we condemn in this Chamber all expressions of
conflict-related sexual Violence committed against
women, girls and boys, and speak of them as unjust
and intolerable - and we have done this for 13 years
now - and then down the hall, only a few metres from
here, in the Sixth Committee, we do next to nothing,
year in and year out, on the draft convention on criminal
accountability of United Nations officials and experts
on mission, a draft which has been on the agenda of the
Sixth Committee since 2007.

Do we have any credibility when we insist that the
United Nations has no business in relation to the conduct
of investigations into alleged crimes committed by our
own United Nations uniformed peacekeepers, knowing
that in the past we, the Member States, were not reliable
enough in guaranteeing that justice was done in respect
of the victims?

Are we credible when in 2012, the last Office of
Internal Oversight Services reporting period, we still
had 42 cases of sexual exploitation and abuse involving
United Nations peacekeepers being investigated by that
Office? By now, some seven years after we identified
both the challenge and the plan needed to eliminate
this odious phenomenon, there should be practically
no cases at all. I do not wish to be misunderstood: if
we had done everything we should have done over the
past seven years to ensure the total elimination of this
abominable practice by our own peacekeepers, and
they still occurred, then we could accept that there is
little more we can do. But we, as Member States, have
not done everything, and so we cannot make that claim.

The United Nations is required to set an example
before our publics as an Organization that will without
question pay special attention to the most vulnerable
and defenceless protected persons in war, with, first,
a guaranteed protection provided by ourselves, from
ourselves and then from others. My intention here is
not to cast doubt on or belittle the outstanding service
and contributions of United Nations peacekeepers. As
a former peacekeeper myself, I would never do that;
I would never disgrace their efforts. I know only too
well and first-hand what they do and can endure. But I
also know that we have long treated those individuals
who dare commit sexual abuses too lightly. Indeed,
while it is they who in the end disgrace United Nations
peacekeeping, we on occasion also contribute to it
by our clear indifference. I hope that this debate will
restart this discussion.

So what must we do regarding United Nations
peacekeeping? We must adopt the convention on
criminal accountability as soon as possible; we must
make the United Nations a co-examiner of the facts,
even when the allegations involve United Nations
military personnel. We must be more transparent
regarding the severity and nature of the crimes being
committed by United Nations peacekeepers. We must
do better on matters relating to paternity. In situ court-
martials for military offenders must be the rule and not
the exception for sexual offences, and we must consider
again the proposal that all United Nations personnel
destined for field service submit a sample of their
DNA to the United Nations before they embark, both
to serve as a deterrent to the commission of crimes and
also for the sake of possible subsequent investigations,
including establishing paternity. And, lastly, we, the
Member States, need to report to the UN clearly and
at the earliest possible time, what judicial steps were
undertaken by our authorities with respect to the
alleged crimes.

Beyond United Nations peacekeeping, what else
should the United Nations do to assist societies or
countries in war, or emerging from war, to address
sexual Violence and end impunity?

The United Nations, in our opinion, requires a single
vehicle for the delivery of judicial and legal advice.
My delegation has been saying this for many years
now. So crucial is a functioning, credible judiciary to
every State's existence, it is remarkable that, 68 years
after the founding of the United Nations, while we
have single-purpose departments and agencies for
almost everything, we do not have one for this: only
a hodge-podge of rule-of-law offices, representatives,
units and experts scattered throughout the Secretariat
and specialized agencies.

It would be like having a major modern hospital
containing wings dedicated to every known
medical specialty and sub-specialty, but with no
division dedicated to cardiology or cardiovascular
surgery - only a few cardiologists scattered throughout
the hospital - because somehow we thought the heart
did not merit it. What we have is simply insufficient.

The United Nations needs a service, a full-fledged
department that, on request, can advise Member
States that seek to upgrade or reform their judiciary
or prosecution services or wish to improve their penal
codes. United Nations missions of every variety would
also require its services. If we are to be serious about
ending impunity for sexual crimes in the context of war,
that is what we need. Teams of experts are a good start
where the action of the Security Council is concerned
but fall woefully short of what is required, and I myself
have seen this in United Nations field operations.

Secondly, we must support all and every effort
aimed at the creation of an international repository for
evidence - a complicated business, we know, owing to
concerns relating to contamination and admissibility.
Nevertheless, we must try to set it up. We would then
be in a position to better assist national jurisdictions
that are incapable of or unwilling to prosecute during
conflict, but would in some cases be better able to do so
post-conflict. Such a facility could also be of service to
the International Criminal Court.

Finally, while my delegation believes that it is of
course necessary to focus on women, girls and boys as
the obvious victims of sexual violence in the context of
war, there is an unfortunate aspect to that view, which
is that we give the impression that only the young count.
In all conflicts, in our experience, it is the elderly,
women and men, who are often the most vulnerable
to the horrors of war, simply because their immobility
in many cases means they cannot flee. Elderly women
can therefore be, and often are, more easily assaulted
sexually and then murdered, than younger women.
Without, of course, taking our eyes off the young, we
should all also pay more attention to the elderly and
disabled in war than we have done thus far.

