Mr. McIvor (New Zealand): New Zealand
commends the United Nations for its recognition of the
linkages between gender equity and the realization of
peace and security. The Security Council debate almost
two years ago, resulting in resolution 1325 (2000) on
women, peace and security, was a milestone. That
resolution expressed concern about the adverse impact
of armed conflict on women and girls as civilians,
refugees and internally displaced persons. The
resolution promoted the role of women in preventing
conflicts and in peacemaking and advocated that a
gender perspective be mainstreamed into United
Nations peacekeeping operations and that there should
be greater involvement of women in such operations.

New Zealand was pleased financially to support
the Secretary-General's study on the impact of armed
conflict on women and girls that resulted from that
resolution. New Zealand has participated in the group
of friends of resolution 1325 (2000) and in the expert
group meeting hosted by Canada to consider the best
means to implement the resolution.

In our own region, we are particularly aware of
the impact of armed conflict on women and of the very
constructive role that women can play in the peace
process and in the rebuilding of society. Earlier
speakers have referred to scepticism on this issue. But
we know, for example, that, as my Australian colleague
has just pointed out, women were instrumental in
bringing to an end the secessionist crisis from 1989 to
1998 in Bougainville. And in the Solomon Islands,
women's groups recently helped develop the
momentum towards peace. Women literally took to the
streets calling for an end to ethnic conflict between
Gwale and Malaitans.

We were impressed by the commitment of the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) to implementing resolution 1325
(2000) in East Timor. Not only did UNTAET make sure
that its staff integrated gender issues into its work, it
actively collected data and information about the
situation of East Timorese women and ensured that
East Timorese women had a say on issues of
importance to them. UNTAET's report notes, however,
that it is important for the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) that Member States increase the number of
women in the military and civilian police forces
serving in peacekeeping operations. We are pleased to
note that 461 women - more than 10 per cent of the
total - have played an active role as part of the New
Zealand peacekeeping force in East Timor.

Finally, I welcome the opportunity of this debate
to underline the fundamental importance of achieving
gender equity for the maintenance of peace and
security and of enabling women to participate in the
decision-making process.

