Mrs. 'Utoikamanu (Tonga): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Pacific small island developing
States Fiji, the Federated States of Micronesia, Nauru,
Palau, Papua New Guinea, the Republic of the
Marshall Islands, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu,
Vanuatu and my own country, the Kingdom of Tonga.

I wish to take this opportunity to congratulate you,

Mr. President, on your strong leadership in convening

this open debate on the theme of women and peace and

security. We also welcome the Secretary-General's
report on women and peace and security (S/2008/622).

The security concern of women and children in
crisis and conflict situations must be addressed. The
lawlessness of many of post-conflict situations put
women and children in physically and psychologically
vulnerable situations. Due to the increasing number of
civilian combatants, the line between a soldier in the
traditional sense and that of a civilian in combat is no
longer as clear-cut.

The increasing engagement of civilians in
violence poses an enormous threat to the security of
women and children. Communities that once could be
counted on for support during times of war are no
longer safe, with an increasing number of their
members engaging in combat. In reality, that means
women and children cannot rely on the safety net they
once had, and that reality is further exacerbated in
post-conflict situations by the difficulty of
reintegrating civilian combatants into the community.
Many civilian combatants are rejected by their own
communities because of the atrocities they have
committed during war, regardless of whether it was by
choice or was forced upon them by the army.

The community sprit is fragmented and damaged
as a result, and in many cases it may seem irreparable.
Feelings of hatred, resentment, fear and mistrust
become real obstacles to the process of reintegration
and the rebuilding of communities. The longer the
process is delayed, the more women and children suffer
due to the lack of leadership and the increasing
lawlessness of the situation.

Thus, we would like to urge the United Nations
and its Members States to work together to address the
issue of women's participation in peace talks, justice
processes and peacekeeping efforts. Women and
children are often neglected and violated during times
war and we must ensure that they are able to exercise
their rights to fully participate in the rebuilding of their
communities.

We would like to highlight four points in regards
to strengthening the implementation of resolutions
1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008).

First, the United Nations system should facilitate
support to encourage women's participation in the
normative and operational functions of peacekeeping.
A gender perspective must be integrated into the
mainstream efforts of peacekeeping to ensure that the
concerns of women and children are adequately
addressed.

Secondly, we support the concept of the
establishment of a gender unit in the Department of
Political Affairs, since the Department is instrumental
in peace negotiations and manages political missions in
country-specific situations. The gender unit should
work closely with other gender focal points in the
United Nations to provide expertise and support to the
missions in the fields.

Thirdly, we encourage women's equal and
substantive participation in all levels of peace and
security decision-making, particularly in negotiation
processes and peace talks in post-conflict situations.

Fourthly, we further encourage efforts to support
the inclusion of women's issues in disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation, reintegration and the
resettlement of communities. Women and children have
specific needs and vulnerabilities and. therefore,
deserve attention.

In June this year, the Council held an open
thematic debate on the theme "Women, peace and
security: sexual violence in situations of armed
conflict". We joined other delegations in supporting the
work of the Council in that area. We have also
consistently referred to the link between the security
implications of climate change and the impacts the
security implications may have on the physical security
of women and children. We would like to reiterate that
it is vital to consider the security implications of
climate change and how it may affect the most
vulnerable groups of our populations. Climate change
is a cross-cutting issue, and it has wide implications
beyond the realm of development.

We take note of the congress held in the
Philippines last month, which brought much-needed
attention to the link between gender, climate change
and disaster risk reduction. The congress also adopted
a declaration that expressed concern at the lack of
awareness in many countries on those issues and the
impacts it has on women.

We urge the international community to join our

efforts in recognizing the security implications of

climate change and the implications it has on women
and children's security and well-being.

