Mr. Mendonca e Moura (Portugal): I would
like to thank the Spanish presidency for convening
this ministerial open debate and congratulate you,
Mr. President, on the adoption of the first Security
Council resolution on trafficking in human beings in
situations of conflict, which my country is proud to
co-sponsor (resolution 2331 (2016)).

I thank the Secretary-General, the Executive
Director of United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
and Ms. Zainab Bangura, Special Representative on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, for their briefings.

Trafficking in human beings is one of the most
serious violations of human rights and constitutes an
offence to the dignity and integrity of the human being.
Every year, millions of men, women and children
are victims of human trafficking for exploitation,
which includes prostitution and other forms of sexual
exploitation, forced labor and services, slavery and
similar practices, involuntary servitude, and removal of
organs and other forms of exploitation. It is a complex
reality, transnational in most cases, often committed
within the framework of criminal organizations, which
prey on vulnerabilities and weaknesses of trafficked
persons. Trafficking in human beings is often
exacerbated in situations of conflict and humanitarian
crisis and aggravated by factors such as poverty,
unemployment, weak rule of law and poor governance.

We note with concern that trafficking in persons
in situations of conflict-related sexual violence has
become a war tactic by violent extremist groups. It
turns individuals into commodities, dehumanizes them
and exacerbates the multiple and protracted harmful
effects of conflict-related violence on victims. And it
must be stressed that a consistent mark of this crime is
that most victims are women and girls.

Any intervention, to be effective, must be based
on common and coordinated efforts in the fields of
prevention, awareness-raising, support, research and
repression at the international, regional or national
levels. Bilateral, regional and international cooperation
among countries of origin, transit and destination, as
well as effective information-sharing, are crucial to
addressing human trafficking resulting from conflict.
It is a global issue that demands collective action, not
only from national Governments, but also from the
international community, civil-society organizations,
media, academia and other stakeholders.

The crime of trafficking in persons is generally
underreported and underrecorded. The overwhelming
majority of victims of trafficking never see justice for
what they have endured, nor receive the assistance
and support they need. We must fight the culture of
impunity for those who commit these crimes; those
responsible must be brought to justice. To this end, law-
enforcement and other officials need to be trained to
identify and protect victims, and traffickers and their
accomplices need to be prosecuted, and justice for
victims needs to be secured.

Portugal urges all delegations that have not yet
done so to accede and ratify the Protocol to Prevent,
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially
Women and Children, supplementing the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime. The Protocol provides a broad basis for policies
to address the issue and requires countries to take
action against the traffickers, protect and assist the
victims and help prevent trafficking. My delegation
looks forward to the high-level review of the Global
Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons, set to
take place in 2017.

In 2007, with the involvement of several sectorial
ministries, the private sector and civil-society
organizations, we in Portugal developed its first
National Plan against Trafficking in Human Beings.
In 2008, we created the Trafficking in Human Beings
Observatory with the goal of collecting and analysing
data on trafficking. Our third National Plan against
Trafficking in Human Beings, for 2014-2017, is currently
being implemented and entails 53 policy measures
focused around five strategic areas: first, prevention,
awareness-raising, information and research; secondly,
education and training; thirdly, protection, intervention
and capacity-building; fourthly, criminal investigation;
and fifthly and finally, cooperation. The third National
Plan against Trafficking in Human Beings reflects
my country's commitments, in particular within
the framework of the United Nations, the Council of
Europe, the European Union and the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries. The national efforts
developed by Portugal in combating trafficking in
human beings have been recognized in several forums,
and most recently by the Council of Europe's Group of
Experts on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings.

In conclusion, trafficking in human beings is one
of the most heinous crimes against human dignity.
Preventing and punishing trafficking in human beings
is crucial to achieving a future of dignity, freedom for
all and sustainable development, in line with the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and our collective
efforts aimed at consolidating peace and security.

