Ms. Kadare (Albania): Albania aligns itself with
the statement made by the observer of the European
Union. I wish to add the following remarks in my
national capacity.

Despite the progress made to date and the
development of an extensive normative framework on
women, peace and security, implementation is lagging
behind, while many barriers and challenges persist.
As the Secretary-General puts it, there remains a stark
contrast between rhetoric and reality. Women continue
to be insufficiently represented in peace processes
and their involvement in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts has not been guaranteed. In addition, we
are very concerned by the finding of the Secretary-
General's report that women are currently targeted by
record high levels of political violence.

Nowhere is the gender gap more evident than
in field missions, particularly United Nations peace
operations. Despite clear evidence that the meaningful
inclusion of women in peacekeeping missions improves
their efficiency and effectiveness, women represent
only 4.2 per cent of United Nations military personnel
in the field.

We need international mechanisms that overcome
the structural barriers that exist and ensure women's
meaningful participation in all peace and security
decision-making processes. We need to properly
finance the women and peace and security agenda and
invest in women peacebuilders. And we need men to
stand up and support that cause as resolutely as women.

Albania has made significant progress in
empowering women and achieving gender equality,
including in the security sector. Albania currently has
the fifth most gender-balanced Cabinet in the world,
with 53 per cent women ministers, including the
Minister of Defence. While women constitute 18 per
cent of the total armed forces personnel, in June for the
first time Albania sent two women to serve in a United
Nations peacekeeping operation in South Sudan.

A year ago, we approved our first national action
plan for resolution 1325 (2000). In order to ensure its full
implementation, we have established a technical group,
composed ofgender focal points, which drafts periodical
reports, as well as a political group, composed of high-
level representatives from the Ministries for Foreign
Affairs, Defence, Health and Social Protection, which
monitors progress by assessing the reports. Every year
the conclusions are discussed at the National Council
on Gender Equality, with the aim of improving national
policies as well as holding the leadership accountable.

Between October 2018 and May 2019, we
organized, in close cooperation with non-governmental
organizations, 12 training sessions for military and
police staff, focused on gender issues in military/police
operations, the handling of post-conflict situations and
violence against women and girls.
The appointment and promotion of women to
leading positions in the police and the army remain a
priority. More generally, the Albanian Government has
put a clear focus on policies aimed at boosting women's
meaningful engagement in public life. We believe that
fundamentally women's political empowerment can also
significantly boost gender-equal decision-making of all
kinds, including on peace and security issues. Albania
will continue to champion the women and peace and
security agenda, which has been included among the
priorities of our chairmanship of the Organization for
Security and Co-operation in Europe in 2020, as well as
of our bid for membership of the Security Council for
the term 2022-2023.

In concluding, I would like to reiterate that
women should not only be consulted. Women also
need to be heard. Their expertise, experience and
ability to understand the needs of communities
should be acknowledged and have a real influence
on all peace processes. The message that this debate
sends to the world must be crystal clear: no lasting or
sustainable peace can be achieved without women's
meaningful engagement.

