Mr. Hattrem (Norway): I have the honour to make
this statement on behalf of Denmark, Finland, Iceland,
Sweden and my own country, Norway.

While hope is growing in some regions, new crises
are emerging elsewhere. Persistent and recurring
suffering as a result of war calls us to action. There is
fear and distress, persons are displaced, and educations
and livelihoods are lost. Women's and girls' rights are
targeted and their security compromised even before
a conflict erupts. Experience has taught us that there
is no sustainable peace without the participation of
women. We will not succeed unless our approach is
gender-responsive.

We welcome the Secretary-General's report
(S/2017/861), but we also have concerns about the
decrease in women's participation in mediation after
years of steady progress, the decline in requests for
and inclusion of gender expertise, and the decline in
gender-sensitivity in peace agreements. Hard-won
gains must be sustained. It is up to us to see that they
are. A global Women, Peace and Security Index was
launched yesterday. It combines data on women's
inclusion, access to justice and security. It can help
us target interventions more effectively. We are doing
better normatively, but also in implementation. What is
needed is more strategic and consistent implementation.

Overall, women have become more influential in
peace processes, at the negotiating table and as part of
parallel initiatives. Colombia and Syria are noteworthy,
but important strides have also been made in countries
like Yemen and the Philippines. We are including civil
society more systematically. We commend the efforts
of UN-Women, the Department for Political Affairs,
and committed Special Envoys.
The question remains: Are we learning from
one process to the next? Various groups of friends,
including the new Group of Friends on Countering and
Preventing Violent Extremism, give attention to the
participation of women and the roles of young women
and men. The Women Mediators Networks make it
possible for those involved to share experiences. The
National Focal Points Initiative is helpful. The Nordic
countries have joined forces for women and peace and
security. Nordic-Baltic coordinators will meet annually
to improve coordination and the implementation of
national action plans in our region.

However, more is required if we are to effectively
learn from our successes and failures alike. The NGO
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security provides
essential information. The Global Solutions Exchange
platform shares insights that we need. Yet our approach
to women and peace and security is often too generic
and lacks contextual analysis and points of action. The
Security Council's informal group of experts is an
important step in the right direction.

Gender is recognized to be about men and
masculinity as well. Men can be victims of sexual
violence too. That women can play a destructive role in
conflict is no longer ignored, yet stereotypes persist and
influence our work. The powerful leadership of women
in mediation is now better understood and promoted,
but women are often ignored when a process moves
to the national or international level. Women human
rights defenders often remain unprotected, abuses
underreported, and our response inadequate.

Sexual violence is firmly on the agenda. We
recognize the work of the Special Representative on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Pramila Patten, United
Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict
and her Team of Experts, and the call to action to end
sexual violence in conflict. Women and men in United
Nations operations are more systematically trained
to be gender-responsive. Yet sexual violence remains
endemic in many conflicts. We welcome the new
handbook on the prevention and handling of sexual
violence in conflict that is being developed for use in
United Nations peace operations.
More women are being deployed as leaders as well.
Major General Kristin Lund was recently appointed
Head of Mission and Chief of Staff of the United
Nations Truce Supervision Organization in the Middle
East. Women leaders are sought after. We welcome the
Secretary-General's leadership and the new strategy
on gender parity. However, he needs our help. Member
States are nominating seven men for each woman. We
have many best practices and positive developments
to showcase, but far too often they remain isolated
initiatives that are not followed up consistently and
systematically. Our job is to ensure that best practices
become mainstream practice.

