Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank Spain
for having organized this high-level open debate to
review the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
and assess its concrete outcomes. I also thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his statement, as well as
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of
UN-Women, and the civil society activists Ms. Julienne
Lusenge, Ms. Yanar Mohammed and Ms. Alaa Murabit
for their briefings and testimony.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be made by Ms. Bineta Diop, African Union Special
Envoy for Women, Peace and Security.
Resolution 1325 (2000) was adopted by the
Security Council 15 years ago, and was followed
by other resolutions calling for enhanced efforts to
protect women and to promote their equal participation
in reconciliation and reconstruction processes. The
Secretary-General's global study on this issue and his
most recent report in that regard (S/2015/716) reflect
the significant progress that has been made at various
levels in the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

At the same time, however, it highlights certain
serious gaps and failings. The involvement in women
in conflict prevention and management and their
appointment to high-level positions at the national,
regional and international levels remain inadequate. In
such circumstances, it would be very difficult - indeed,
almost impossible - to ensure any time soon the gender
equality that the international community has set as its
goal. It is against the backdrop of that challenge that, at
its seventieth session, the General Assembly Summit
for the adoption of the Sustainable Development Goals
decided to make gender equality a central pillar of the
new development road map at all levels.

Much remains to be done in that regard, beginning
with the United Nations itself, which should set the
example by further promoting the recruitment and
appointment of competent women to various senior
posts in the Organization. For its part, the Security
Council should fully embrace the commitment it
undertook in resolution 2122 (2013) to uniformly
implement resolution 1325 (2000) in the context of its
work by putting in place a follow-up strategy for its
work in that regard.

Moreover, we would like to underscore the
importance of close cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations in achieving the
goals of Security Council resolutions on women and
girls. In that connection, I would like to welcome the
African Union's adoption, in 2014, of its women, peace
and security programme, which was an important step
in strengthening efforts to raise awareness and improve
the capacities of its member States with regard to
resolution 1325 (2000).

In the face of the new challenges linked to sexual
and gender-based violence posed by such armed
groups as Boko Haram and Daesh, which carry out
kidnappings, traffic in women and girls and practice
forced prostitution, the entire international community
and individual States should further marshall their
efforts to wage a battle commensurate with the stakes
involved.

While fully acknowledging the progress made over
the past 15 years, we note that, when it comes to State
efforts, only about 50 countries have developed action
plans, whose implementation is significantly hampered
by the need for financing. In many developing countries,
including Chad, the persistence of negative cultural
aspects and misguided interpretations of religious
principles remain genuine obstacles on the path towards
achieving the commitments undertaken in resolution
1325 (2000). Those obstacles could and should be
overcome via robust involvement on the part of local
communities and traditional and religious leaders,
whose major role appears to be ignored in favour of
State institutions and non-governmental organizations
in the course of seeking adequate solutions. It should
be noted that perceptions among local communities
have also evolved, and that it is quite possible to make
a real difference using their own institutions that see
themselves as the guardians of tradition. The integration
and participation of women in every aspect of public
and private decision-making will make it possible to
eradicate negative social norms, reduce discrimination
and promote gender equality.

With regard to Chad's own efforts, despite the
political determination reflected in resolution 1325
(2000), to date we have not been able to complete our
national plan, owing primarily to institutional and
technical shortcomings and a low level of ownership.
Nevertheless, since 2000, the constant efforts of our
national authorities, supported by the agencies of the
United Nations system, have made it possible to further
integrate women at various levels in all aspects of
society. In addition to boosting women's presence in
the Government and the Parliament, women have been
encouraged to join our domestic security services,
especially the Gendarmerie and in the Garde nationale
et nomade. For some time, our national police have
implemented a 30 per cent quota on recruitment, thereby
contributing to promoting gender equality. Moreover,
this year, in the context of national women's week and
the observance of International Women's Day, the focus
has been on the empowerment of women. To that end,
for the past four years a special policy has been in place
to extend microcredit to women.

In conclusion, I reiterate Chad's commitment to
implementing resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent
resolutions on the issue, in line with our national
legislation, while giving the requisite attention to the
recommendations set out in the global study on the
implementation of that resolution, as set out in the
report of the High-level Panel on Peace Operations and
the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of the
United Nations Peacebuilding Architecture.

