Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): Hungary takes a stand
against the use of sexual violence as a tactic of war. We
fully support and have joined the "Get Cross!" global
campaign of the United Nations.

I wish to thank you, Madam President, and Jordan
for choosing an old monster afflicting humankind as
the topic of today's open debate. I also wish to thank
Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
and Ms. Allamin of Nigeria for sharing so openly those
shocking and personal accounts.

Hungary fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union.

I said "old monster" because women and girls have
always been particularly vulnerable victims during
armed conflicts; however, in modern history sexual
violence is often used as a weapon of war to demoralize
women or the communities to which they belong.
Also, sexual and gender-based violence rarely cease at
the end of hostilities, but continue well into the post-
conflict phase.

We know only too well from history that sexual
violence is often used by people with guns and power as
part ofa multifaceted strategy to terrorize populations,
displace communities, humiliate women, children
and men and destroy their human dignity for the rest
of their lives. Those crimes are serious violations of
international human rights and humanitarian law and
represent one of the cruelest forms of discrimination
against women, which the international community
must not tolerate. In that context, Hungary firmly
supports the international efforts aimed at eliminating
all forms of sexual violence in conflict.

In that spirit, a high-level Hungarian delegation
participated in the Global Summit to End Sexual
Violence in Conflict, held in London last June. The
Hungarian Government joined the Call to Action on
Protecting Women and Girls in Emergencies and the
Girl Summit 2014 charter on ending female genital
mutilation and child, early and forced marriage.

We are deeply troubled by the harrowing accounts
of sexual violence used as a tactic of war described
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/203).
Sexual violence remains chronically underreported
as a result of fear and stigmatization. We support the
urgent recognition that sexual violence can not only be
employed as a tactic of war but, indeed, as a tactic of
terror.

We would like to see more women as official
peacekeepers and peacemakers to strengthen
communication in the field. Today's armed conflicts
are increasingly characterized by extremist ideologies
and ethnic or religious divisions, thus presenting new
challenges for the international community.

We consider the criminal activities of Al-Qaida,
Daesh, Boko Haram and the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) as shocking news. In our View,
ISIL's targeting of women and girls, especially those
belonging to ethnic and religious minorities - including
Christians, Yazidis and women of other faiths - is also
shocking news.

Also, using sexual violence as a form ofpersecution
to forcibly displace populations is particularly
worrisome. Displaced and refugee girls face particular
risks and are more vulnerable to sexual abuse, as
witnessed in refugee camps. A recent United Nations
inter-agency report revealed that rates of early marriage
in refugee camps are on the rise, thus putting those girls
at a higher risk of sexual abuse.

As others have today, we agree with the Secretary-
General's recommendation that effective counter-
terrorism strategies need to address the use of sexual
violence as a tactic of terror and be adapted accordingly.

We firmly believe that those crimes must
be prosecuted and punished under national and
international law. Regrettably, however, impunity for
perpetrators remains a major challenge, as we know.
We support the efforts of the United Nations Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence
in Conflict aimed at assisting national authorities in
criminal investigation and prosecution, the collection
and preservation of evidence and criminal law reform.

The Declaration of Commitment to End to Sexual
Violence in Conflict, endorsed by 144 Member States,
including Hungary, in September 2013, is an important
achievement in raising awareness and ending the
silence surrounding this atrocious crime - as is
today's meeting in the Council. It is now imperative
that the international community live up to its political
commitment by way of concrete and measurable action.

