Mr. Le Roy (spoke in French): I too thank the
Council presidency for having taken the initiative to
organize this important debate. This is an opportunity
for us to review the efforts of peacekeeping missions
against sexual violence in times of conflict. This
question remains one of the major challenges
confronting us. The Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) and the Department of Field
Support (DFS) are deeply concerned by ongoing sexual
violence against civilians, in particular women and
children, in conflict zones in spite of repeated
condemnations by the international community.

In 2010, DPKO and DFS launched various
targeted initiatives to improve the implementation of
our protection mandates. We have concentrated our
efforts on the prevention of protection incidents by
missions and on strengthening their capacities to
support national authorities in the implementation of
their responsibilities to protect civilians in their
territories.

It is vital to recognize that peacekeeping missions
are but one protection actor among others, beginning,
of course, with the Government of the host country,
and that they cannot guarantee absolute protection. We
have always said that we expect each mission
component to do its utmost to prevent any occurrence
of sexual violence.

After developing the operational concepts earlier
this year, we centred our actions around five key pillars
in order to improve the planning and implementation of
our protection mandates. These are: first, the
development of a strategic reference framework to
guide the development of missions' protection
strategies; second, training modules on the protection
of civilians for pre- and post-deployment courses,
which include practical exercises and address all
components of peacekeeping missions; third, an
assessment of resources and capacities necessary for
the implementation of our civilian protection
mandates; fourth, an in-depth study of planning
processes for the protection of civilians pre- and post-
deployment; and finally, capacity-building initiatives.
We are working on a definition of standard capacities
for our military personnel in order to better define our
expectations for performance in civilian protection, and
for our other mandated duties.

We have also undertaken specific initiatives to
combat sexual violence, which are clearly at the centre
of our efforts to protect civilians.

(spoke in English)

Addressing impunity, for example through the
establishment of the rule of law and accountability, is
another key plank of our ongoing efforts to address
conflict-related sexual violence. DPKO, together with
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and the United Nations Development
Programme, developed the conceptual framework for a
rapidly deployable team of experts on sexual violence
in armed conflict, pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1888 (2009). Members of the team, including
a DPKO judicial officer, are currently in the process of
being recruited, as just mentioned by Ms. Wallstrom.

A number of illustrative examples from the field
include the case of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO), where the military legal
adviser in Goma is currently providing technical
support to Congolese military justice authorities in the
conduct of the Walikale investigation. MONUSCO is
carrying out an ongoing procedural efficiency and
fairness project, which provides training to military
and civilian judges and prosecutors, with a particular
focus on conflict-related sexual violence. The Mission
is also in the process of establishing prosecution
support cells to assist the military justice authorities of
the Forces arme'es de la Republique democratique du
Congo (FARDC) in prosecuting persons arrested by the
FARDC.

The United Nations Mission in the Sudan
provides technical support to the Government of
Southern Sudan to review, amend and enact legislation
that ensures protection from sexual and gender-based
violence. In the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL), there is a project currently under way to
train prosecution and investigation teams specifically
on sexual and gender-based violence issues. In 2009,
the Liberian judiciary launched, with the support of
UNMIL, a dedicated court for sexual and gender-based
violence cases that pays special attention to victim and
witness protection.
10-69655

We are addressing the question of the training of
DPKO personnel to address conflict-related sexual
violence in a comprehensive manner. I would like to
highlight that DPKO and DFS are building the capacity
of United Nations police officers to protect women and
children from sexual violence through the development
of a standardized training curriculum for United
Nations police on investigating and preventing sexual
and gender-based violence.

Capacity-building continues on the ground
through the establishment of specialized police units
and training curricula for investigators. These have
proven effective in several peacekeeping missions. The
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste, for
example, has conducted training for the Timor-Leste
national police on gender-based violence
investigations. It has also produced a manual on the
topic for community police and elements of the
Vulnerable Persons Units.

DPKO and DFS are also planning to launch a
United Nations police standardized best practices
toolkit on gender and policing in peacekeeping
operations in 2011, the aim of which is to ensure that
such practices are shared among peacekeeping
missions and implemented.

On the question of preparing peacekeeping
personnel to implement their mandate to protect and to
respond to conflict-related sexual violence, we are
developing a training curriculum on gender
mainstreaming for military components, based on the
DPKO/DFS gender guidelines for United Nations
military in peacekeeping operations, which will help
military components to mainstream gender and
protection from conflict-related sexual violence at the
strategic, operational and tactical levels. General Gaye
is in charge of that.

In addition, in partnership with the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict and UN Women, scenario-
based training materials developed on the basis of
Addressing Conflict-Related Sexual Violence: An
Analytical Inventory of Peacekeeping Practice are also
under development for military components. The
DPKO/DFS operational guidance to assist civilian,
military and police components of peacekeeping
missions to implement resolutions 1820 (2008) and
1888 (2009) is in its final stages and will support the

overall implementation of those resolutions in
peacekeeping missions.

Also in collaboration with the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
we have taken steps to act on the request by this
Council to appoint women's protection advisers in
peacekeeping missions. We are currently undertaking
consultations with our missions concerning the role
and the responsibilities of women's protection advisers.
Our preliminary discussions thus far indicate that the
recruitment of advisers will need to be assessed on a
case-by-case basis, owing to the differing architecture
and challenges of each peacekeeping operation. We are
striving to ensure that the way forward supports an
integrated response that reinforces existing capacities
on the ground, thus avoiding fragmentation and
duplication of responsibilities.

As the Council is well aware, there remain a
number of systemic challenges that prevent us from
providing effective protection from conflict-related
sexual violence. The insufficient number of female
uniformed personnel is one of those challenges. In the
absence of sufficient female personnel, the missions
are often unable to effectively reach out to those we are
mandated to protect, the majority of whom are women
and children.

In spite of these constraints, our missions are
endeavouring to do their best with the limited
capacities they possess. For example, we have seen
that the recruitment of national community liaison
assistants has provided the necessary link between
troops and local communities in the Kivus and is
contributing towards enhanced protection of the
civilian population. It is critical that this important
outreach capacity be supported by a sufficient number
of female Community liaison assistants, who will be
able to communicate effectively with the women in the
local communities we endeavour to protect. It should
be noted, however, that there are sometimes cultural
constraints involved with the use of female assistants.

On a more systemic level, the results of the
Police Division's global effort have allowed us to
increase the proportion of female police officers in our
missions from 7.8 per cent to nearly 10 per cent now in
one year. It is of note, for example, that women
account for 24 per cent of the police personnel in the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur.

In closing, I would like to stress that the
economic, social and political empowerment of women
within societies affected by armed conflict is
fundamental to eradicate sexual and gender-based
violence. Women must participate in reforming and
building the institutions that will provide for their
protection and indeed, for the protection of all
civilians.

