Mr. Rutikanga (Rwanda): This open debate comes
at an opportune time to reflect on the achievements,
challenges and remaining work ahead on issues related
to the women and peace and security agenda, as we
mark 10 years since the establishment of the Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict and nearly 20 years since
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).

The issues related to women, peace and security
are a core foundation of lasting peace. The full
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda involves the meaningful participation in the full
spectrum of conflict mediation, conflict resolution and
the negotiation of peace agreements and peacebuilding.
Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) in 2000,
19 related resolutions have been adopted, similarly
highlighting the suffering that women face as a result
of armed conflict and recognizing that women carry
the heaviest burdens related to conflicts.

Unfortunately, despite all those resolutions,
atrocities against women and girls in armed conflicts
have continued. Today's wars continue to be fought
on women's bodies in acts of terror with the aim of
destroying beyond recovery the social fabric of targeted
communities. There remains a great deal of work for us
to advance women's empowerment in the area of peace
and security. In that respect, I would like to make the
following recommendations.

The political will of Member States, the United
Nations Secretariat and the commitment of all parties
to a conflict are critical to creating the necessary
environment for meaningful women's participation. It is
particularly hard to understand the absence of women
in negotiations for peace agreements supported by the
United Nations, as was reported earlier by the Executive
Director of UN-Women in her briefing (see S/PV.8649).

The women and peace and security agenda should
be central in all peacekeeping missions with a protection
of civilian mandate. Effective implementation calls
for increased investment in women and peace and
security advisers in peacekeeping missions and regular
reporting. The protection of civilians is and will
continue to be the driver of Rwanda's engagement in
United Nations peacekeeping. As the third top troop-
contributing country, we are fully committed to
the women and peace and security agenda in United
Nations peace operations.

It is essential to raise awareness and build the
capacities of local communities, as they are the first
line of response to conflict-related sexual violence.
During Rwanda's reconstruction period, the role of
local communities was central to effective prevention,
timely reporting and accountability.

Turning to the focus on a survivor-centred
approach, there is a need to reinforce the protection
and rehabilitation of victims of sexual abuse in armed
conflicts by providing services, including medical
care, psychological support, the protection of victims
and legal aid. In that regard, we commend Ms. Pramila
Patten, Special Representative ofthe Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, for putting the focus on
survivors during last week's event to commemorate the
tenth anniversary of the mandate on sexual violence in
conflict. We welcome the launch of the Global Fund for
Survivors of conflict-related violence by Nobel Peace
Prize laureates Dr. Denis Mukwege and Ms. Nadia
Murad and encourage more members to support
the Fund.

Supporting countries in need by strengthening
the legal and policy framework that advances the
rights of women and children is vital. Prevention of
sexual violence starts with strong institutions and
comprehensive legal frameworks during times of peace.
Holding perpetrators of sexual violence to account is
crucial to delivering justice to victims and to deterring
future crimes.

At the national level, it is vital to adopt and
implement national policies and national actions
plans and to make efforts within regional frameworks
aimed at raising public awareness of women's rights
and the importance of their role and participation in
peace processes.

Regarding all the aspects I have mentioned,
including others in my written statement, Rwanda
will hold the 2019 Global Gender Summit from 25 to
27 November under the theme "Unpacking constraints
to gender equality". All Member States are welcome.

