Mr. Govender (South Africa): My delegation would
like to thank the United Kingdom's presidency of the
Council for convening this important open debate. We
would also like to commend the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in
Conflict, Ms. Bangura, for her commitment and efforts
in addressing these egregious crimes.

While the Security Council has adopted the
requisite resolutions to address those crimes, including
resolution 2106 (2013) today, full and effective
implementation of the key resolutions underpinning the
women, peace and security agenda is critical to closing
the existing protection gaps. The Secretary-General's
report (S/2013/335) correctly alludes to a systemic
United Nations response to that problem. However,
we cannot agree more with the Secretary-General's
observation that Member States bear the primary legal
and moral responsibility for preventing and addressing
conflict-related sexual violence.

We concur with the five-point priority agenda
of the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
but we believe that priority must be given to fostering
national ownership, leadership and responsibility in
addressing sexual violence in conflict, thereby ensuring
its sustainability. The role of the Team of Experts on the
Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict becomes
crucial in enhancing the capacity-building of civilian
and military justice systems to address sexual violence
in conflict afflicted communities.

The technical assessment missions of
peacekeeping operations should, as a matter of
standard practice, include an agenda adviser whose
primary task must be situational awareness, analysis
and recommendations regarding the threat of or acts
of sexual violence in conflict. As part of a systemic
response, multidimensional peacekeeping missions
should incorporate a public awareness campaign at the
field level that encourages community involvement
in monitoring and reporting of the threat of or actual
incidences of all forms of sexual violence.

The Secretary-General's report highlights lessons
that could be learned from security sector reform
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes that went wrong in specific peacekeeping
missions. The Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
the Security Council and other relevant United Nations
entities should take stock of those lessons and ensure
that subsequent mandates, renewals and transitions
involving security sector reform and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes prevent any
escalation of threats to vulnerable communities.

While scenario-based training for peacekeepers
is essential to enhancing operational readiness and
prevention, it can never be a panacea for eliminating
sexual violence in conflict. The reach of the national
Government throughout its territories and its ability
to exercise control over those territories through its
national security apparatus, including law enforcement
and military capabilities, will always remain integral to
preventing and arresting sexual violence.

We support the recommendations of the Secretary-
General as contained in his recent report. We believe,
however, that the effective implementation of resolution
1960 (2010) will require greater involvement of women
in conflict resolution, mediation and peacebuilding
processes. While there is value in the Security
Council's developing monitoring mechanisms to ensure
the implementation of the provisions of resolution
1960 (2010), the greater involvement of women in
negotiation and peacemaking processes brings with it a
greater infusion of gender concerns and interests in the
resolution process.

In closing, every effort must be made to end
impunity by perpetrators of sexual Violence in conflict.
Making parties live up to their commitments in peace
agreements, which include the prohibition of sexual
violence in such agreements, is certainly one of the
tools that must be utilized with fervour. The Security
Council must also include measures that bring pressure
to bear on perpetrators of sexual violence in conflict,
especially on individuals and parties, through targeted
and graduated measures, as well as for the Security
Council to immediately and unambiguously pronounce
on those acts as and when perpetrated.

