Mr. Liden (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). Turkey,
Croatia, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Albania, Montenegro, Serbia, Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova, Armenia and Georgia align themselves with
this statement.

I would like to begin by commending the
Vietnamese presidency on the initiative to convene this
thematic debate on women and peace and security. The
debate presents yet another important opportunity to
promote the effective, coherent and systematic
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). The
European Union welcomes the important steps taken
today by the Security Council through the adoption of
resolution 1889 (2009) on women and peace and
security, which sets the agenda for our work next year.

The Security Council's adoption of resolutions
1325 (2000), 1820 (2008) and 1888 (2009) bears
testimony to the progress made during the last decade
in the area of women and peace and security. Those
resolutions have brought much-needed and welcome
Visibility to the question of women's empowerment,
which is a priority for the European Union. The issues
at stake concern basic human interests and human
rights. While all the resolutions on women and peace
and security are equally important, resolution 1325
(2000) serves as an umbrella resolution in addressing
women's empowerment, their role as peacebuilders and
their vulnerable position as victims of war.

The European Union welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2009/465) on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), and we support its
recommendations. We further echo the concern
expressed by the Secretary-General at the lack of
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). Why, after
almost 10 years, is there still a need for us to reaffirm
our commitments? Why do we not see trends of
decreasing sexual violence? It is disappointing that we
must still be asked to strengthen our efforts to fully
implement resolution 1325 (2000). Clearly, the status
quo is unacceptable. Women must be empowered,
accountability established and commitments
transformed into actions.

The empowerment of women is important for the
realization of their human rights, as well as for economic
and political development. The empowerment of women

is equally important to durable peace, security, early
recovery and reconciliation. If the marginalization of
women and impunity continue, whole peace processes
may be undermined. Women's empowerment and their
enjoyment of human rights must be an integral part of
post-conflict needs assessments. Needless to say, this is
of equally importance in carrying out humanitarian
needs assessments in situations of complex
humanitarian emergencies.

We urgently need to focus more on the capacity
to implement effective institutional reforms for gender
equality. The immediate aftermath of conflict provides
an opportunity to address women's issues and to use
women's potential. More resources must be
accompanied by increased donor coordination to
ensure financing efficiency, as well as coherent and
predictable international support. Women's equal
participation in decision-making at all levels is key to
better advancing human rights, to addressing the
specific needs and concerns of women, and to making
use of all human resources.

The European Union supports the idea that the
Security Council should vigorously pursue a strategy to
ensure an increase in women's participation in all
peace processes. We therefore support the idea of a
United Nations strategy to set concrete and specific
targets for women's participation in such processes. By
this time next year, we expect there to be at least one
female chief, or lead, peace mediator, several female
special representatives of the Secretary-General and a
full-time gender adviser in the Secretariat for political
affairs. A better gender balance in international
operations would signal to parties in conflict that
women have an important role to play. If international
and national leaderships are not interested in progress
on gender equality issues, we will not be able to move
beyond the rhetorical stage.
In accordance with resolution 1889 (2009), the
European Union underlines the need to improve and
strengthen the way in which the Security Council
receives, analyses and takes action on information
related to resolution 1325 (2000). The European Union
welcomes the decision of the General Assembly to
establish a United Nations composite gender entity. We
hope that the entity will bring about the much-needed
improvements in the work of the United Nations on
gender equality, including in the area of international
peace and security. We look forward to the proposal of
the Secretary-General on the details of the gender
entity, as well as the early appointment of the new
Under-Secretary-General. We must not lose momentum
on that matter.

The European Union stands fully committed to
the implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820
(2008) and 1888 (2009). However, there must be a
coherent strategy for the whole area of the protection
of women and women's rights. Women's participation
is needed in all processes at all levels. We need an all-
embracing approach on how to bring the system
together.

For the process of implementing resolution 1325
(2000), it is important to develop adequate tools of
accountability, including national action plans. In line
with the 2008 EU comprehensive approach to
implementing resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008), the EU is committed to stepping up efforts in
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and to
translating those efforts into real impact on the ground.
28
Our ambition is to be well prepared for October 2010,
when the international community will celebrate the
tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000) at a ministerial review conference.

At the same time, the European Union is
interested in continuing discussions with partner
countries and partner regional organizations, in
particular the African Union, on women and peace and
security, and on cooperation on and the improved
effectiveness of resolution 1325 (2000). We encourage
all Member States to swiftly adopt accountability
instruments, including national action plans.

