Mr. Rogachev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Security Council resolution 1325 (2000)
continues to be relevant as a guideline in defining the
role of women in conflict prevention, conflict
resolution and post-conflict reconstruction. We must
apply the provisions of the resolution in the process of
creating equal opportunities for the women to
participate actively in peacebuilding and security, as
well as to play a growing role in decision-making. The
issue is being mainstreamed in the work of the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the
Commission on the Status of Women and should
occupy an appropriate place in the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission and the work of the Human
Rights Council.

It is certain that women already have an
important role and are capable of playing an even
greater role in all issues relating to conflict prevention
and conflict resolution. In that context, we support the
development of a strategy to ensure women's fully
fledged participation in peace talks and in the electoral
processes.

During post-conflict reconstruction, there must be
broader use of the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW)
as the basic reference instrument.

The United Nations System-wide Action Plan for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) was
adopted in 2005 and helped us to implement the United
Nations strategy on women, peace and security. The
Action Plan made it possible to enhance interagency
coordination and structural accountability. However, its
potential has not been fully utilized.

We agree with the observation made by the
Secretary-General in his report (S/2006/770) that there
is a need to close the gaps in the implementation of the
Plan, which are due in part to the problems throughout
the United Nations system. Closing those gaps does not
mean establishing new structures, since that would
only worsen duplications and inconsistencies. Instead,
we should enhance the effectiveness of existing
mechanisms and special procedures by improving their
coordination and accountability and ensuring that they
use reliable sources of information, which would
enable them to avoid bias. Here, we should highlight
the role of the Inter-Agency Network on Women and
Gender Equality and its Task Force on Women, Peace
and Security. We also agree that there is a need to make
greater use of the expertise of the Office of the Special
Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of
Women. The work of the Special Rapporteur on
violence against women is not above criticism. Here,
too, we must ensure an objective and depoliticized
approach.

We support an extension of the Action Plan. In
particular, it should cover all issues related to
promoting women's participation in peace processes
and ensure that this issue will remain at the centre of
the attention of United Nations bodies.

