The Secretary-General: One of the most
difficult and important tasks facing the United Nations
is to ensure that nations emerging from devastating
conflicts are not allowed to slide back into violence.
Building peace may sound straightforward, but we
know from painful experience that it is not. Success
requires patience, long-term commitment and the
involvement of a wide range of actors working
together. We face real difficulties every day as our field
missions, funds, programmes and agencies, each in
their own way, work to provide the kind of help that
nations need to rebuild after war. We feel keenly and
constantly the need to do better.

It was in that spirit that my report last year on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2009/304) set out an agenda for action to help the
United Nations deliver more rapid and effective
support to national peacebuilding efforts and to ensure
that the impacts of those activities would endure.

We are making progress in Burundi, Haiti, Nepal,
Sierra Leone and elsewhere. Let us remember that for
people who have suffered through conflict, progress
cannot come fast enough. The ultimate test is how well
10-57830
we deliver on the ground and how well we give people
signs of hope, beyond mere words and promises.

One year since I issued that report, I am pleased
to report that we have made real gains in carrying
forward the specific recommendations I put forward
aimed at better organizing our peacebuilding efforts.
But we still have further to go. I see four areas that
require our particular attention.

First, we need to get the right people in the right
place at the right time. We now deploy special
representatives and other United Nations leaders more
rapidly to crisis situations. All senior staff now have
managerial compacts to define their goals and priorities
and to improve their accountability.

The demands on leaders in crisis situations are
growing. They are now expected to implement broader
Security Council mandates, provide a strategic vision,
ensure proper coordination and undertake joint
planning. We need to give them the properly trained
and equipped support teams that will enable them to
perform the full range of their responsibilities right
from the very beginning.

Such demands underpin the review of
international civilian capacities that is currently under
way. The review is anchored in the need to ensure that
international assistance in the aftermath of conflict is
driven by national needs and priorities, that we make
better use of the capacities of women and the global
South, and that our responses become faster and more
flexible. I look forward to the recommendations of the
Senior Advisory Group for the Review of International
Civilian Capacities, led by Jean-Marie Guehenno, early
next year. Meanwhile, I encourage all Member States
to be engaged in and contribute to the outcome of the
review.

Secondly, we need predictable financing.
Whatever type of United Nations presence there is, we
and our national partners need sufficient and timely
funding, especially in the middle of a crisis response.
In fragile transition situations, the Peacebuilding Fund
can quickly finance early action, which can in turn
prompt other sources to provide longer-term funding.
The Fund has streamlined its procedures, enabling it to
respond more swiftly to urgent needs. I encourage
Member States to contribute to its replenishment.

But the Fund is only one among many. Many
other efforts are under way, aimed at making all
10-57830
peacebuilding financing more flexible and tolerant of
risk. I urge Member States to support these as well.

Thirdly, we need more effective partnerships.
Greater cooperation and joint approaches within the
United Nations are important, but they are not enough.
We must build deeper strategic partnerships. With that
in mind, we have begun strengthening cooperation and
developing closer institutional links with the World
Bank.

Partnerships work best when roles are clear.
Greater clarity and deeper capacities are being
established in core areas such as mine action,
mediation and electoral assistance, but we still need to
review the institutional arrangement in areas such as
security sector reform and the rule of law. To this end, I
am encouraging a frank examination of the
comparative advantages of various United Nations
actors and other partners, based on available capacities
and presence. This will be an important priority in the
coming months, and I rely on the support of the
Council.

One of the most important partnerships is the one
between the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission. A closer collaboration can help the
Council to support peacebuilding more effectively
from the very start, including by enabling
peacekeeping operations to have an impact as early
peacebuilders and by ensuring that integrated
peacebuilding offices institutionalize these early
achievements.

With respect to the recent review of our
peacebuilding architecture, I look forward to the
outcome of discussions by the Council and the General
Assembly.

Fourthly, we need to put women at the heart of
peacebuilding. That is where women should be, not
only because of their peacebuilding needs, but above
all because of their capacities. Yet we have not truly
achieved this, nor have we fully implemented
resolution 1325 (2000). While their voices are critical
for ensuring that the foundations of peace are just and
equitable, women are still not systematically included
at all stages of the peace process.

My new report on women's participation in
peacebuilding (S/20lO/466) provides a comprehensive
strategy to address these challenges. It identifies the
hurdles women confront in seven key areas: mediation,
3
post-conflict planning, financing, civilian capacity,
post-conflict governance, the rule of law and economic
recovery. It makes specific commitments for each,
thereby providing a framework for the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

But that did not happen without dedicated
funding for women's needs. Conflicts leave States
severely weakened and social structures decimated. In
such situations, women are vital to ensuring that the
basic survival needs of families and communities are
met. I have therefore stipulated that all peacebuilding
funds managed by the United Nations will henceforth
allocate 15 per cent of their funds to projects that
address women's specific needs, advance gender
equality or empower women. Advancing the cause of
women and peace and security enhances the legitimacy
of peace processes and governance structures. It must
be an integral part of our peacebuilding efforts, not an
afterthought.

The work of rebuilding societies broken by
conflict requires long-term commitment, a truly
integrated approach and significant amounts of human,
financial and institutional resources. There is no set
sequence of peacemaking, followed by peacekeeping,
followed by peacebuilding, but rather a need for us to
be flexible and bring our tools into play at the
appropriate moments.

It is essential for us to develop the peacebuilding
architecture and promote greater coherence within the
United Nations system. Meeting these challenges will
bring us closer to our overarching goal of building
sustainable peace. I will continue to rely on the
Council's support and cooperation in that endeavour.

