Mrs. Boura (Greece): I would like to thank the
Spanish presidency of the Council for taking the
initiative to organize this important debate on the
occasion of the fifteenth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000) and the high-level review of its implementation.

Greece aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union and
wishes to add the following from a national point of
view.

Over the past 15 years, there have been seven
Security Council resolutions demonstrating the
international commitment to the principles of the
protection, prevention, participation of women and
gender mainstreaming. Yet, despite progress at the
normative level, 15 years after the establishment of the
women and peace and security agenda, women continue
to remain largely excluded from peace, security and
political processes, and women leaders and human
rights defenders are still being targeted.

We particularly welcome the adoption of resolution
2242 (2015), which we have proudly co-sponsored. The
high-level review of the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) will provide a road map to accelerate the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda and to address new challenges, such as the rise
in violent extremism, the humanitarian crises and the
growing refugee and migration flows.

However, as many others have stated earlier in
this meeting, much more needs to be done to translate
normative progress into results on the ground. We should
strive to change the traditional conceptual framework
in which security tends to be a man's narrative. The
recognition of the fact that women's participation
in all peace and security efforts offers important
advantages is crucial for achieving progress on the
issue. Gender-inclusive peacekeeping, peacemaking
and peacebuilding can contribute effectively to the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Women need to be included in the decision-making
at all stages of conflict resolution and post-conflict
reconciliation processes.

Greece is strongly committed to actively promoting,
in law and in practice, women's participation in
peacebuilding and mediation efforts. It is our priority
to tackle the underrepresentation of women in
political decision-making with a View to attaining a
more balanced participation of women and men in all
institutions, including the military and the police. In
that context, we have been in close dialogue with civil
society concerning the role of women in conflict and
post-conflict situations in order to promote women's
leadership in all relevant initiatives.

The major priorities have been incorporated into
our national programme of action for substantive
gender equality, which covers a wide range of public
policies at the national and regional levels aimed at
empowering women and girls and promoting their
participation in all areas of policy on an equal basis.
The national programme of action focuses on specific
actions targeting thematic areas, where women and
girls are either underrepresented or primarily affected,
such as violence, employment and decision-making.

In the light of the national programme of action, the
Greek General Secretariat for Gender Equality monitors
all national policies at the governmental, regional and
local levels and assesses their impact on gender by
rating their results. The follow-up and evaluation of
such policies will be based on statistical data and the
development of gender indicators according to United
Nations and European Union criteria. A range of eight
strategic priorities will guide the structural funds
for gender equality, which are especially aimed at
the protection of women against the economic crisis,
unemployment, poverty and exclusion.

Today, 15 years after Security Council resolution
1325 (2000) and 20 years after the Beijing Declaration,
we sincerely hope that we can fulfil the expectations to
redouble our efforts for gender equality. Women's role
is critical for resolving conflicts, fostering peace and
promoting reconciliation. No society can achieve peace
if half of its population is left behind.

