Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this debate. I would also like to thank the three briefers
for their outstanding presentations. I join the other
delegations in commending the participation of civil
society in this meeting.

When I read the excellent concept note (S/2015/32, annex) preparedby the Chileanpresidency, I remembered
the tragic images of 16- and 17-year-old Yazidi girls
who had been raped, abducted and abandoned. One
of them who survived that tragedy decided to take
her own life. Indeed, the situation could not be more
disturbing. At the same time as these girls were being
born in the late 1990s and the negotiations on the Rome
Statute were coming to an end, the Council was, for
the first time, adopting resolutions that specifically
addressed the protection of civilians and peacekeeping
resolutions that contained very specific mandates on the
protection of civilians. Since then, important steps have
been taken. Unfortunately, however, current conflicts
highlight the fact that violence in general, and gender-
based violence in particular, are increasing day by day
and that we are lagging behind those events.

The protection of civilians will be the focus of
Spain's contribution to the review of peacekeeping
operations being led by Mr. Ramos-Horta. However, to
ensure that the protection of civilians is truly effective,
not only must we assess peacekeeping operations, but
another four crucial aspects, as mentioned by Ms. Kang,
should be addressed. I share her opinion of the great
importance of humanitarian law, humanitarian access,
accountability and the role of non-State actors.

Resolution 1325 (2000) highlighted the tremendous
impact of conflict on women. Women face a wide
variety of threats, and for that reason we must seek
equally varied measures. As some speakers have noted,
we will encounter a series of crucial events this year.
First is the twentieth anniversary of the Fourth Beijing
Conference on Women. At the end of the year, we will
agree on the post-2015 development agenda. We must
review peacekeeping, resolution 1325 (2000) and the
Peacebuilding Commission. Spain, which will preside
over the Security Council in October, will devote all of
its efforts to ensuring a successful review of resolution
1325 (2000). To the extent possible, given the fact that
all these important events are occurring at the same
time, we will try to achieve new gender architecture on
behalf of the United Nations.

The Security Council has focused its attention
on women, and in particular on sexual violence in
conflict. But I think it is also important, as noted by
the Ambassador of the United Kingdom, that this organ
become involved in other important aspects, such as
accountability in relation to the role of women in peace
talks, mediation processes, ceasefire agreements and
post-conflict situations in general, because women's
empowerment is absolutely crucial if we desire greater
success.

I wish to point out the eloquence of our briefer
from civil society, Ms. Elman, who provided some
truly disturbing figures on the poor or non-existent
participation of Somali women in the administration of
Somalia. Training can play a critical role in that regard.
Without proper training, we cannot successfully
address that situation, which, as I have said, deeply
concerns Spain. We will do our best to contribute to
a solution, or at least to an improvement of the tragic
situation. There is a major imbalance between our legal
framework and the situation on the ground. We must do
everything possible to eliminate that vacuum.

I conclude simply by recalling the terrible statistics
we have heard today, indicating that each minute
a woman is raped in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Clearly we are not doing ourjob very well.

