Ms. Bassols Delgado (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
The women and peace and security agenda has been
and remains a priority for Spain. We are committed to
advancing towards a sustainable peace, convinced of
the fact that a lasting peace will be possible only with
the effective participation and leadership of women.

We have made progress on this matter since the
year 2000. However, data and the recent report of
the Secretary-General (S/2019/800) both concur in
indicating that we are still far from the full and effective
implementation of this agenda. Secretary-General
Guterres refers in his report to the "stark contrast
between rhetoric and reality" (ibid., para. 5) on this
issue. Much remains to be done. If we really want to
ensure progress, we are obliged to take concrete and
measurable steps. Therefore, Spain and Finland jointly
launched the Commitment 2025 initiative in September.
It contains concrete and ambitious commitments to
accelerating the effective participation of women in
peace and mediation processes. Our aim is to submit,
in 2022, a follow-up report on our commitments, in
line with the Secretary-General's recommendations, in
order to reduce the rift between rhetoric and reality. In
brief, we are seeking very concrete results to ensure
that we move forward.

Through the Women, Peace and Security Focal
Points Network - a Spanish initiative in operation
since 2016 - 11 countries have so far joined the 2025
Commitment, while others are expected to do so soon.
All States Members of the United Nations are invited to
join. The implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda crucially requires regional, national
and local policies. Therefore, strategic instruments
such as national action plans represent a fundamental
mechanism. Spain is currently reviewing its second
action plan. From the lessons learned through its
implementation, we hope to glean a set ofgood practices
to share with all Member States and the Organization.
We are facing a challenge that requires a transformative
and sustained effort over time.
Before I conclude, allow me to refer to
education - a fundamental tool for the political,
economic and social empowerment of women. Spain
this year hosted the third International Conference on
Safe Schools, which, among other issues, addressed
the impact of attacks against education on women and
girls. The 87 participants agreed that it is essential to
forge synergies between the safe schools agenda and
the women and peace and security agenda. I encourage
other States represented here to adopt the Safe Schools
Declaration as an instrument to prevent attacks on
access to education.

Today's debate is the last major event on this issue
in this forum before 2020, when we will commemorate
the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000). There is still a long way to go. There are
still rights to be defended in the face of attacks and
even in the face of inaction. Spain will remain heavily
involved in pursuing a change that guarantees genuine
equality in the exercise of women's rights and in their
participation in all decision-making and peacebuilding
processes. We will engage at the national level, we will
cooperate with those who wish to cooperate and we will
share the lessons learned to the benefit of peace.

