Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): Allow me first to
congratulate you, Sir, on the successful adoption today
of resolution 2242 (2015). Given this unprecedented
debate, I will not read out our whole statement, but will
simply highlight the six most important points. IfI get
anything wrong, I would ask listeners not quote me but
refer to the written statement, which is available.

Our first point is that the main challenge
to the women and peace and security agenda is
implementation. We need to move away from a silo
approach and to more strongly tackle the root causes
of the lack of implementation of the agenda, which
concerns gender-based discrimination more broadly,
irrespective of conflict. A study suggests that rising
levels of violence against women are in fact indicators
of impending conflict, before the conflict starts. We
therefore need a broader approach in tackling the root
causes.

Secondly, we believe that the 2030 Sustainable
Development Agenda (General Assembly resolution 70/1), will be an important tool to improve
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda. Sustainable Development Goal 5, on gender
equality, and Goal 16, on peaceful societies, establish a
long-overdue link between the work of the Council and
our development efforts.

Thirdly, we would like to emphasize that the World
Humanitarian Summit next year will also provide
an important opportunity to promote this agenda,
especially since we know that including women also
enhances humanitarian work.

Fourthly, participation is an important pillar of this
agenda. But we believe that to achieve the meaningful
participation of women, we need to really change
attitudes, harmful stereotypes and the violent ideas
of men that persist in many parts of the world, and
education is the only way to change that.

Our fifth point is that we also need to tackle the
culture of impunity. We believe that the International
Criminal Court (ICC) has an important role to play in
this regard, especially since sexual violence plays a role
in nearly every case before the ICC. We would also like
to emphasize that collecting evidence in a professional
manner at the earliest possible stage is crucial for
successful prosecutions, and we support the Justice
Rapid Response initiative in that regard.

Our sixth and final point is that sufficient funding
is required. For Liechtenstein, women's human rights
and empowerment are high priorities in our budget
for international cooperation, and we hope that other
countries, especially major donors, will continue to
take the same approach.

