Mr. Khiari (Tunisia) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I congratulate the Spanish presidency of the
Council on having organized this important open
debate on women and peace and security, marking the
fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000). Tunisia is pleased to participate in this debate
and takes this opportunity to reaffirm its support for
the objectives set out in resolution 1325 (2000), which
my country is proud to have co-sponsored.

The adoption of this resolution constitutes a
major step. It addresses not only the impact of armed
conflict on women and the importance of their active
participation in the peace process, but it also highlights
the disproportionate violence they suffer in armed
conflicts.

We are pleased to see today a growing awareness
of the multifaceted discrimination against women in
conflict, an awareness that has resulted in significant
efforts to address it. In our opinion, it is important that
women, who, together with children and the elderly, are
the first victims of armed conflict, be given a leading
role in maintaining and consolidating peace and,
even more urgent, in preventive processes, which also
deserve special attention.

Significant progress has been achieved in that
regard since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
such as the appointment of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
the creation of the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law
and Sexual Violence in Conflict, the list of shame and
the deployment of advisers and experts responsible for
the protection of women in peacekeeping missions.
We also have at our disposal a more robust normative
framework for women and peace and security, which is
further bolstered by resolution 2242 (2015), which the
Council adopted yesterday and which we co-sponsored.

Other measures have been taken to improve the
implementation of the resolution at the level of the
regional organizations to which we belong, including
the elaboration by the League of Arab States of a
regional strategy on women and peace and security and
the launch of a five-year programme, in 2014, by the
African Union Commission, entitled "Gender, Peace
and Security". However, it must be noted that, despite
the progress achieved, much remains to be done to
achieve the objectives set out in the agenda on women
and peace and security. Therefore, we believe that the
Security Council must remain seized of this matter and
take the necessary steps to ensure the protection of
women and their full and effective participation in the
various stages of the peace process.

That is all the more urgent in the context of the
emergence of new unconventional conflicts and the
expansion of their zone of impact, conflicts which are
related to the proliferation of terrorism and violent
extremism, where women are deliberately targeted and
their fundamental rights - indeed their rights, full
stop - are violated. In that respect, Tunisia strongly
supports the incorporation of the issue of women's
rights violations, including sexual violence, under the
criteria triggering the imposition of targeted sanctions.
We also believe that all national stakeholders, including
civil society, should be able to actively contribute to
the promotion of the peace process, as a State can
only lay a solid foundation for a lasting peace with the
involvement and support of all its citizens.

Our own national experience, which has made
dialogue, compromise and the active participation of
civil society the modus operandi of crisis management,
has enabled us to avoid any detrimental drift of our
democratic transition process. This approach of
the Tunisian national dialogue quartet, led by the
permanent institutions of Tunisian civil society, was
recently awarded the prestigious Nobel Peace Prize in
2015. That Prize honours my country and commends
the various components of our civil society.

As mentioned in the global study on the impact
of women in conflict prevention and peacebuilding,
civil society is a key partner in post-conflict situations
and can contribute significantly to strengthening early
warning mechanisms, thereby making it possible to
anticipate an escalation of violence against women
and to raise awareness initiatives in that regard. That
is why it is important to further mobilize support for
the efforts of civil society organizations in conflict and
post-conflict situations. There is also a need to maintain
a sustained dialogue with civil society organizations in
thematic debates and in the deliberations concerning
specific countries.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that my country
remains available to the United Nations for any action
within the framework of the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) and other international instruments aimed
at consolidating women's full participation in the
decision-making process and enshrining a culture of
respect for women's rights.

