Mr. Cevik (Turkey): Allow me to congratulate
India for its successful presidency during the month of
November and to thank you, Sir, for organizing today's
open debate.

I wish to express our thanks to the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive report (S/2012/732).
We appreciate presidential statement S/PRST/2012/23,
which was adopted at the end of October. I take this
opportunity to also thank Under-Secretary-General
Bachelet and to assure her of my country's full support
and cooperation.

Since the adoption of the landmark
resolution 1325 (2000), thanks to the efforts of the
international community, including non-governmental
organizations and women's organizations, progress has
been made across a broad range of issues concerning
the protection and promotion of women's and girl's
rights in conflict-affected situations. However, as
today's debate has shown, many obstacles remain.

We agree with the recommendations contained
in the report of the Secretary-General, which guide
us towards particular areas requiring increased
and improved effort. In that context, I would like to
highlight three aspects in my intervention today.

The first is the valuable role that women can play
in mediation efforts. As a co-chair of the Group of
Friends of Mediation, Turkey, together with Finland,
endeavoured to ensure that the very first United Nations
resolution on mediation (resolution 65/283), of 2011,
reflected the main elements of resolution 1325 (2000)
and subsequent resolutions on women and peace and
security.

Secondly, there is conflict-related violence against
women. As a way of tackling that problem, we believe
that the Security Council should, as appropriate, ensure
that ceasefire agreements include sexual violence in
their definitions. On this occasion, we would like to
welcome the publication of the Guidance for Effective
Mediation, which is contained in the Secretary-
General's report entitled "Strengthening the role of
mediation in the peaceful settlement of disputes,
conflict prevention and resolution" (A/66/811, annex I), which addresses conflict-related sexual violence in
ceasefire and peace agreements, and we encourage its
increased utilization.

Thirdly, there is the interface between security
and development and the role women can play in that
respect. As we embark upon a process to develop a
set of sustainable development goals for post-2015, we
believe that gender equality and the empowerment of
women should be at the centre of all our solutions and
commitments. That would also help further the agenda
on women and peace and security.

Before concluding, I would like to underline the
valuable contribution of UN-Women in pursuing United
Nations gender-related efforts in a more systematic and
coordinated manner. That is evident also in the women
and peace and security agenda. In that respect, we
welcome the joint strategy on gender and mediation
launched by UN-Women and the Department of Political
Affairs. We also commend the seven-point action plan
for gender-responsive peacebuilding, spearheaded by
UN-Women and the Peacebuilding Support Office.

I wish to conclude by underlining my
country's commitment to the full implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) and the four subsequent
resolutions on women and peace and security, namely,
resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009), 1889 (2009),
and1960 (2010).
