Mr. Beck (Solomon Islands): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate
on women, the rule of law and transitional justice
in conflict-affected situations. I would also like to
welcome the report of the Secretary-General on women
and peace and security (S/2013/525).

At the outset, the Solomon Islands aligns its
statement with that delivered by the representative of
the Marshall Islands on behalf of the members of the
Pacific Islands Forum. I would also like to make some
additional comments in my national capacity.

Resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009),
1889 (2009) and 1960 (2010) provide a framework
for improving the situation of women in conflict, as
articulated in the President's concept note (S/2013/587, annex). The impact of conflict on society as a whole
exposes the vulnerability and dignity of women and
children even more.

The Solomon Islands went through a conflict
situation beginning late in 1998. I would like to use this
occasion to speak on some lessons learned from it. We
saw both the vulnerability of women and their strength.
During the conflict, women organized themselves
into various groups, identifying themselves as women
for peace, acting as mediators, providing bridges and
bringing communities together. Cultural peace and
reconciliation traditions continued to be used to unify
and heal communities even after the conflict. The
role of women is recognized by the Solomon Islands,
which appointed women to be two of its five truth
and reconciliation commissioners. They have since
presented their reports to the Government.

At one of the open debates in the Council during
the previous session, we discussed cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations (see S/PV.7015). Looking at the
experience of the Solomon Islands relating to women
and peace and security, we cannot help making the
connection to the contribution of regional organizations
to the maintenance of international peace and security,
given its role in our national situation. At the request
of the Government of the Solomon Islands, under
the auspices of the Pacific Islands Forum in 2003, a
Regional Assistance Mission to the Solomon Islands,
led by Australia and supported by New Zealand and all
the Pacific small island developing States, was deployed
to my country to restore the rule of law, rebuild core
public institutions and allow the country to recover
from the conflict. The Regional Assistance Mission,
made up of military, police and civilian components,
restored the rule of law and carried out peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and peacemaking activities.

To date, our economy is growing, State institutions
are functioning and the country is open for business.
Accordingly, the Regional Assistance Mission, in
partnership with the Government, has now undergone
a transitional phase. It is now a police-only mission; its
success belongs to the people of the Solomon Islands as
well as the Pacific. The Regional Mission was flexible
in adapting to a changing environment, allowing the
partnership to conduct the transition at a pace suited
to the conditions in the receiving State, the Solomon
Islands. It is an example of South-South cooperation,
and triangular cooperation with the Solomon
Islands' regional neighbours. While each example of
transitional justice is unique and has its own national
context, my delegation feels that the Pacific has found
a model that addresses peacekeeping, peacebuilding
and peacemaking, all rolled into a single mission. As a
nation, we still have much to do in serving our people,
scattered over our country of 900 islands.

The Solomon Islands is one of the few countries that
have a ministry ofpeace and reconciliation. We also have
a ministry of women's, youth's and children's affairs.
We have come a long way in implementing elements of
the five resolutions on women and peace and security.
In 2009 we reviewed our national policy on gender
equity and women's development. In partnership with
Australia, we have also undertaken a Solomon Islands
family health and safety study, which has found that two
out of three women in our country suffer from gender-
based violence. A recent commission on the status of
women found that 7 out of 10 women around the world
suffer from gender-based violence. In response to that,
we adopted a national policy on eliminating Violence
against women. Our national police have responded,
adopting a no-drop policy of victim protection that
deals with both Victims and perpetrators. Our public
solicitor's office has established a family protection
unit that provides specialized services to women and
children. Also, working with other non-State actors and
faith-based institutions, we continue to provide shelter,
counselling and support for victims of gender-based
violence.
We have come a long way, but we are determined
to keep going, focusing on the economic empowerment
of women and greater investment in rural areas, which
is where the bulk of populations are located in least
developed countries (LDCs) as well as in Pacific
nations. These are conflict-resolution measures as well
as conflict-prevention measures. It is for that reason that
putting peace at the heart of sustainable development,
with peace - and state-building goals, is something
that we, as a member of the Group of 77 and China,
would like to see on the post-2015 development
agenda. We would like to see more investment in high-
value, game-changing investments that can transform
economies within the Pacific and in LDCs to allow us
to build resilience against warm, cold and hot security
threats.

For us, as a small island developing State, climate
change remains a threat multiplier, with impacts on
food and water security. Threats of sea-level rise
continue to disempower women as land is swallowed
up by sea. Relocating populations to higher islands also
poses threats of conflict, as one language group moves
from its ancestral land to another land-tenure system. It
was for that reason that the General Assembly adopted
resolution 63/281, on climate change and its possible
security implications. We see this as an issue that all
United Nations principal organs, including the Security
Council, should be seized of.

I would like to conclude by assuring you once
again, Mr. President, of the support and cooperation of
the Solomon Islands in protecting women's safety and
their contribution to nation-building and world peace.

