Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I would like to express
my pleasure in participating in today's debate on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). I take this
opportunity to thank the Secretary-General for his
most recent report on women and peace and security
(S/2013/525), which enlightens us with regard to
the implementation of that resolution at all levels.
I also thank the Executive Director of UN Women,
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka; the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Navanethem
Pillay; and the representative of Femmes Africa
Solidarite', Ms. Brigitte Balipou, for their informative
briefings.

At the outset, the Government of Rwanda once
again condemns all forms of violence against women
and girls worldwide, especially in conflict and post-
conflict zones. As previously stated in the Council,
we believe that sexual Violence in conflict should be
qualified as sexual terrorism.

Our Government considers violence against
women and girls as an assault on human dignity. Over
the years, we have created a favourable environment
for gender equality, women's empowerment and
children's rights. We have demonstrated a strong
political will to end the scourge by adopting supportive
policies and legal frameworks, which include a gender-
sensitive Constitution and laws on the prevention
and punishment of gender-based Violence and on the
protection of children from violence. As Ambassador
Power stated, our new parliament - our lower Chamber
of Deputies - attests to the fruitfulness of the policies
on our agenda, as recent elections raised women's
representation in that body at 64 per cent.

At the institutional level, Rwanda's security organs,
in collaboration with other Government agencies, local
communities and civil society, have launched initiatives
to prevent and respond to violence that targets women
and girls. The one-stop centres run by the national
police offer a wide range of free services for victims
of gender-based violence, and we have set up gender
desks in police stations and army posts nationwide, and
at the national prosecution agency, for the purposes of
offering gender-sensitive services to victims.

At the continental level, Rwanda is among the
leading the police-contributing countries, with female
police and correctional officers serving in the United
Nations peacebuilding and peacekeeping missions
in Liberia, Haiti, the Sudan, Cote d'Ivoire and Chad.
Those officers actively contribute to combating and
raising awareness on Violence against women in the
communities they serve. They also serve as advisers
on gender-based violence and share best practices with
other officers and local authorities.

For those reasons, we support the full
implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1960
(2010), which insist that all peacekeeping mandates
incorporate provisions that specifically identify
steps to address sexual violence, including the clear
identification of women's protection advisers alongside
gender advisers and human rights protection units.

Let me also emphasize that, in our efforts to
promote the women and peace and security agenda,
in 2010, my country adopted a national action plan on
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). To that
end, we have adopted a range of policies to prevent and
respond to violence against women and girls. One of
the foremost priorities is to protect and rehabilitate the
dignity of Victims. We commend those countries that
have also adopted national action plans and urge those
that have not done so to make it a priority.

Let me also express my delegation's support for
the principle of zero tolerance advocated by the United
Nations and call for the principle to be more rigorously
enforced. During the 1994 genocide perpetrated
against the Tutsi in Rwanda, women and girls were
forced to endure inhuman and degrading atrocities.
Tens of thousands were raped and left for dead. That
memory - that history - inspires Rwanda in its
unyielding and heartfelt commitment to fight against
impunity, especially when it comes to crimes against
women and girls.

Rwandans have come to understand first hand
the importance of strengthening internal justice
mechanisms and building institutions that enhance
accessibility to justice. We believe that the fight against
impunity is primarily the responsibility of States. The
international community, including the United Nations,
should support national jurisdictions and help them to
build capacity where gaps exist, by providing guidance
and direction drawn from best practices in the field.
That is not to suggest, however, that those international
justice mechanisms are irrelevant; indeed, a political
international mechanism or tribunal could complement
the work of national jurisdictions in the fight against
impunity and bring perpetrators of crimes against
humanity and genocide, including crimes against
women and girls, to justice.

As we gather today, 13 years after the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), we believe that it is fair to make
an assessment of how effective the implementation
of the resolution has been, and possibly draw lessons
for the way forward. Despite the improved practice in
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), we note
that there remains a deficit in opportunities for women
to exercise leadership and that there is a continued
underrepresentation of women in conflict prevention,
conflict resolution, protection and peacebuilding
processes. Both the international community and
Member States will need to deploy greater efforts to
address those issues and maintain previous gains with
a View to reducing the inequalities observed at various
levels in the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

My delegation welcomes the adoption of resolution
2122 (2013) and hopes that it will help speed up
the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda articulated in resolution 1325 (2000).
Specifically, we are pleased that the resolution
advocates for improving the quality of gender analysis
by calling for gender expertise in all United Nations-
led commissions of inquiry, transitional justice
mechanisms, groups of experts of the relevant Sanctions
Committees and mediation processes; by supporting
special representatives, special envoys and mediation
support teams and political and peacekeeping missions
in that regard; and by deploying gender advisers and
women protection advisers. We also welcome the
Secretary-General's recommendations, including his
call for an independent review of the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) in preparation for its high-
level review in 2015. We hope that such a review will
provide in-depth analysis and recommendations for the
best way forward.

