Mr. Errazuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
thanks Azerbaijani the presidency for convening this
open debate on women and peace and security, and
for the opportunity to reaffirm the role of women in
transitional justice.

While our country has periodically taken part
in these debates, our comments today are special
significance since this is our first speech following
Chile's election as a non-permanent member of the
Council for the period 2014-2015. We reiterate our
commitment to the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) (2000), bearing in mind that 2015 will mark
the fifteenth anniversary of that instrument, which
has enabled us to progress, among other goals, in the
promotion of women to positions of leadership, the
prevention of gender-based violence in situations of
conflict and post-conflict, and the creation of national
plans in various countries, including Chile.

In the spirit of brevity, I shall limit my remarks
to several issues raised in the Secretary-General's
recent report (S/2013/525) that we consider particularly
important.

We note the progress to date in the system as a whole
and at the regional and national levels with regard to
best practices, national plans, indicators and training.
However, we are concerned by the persistent deficit in
the number of women in leadership positions, as well
as the lack of opportunities for them to rise to such
positions. At the same time, we express our concern
at the ongoing decline, as described in the report, in
the number of women represented at the middle and
high levels of mission leadership staff, the scarcity of
data broken down by gender and age, and the gaps in
financing.

Similarly, we support the convening of a high-level
meeting on the matter in 2015 and share the Secretary-
General's recommendation that an independent
worldwide study of the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) be undertaken to make a full diagnosis
of its implementation status and detail priorities for
further action. We hope that the the study will be
designed above all to seek the broadest participation of
Member States and of civil society so that it will enjoy
cross-cutting support.

We agree with the recommendations in the report
about the need to promote sustainable budgets for
the work, so as to strengthen women's organizations
working at the national levels and to train women
leaders of peace movements. While appreciating the
work of the experts deployed in the field, we consider it
essential to provide training at the system and national
levels not only for those providing direct leadership in
that area, but also to those performing management
functions, whatever their role. My delegation agrees on
the need to accelerate women's access to the political
arena and to support transitional justice reform as a
peacebuilding guarantee.

Chile signed the Arms Trade Treaty and urges
other States to support that initiative, which we believe
represents an important humanitarian instrument for
the prevention of violence against women and girls.

It is my delegation's belief that the Security
Council should use every means in its power to gather
information on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and subsequent resolutions, particularly through
briefings provided by the commissions of inquiry
established to investigate situations on the Council's
agenda. We take this opportunity to urge the members
of the Council to hold well-informed consultations on
those issues.

I note that at the regional level, the Chilean
Joint Centre for Peacekeeping Operations convened
a seminar, jointly with the United States Naval
Postgraduate School, entitled "Women, Peace and
Security: Implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
new challenges", in Santiago, Chile from 1 to 12 July. It
was attended by professionals from Brazil, El Salvador,
Guatemala, Paraguay, Peru and Uruguay as well as
from our own country. The seminar concluded with the
adoption of a document in the form of an action plan,
agreed in group discussions, embodying initiatives
fully reflecting the international norms discussed
during the seminar.

Chile will continue promoting the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), convinced as it is of the
important role played by women in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts and of the need to increase their
participation in decision-making processes.

