Ms. Kamara (Liberia): My delegation commends
the Government of Spain for convening this high-
level review on women and peace and security, which
coincides with the fifteenth anniversary ofthe adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000). We were privileged to have
had the presence of the President of Spain yesterday and
to hear insightful briefings by the Executive Director
of UN-Women and the three women representatives of
civil society organizations. We have been enriched by
their testimony.

Just 15 years ago, when the Council adopted
resolution 1325 (2000), Liberia was embroiled in civil
conflict. Our journey to peace bears testimony to the
vital contribution of women to peace, security and
conflict resolution. The positive impact of the presence
of Liberian women at the negotiations in 2003, which
led to the comprehensive peace agreement in Liberia,
is well documented and requires no further elaboration.
Suffice it to say, the Government of Liberia continues
to provide opportunities for women to participate
in ongoing processes of peacebuilding and peace
consolidation.
Based on our national experience, we embraced
resolution 1325 (2000) and set out to apply it within
our domestic context. In 2009, Liberia was the first
country in Africa to complete the formulation of its
five-year national action plan to give meaning to the
resolution. The plan was developed as the framework
to drive the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
at the national level. It rests upon four pillars, namely,
protection, prevention, participation and empowerment
and promotion.

Working in collaboration with UN-Women and other
United Nations agencies, as well as bilateral partners
and civil society organizations, significant progress has
been made in the implementation of the resolution in
Liberia. Such progress includes the creation of a civil
society observatory on resolution 1325 (2000) and the
establishment of the Angie Brooks International Centre
for training women in leadership, conflict resolution
and peacebuilding. A Special Criminal Court E was
established in Monrovia in 2008 for the adjudication
of cases of sexual and gender-based violence. Under a
joint programme of the Government of Liberia and the
United Nations, psychosocial, medical and economic
support is being provided for survivors of rape and
sexual and gender-based violence offenses.

The economic empowerment of women and
adolescent girls continues to be supported through
microcredit, agricultural schemes and training iin
business and life skills. To complement the active
participation of women at the national level, the
Government has integrated a gender perspective
into the decentralization process, which will open
up opportunities for women to serve in leadership
positions at subnational and local levels. Clearly, much
has been achieved, but so much more needs to be done.
Many challenges persist, and are impediments to the
resolution's successful implementation in Liberia.
Foremost among them are inadequate financial
resources, lack of capacity, a weak justice system and
poor coordination among the relevant stakeholders.

As we move towards achieving inclusive
development, through which we hope that women
will enjoy full participation across every sector, the
Government of Liberia will undertake the following
measures before the end of the current Administration.

First, in order to strengthen women's protection,
the Government will ensure the passage into law of
the draft domestic violence act, which was endorsed by
the Liberian Cabinet on 15 June and which is currently
under consideration by the Liberia National Legislature.

Secondly, the Government commits to ensuring
that the outcome of the ongoing constitutional review
process will guarantee and institutionalize women's
full and equal participation in governance and national
affairs.

Thirdly, to improve women's access to justice
throughout the country, the Government commits to
working with the judiciary to initiate the decentralization
of Criminal Court E to all counties of the country, so
that rural-based sexual and gender-based violence
survivors may have recourse.

Fourthly, the Government commits to implement its
decision to establish gender units within each ministry
and agency of the Government.

The Government of Liberia resolves to increase
its allocation in the national budget to support the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) across
the country, with the aim of reinforcing economic
empowerment programmes and expanding their
coverage for the benefit of women and girls in rural
areas. That is critical for the achievement of the
objectives of our national agenda for transformation.

Finally, the Government, through the Ministry
of Gender, Children and Social Protection and in
collaboration with partners, is conducting a review of
the national action plan to develop a bridging strategy to
address gaps in implementation. The Government has
also embarked upon the revitalization of the resolution
1325 (2000) secretariat through the recruitment,
retention and training of staff and the provision of
funding.

As this is a critical time in Liberia's recovery
process from the Ebola health crisis, we count on
the continuing support of international partners to
translate those commitments into reality. We express
special recognition and gratitude to UN-Women for the
steadfast and consistent support it has provided to our
gender equality initiatives. We believe that resolution
2242 (2015), adopted yesterday and which we were
privileged to co-sponsor, offers a new framework as
well as new opportunities for global collaboration to
achieve the goals of the women and peace and security
agenda. Liberia commits to remain engaged.

