Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): At the outset, I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
important meeting during your presidency of the
Security Council this month. I also welcome the report
of the Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual
violence, which informs our discussion today
(S/20l2/33), and the insightful briefing of
Ms. Wallstrom, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict. The
report and the meeting are timely and necessary.
Central to today's debate is the relationship between
conflict and sexual violence. In order to better
understand that connection, I wish to address three
main elements.

The first aspect is the importance of the focus of
the international community. With the end of the
Second World War in 1945, humanity was saved from
another world war, but was not spared the effects of
war and atrocities. Over 20 million people were killed
in the 265 wars and conflicts between 1945 and 1990
and in the 186 wars and conflicts that erupted from
1990 to the present.

In the 1990s, after the Cold War, we increasingly
faced a new form of war, with a decrease in the number
of inter-State conflicts and an increase in the
prevalence of intra-State tension and violent non-State
actors. That brought new waves of atrocious horrors,
including in my country, Afghanistan. The atrocities
emerging from the conflicts of the 1990s, including
genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity,
raised a tenacious challenge for the international
community and, subsequently, fuelled the prompt
application of international laws and norms in
response.

The second element is the interconnectedness of
sexual violence and other atrocities. While sexual
violence is embedded within the definition of war
crimes and crimes against humanity, the international
community should take a holistic approach to those
atrocities, as they cannot be separated from one
another. Furthermore, every atrocity is spawned from
the all-encompassing destruction of society caused by
war. We cannot truly stop atrocities such as sexual
violence without ending the violence, war and conflict
that breed them.

The third aspect is the breakdown of cultural
values. War is pervasive. It destroys the common
understanding of decency and respect for human rights.
It kills morals. It breaks down social contracts. It
erodes solidarity and trust. As I saw in my own
country, war and conflict resulted in the corrupting
prevalence of a militant culture, countering society's
values, based on tolerance and respect.

What emerged was, in fact, a militant
anti-culture, caused by war. Crimes against Afghan
people were committed and human rights violations
were extensive, especially violence against women. We
saw what had never before been seen in the history of
Afghan women - a sequence of killing, maiming and
violence.

However, in the past 10 years, after the fall of the
Taliban, the Government of Afghanistan, with the
support of the international community, has worked to
put an end to violence in the country. That is essential
to security and to protecting the rights of women, men
and children.

Afghanistan adopted a law on the elimination of
violence against women, which has provided the
Government with stronger judicial means through
which we can combat sexual violence more effectively.
That is real progress towards breaking the silence with
regard to violence and sexual violence. We are
confident that, in the years to come, our efforts will
yield more results and that women will be safer and
more respected and will receive the justice that they
deserve.

The President of Afghanistan also established a
commission on the elimination of sexual abuse of
children and women. The commission advises relevant
organizations on how to fight against the sexual abuse
of women and children and encourages relevant
reporting to it.

Afghanistan acknowledges that the
accomplishments that we have outlined are only the
first steps towards achieving gender equality and the
improvement of the position of women. The Afghan
Government will therefore continue its effort to
eliminate sexual violence and to advance women's
rights and empowerment. In that regard, the
Government of Afghanistan welcomes resolutions 1325
(2000), 1888 (2009) and 1889 (2009), which identify
combating sexual violence as a matter of peace and
security.

The international community has an essential role
to play in supporting the ongoing efforts in conflict-
affected and post-conflict countries in order to end
sexual violence and violence against women, combat
impunity and offer assistance to victims of sexual
violence. However, we need not only the support of the
international community, but its awareness not to
forget the violence that affected the lives of women,
men and children. We must work together to ensure
that such atrocities will never happen again.

