Mr. Ladsous: I would join the Deputy Secretary-
General and Michele Bachelet in thanking the presidency
of the Council for having invited me to discuss the
critical issue of women and peace and security.

Last month, in its presidential statement
S/PRST/2012/23, the Security Council underlined the
importance of enhancing the participation of women
in the prevention and resolution of conflict and in
peacebuilding within the framework of the women
and peace and security agenda. Today, I would like
to affirm, from the extensive field experience of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support, that women indeed can
and must play a leading role in political participation,
conflict resolution and the transition from conflict to
peace. I will further illustrate how our missions support
the role of women in building peace and women's civil
society organizations in protecting women's rights. And
lastly, I hope to chart a path forward for overcoming
the political obstacles and security threats that impede
women's groups from more effective engagement in
conflict prevention and peace consolidation.

I am grateful to the Security Council for welcoming
the contribution of gender advisers and women
protection advisers to the implementation of resolutions
on women and peace and security. I wish to express
my commitment to ensuring that gains made in the
protection and promotion of women's and girls' rights
and empowerment remain sustained, including during
United Nations mission drawdowns and transitions.

This year, peacekeeping missions have supported
important progress in some areas, notably women's
political participation at the local and national levels.
Experience also showed that in other areas - including
the protection of women activists - more could be
achieved. Women continue, unfortunately, to be largely
absent from or to play merely symbolic roles in formal
peace processes. Social and cultural norms certainly
pose serious challenges to the full and meaningful
participation of women in peace processes. In addition,
women are frequently exposed to gender-based violence
and have limited access to decision-making.

Regarding political participation, I have seen our
missions work with women's organizations to bring
women into State political institutions, to strengthen
advocacy efforts, and to form strong, effective networks
for peacebuilding, conflict resolution and leadership
skills development. We have seen, for example, that
women can successfully resolve conflicts relating to
land ownership, water and cattle raiding by establishing
dialogues with other women's groups from across
border lines. In South Sudan, the women's community
dialogue forum in the state of Central Equatoria has
held meetings with community's leaders to discuss the
issues affecting women and children who had been
displaced after the conflicts between the Mundari and
Bari communities. Two women who were involved in
the community dialogue forum were nominated to the
state legislative assembly.

(spoke in French)

In situations where, strictly speaking, there is
no armed conflict, it is even more appropriate for
women's organizations and civil society to play a part
in preventing and settling political and social tensions.
At present in Haiti, women account for fewer than 4 per
cent of members elected to the national Parliament, and
it must be acknowledged that most have been excluded
from the reconstruction process. By comparison, in
September this year women accounted for 19.5 per cent
of parliamentarians in the Caribbean and for 20.5 per
cent worldwide. It is true that the Haitian Constitution
has been amended to include a 30 per cent quota
for women, but that special measure has yet to be
implemented. While it could be an encouraging sign
of greater participation of women in political life,
representatives of women's organizations in Haiti
appealed to the President of the Republic to find
solutions to the problem of appointing members of the
Cabinet and Permanent Electoral Council.

We need to do more to help States develop
constitutional reforms that include a gender-specific
perspective and take into account issues related to
gender-based violence. We must also support the
security sector and institutions for the rule of law,
both for professionals and for those who will be held
accountable. That can lead to the training of specialized
police force members and greater capacities for judges
and prosecutors in order to ensure a higher profile for
prosecutions in cases of sexual violence. We must also
strengthen networks for support to those who have
survived gender-based violence so that they can once
again take an active part in public life. Finally, we need
to work together to a greater extent with UN-Women and
our partners in country teams to help States to develop
national action plans for implementing resolutions on
women and peace and security.

We are moving forward in the right direction and
I belive that we have made significant progress. For
example, in 2011, in the Democratic Republic of Congo,
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
trained 380 members of the armed forces, 280 of whom
were women. It also trained 767 police officers, more
than a third of whom were women, in the prevention of
gender-based violence and in the search for appropriate
solutions. MONUSCO also provided training on the
gender-based analysis of conflict for members of the
Commission on the Resolution and Prevention of
Conflicts in Goma. That training made it possible to
develop the capacity of the Commission to respond to
the serious problems stemming from movements of
women and girls in conflict areas, in collaboration with
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs.

(spoke in English)
Through outreach to Governments, Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General can help
provide a link between State-led mechanisms and
women's groups to ensure that women's priorities
are on the agenda. We need more initiatives like
that of Darfur, where the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur has been able
to support the establishment of the Darfur Regional
Women's Legislative Caucus, State committees on
resolution 1325 (2000) and a high-level State committee
on combating violence against women.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
approximately 5,000 women of all political tendencies,
including from civil society, flooded Kinshasa's main
commercial avenue a week ago to protest the fall
of Goma to rebels from the Mouvement du 23 mars.
That was the most massively organized non-violent
protest in the country following the fall of that city.
The women protesters were received by MONUSCO's
senior management. However, women have not been
given any political leverage in the regional negotiations
aimed at bringing peace to the embattled eastern
part of the country pursuant to the provisions of
resolution 1325 (2000) that demand that women be a
core part of all peacebuilding processes and related
agreements.

Additionally, when supporting women's
organizations, we must mobilize all members of the
country team to serve as consultative partners for
civil society. That gives women's groups confidence
to act with the assurance that they may turn to the
United Nations family if they perceive a threat. The
country team also supports women's organizations with
funding, information-sharing and capacity-building
activities. For instance, women's groups convened by
DPKO and UN-Women at the Open Day in Timor-Leste
in 2011 called upon country team members to help
sustain the participation of women in community-level
mediation and peacebuilding activities. As a result,
the United Nations Development Programme and the
Ministry of Social Solidarity implemented a project
that helped establish a Department of Peacebuilding
and Social Cohesion within the Ministry of Solidarity.
That department specifically includes women at the
community level in local conflict resolution and
peacebuilding efforts. Another positive example is
the recently signed memorandum of understanding
between the Law and Order Trust Fund for Afghanistan
and five women's non-governmental organizations on
the implementation of the Women's Police Mentoring
Programme, which aims to build the capacity of
policewomen and to address the issue of abuse.

Finally, I would emphasize that the critical key
to removing the obstacles that impede women's full
participation in conflict prevention and peacebuilding is
active and systematic consultation with local actors and
leaders, including women's civil society organizations.
That is the only way to develop effective, context-
specific and gender-aware solutions.

Last month, DPKO and DFS participated in a
dialogue with women peacemakers from all over the
world who had gathered at the University of San Diego.
The women peacemakers recommended that the United
Nations formalize and systematize consultations with
women in every step ofthe United Nations peacekeeping
process, from pre-assessment to deployment of a
mission, to evaluation of a mission, to the renewal of a
mandate, and to the change of a mandate to transition
to peacebuilding.

Together with our partner, UN-Women, we call
on Member States to enhance women's participation
and protection by supporting and strengthening their
commitment to conflict prevention and peacebuilding.
As Michelle Bachelet has said, together we must go the
extra mile.

Once again, Mr. President, I thank you for this
opportunity to brief the Council.

