Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank you very
much indeed, Madam President, for being with us
again today. It is fantastic to have you here. I thank
you for all the work Sweden has done on this important
dossier, and particularly for keeping it at the forefront
of our minds in the Security Council and for the way
you have tried to ensure that these issues are properly
integrated and that the Security Council and the United
Nations more generally get out of the silos that we are
all familiar with. I am obviously also hugely grateful to
Ms. Diop and the Deputy Secretary-General for leading
the mission, which in my view was an incredibly
important event. Like other speakers, I think it would
be an excellent thing if it were to be regular. As my
Dutch colleague said, there are many areas of the world
that would benefit from their insights and engagement.
They cannot be everywhere, but I think they have made
an very good start on this occasion.

I was particularly interested in the assessment of
the level of women's participation in decision-making
and in peace and development processes, and I was
struck by the same comment about preferring not to be
raped as my Dutch colleague. But I think even more
important than that was the interest shown in producing
more female candidates by the people whom the Deputy
Secretary-General and Ms. Diop talked to. I think that if
we had only one thing we could concentrate on in order
to build that pipeline for the future and start changing
behaviours through Governments, it would definitely
be worth thinking further about.

I would like to say that we in the United Kingdom
fully share your goal, Madam, of having full delivery
of resolution 1325 (2000) by 2020. You can count on
Britain to work with you here and at the United Nations
Office in Geneva to realize that.

As other speakers have hinted, the question of
women's economic empowerment, their enjoyment of
human rights and their role within their families and
communities is something that should be nurtured
and curated. This is not just a moral issue but also an
economic and a prosperity issue. The countries that
make proper use of and develop all the talents of their
people will thrive. I think the Kazakh Ambassador
set it out very well when he talked about the link
between security and development. So we do everyone
a favour by intensifying the link between women's
participation in economic life and the foundation of
peace and security. From our perspective, we would
like to see even more effort dedicated to integrating a
gender perspective in strategies, including those about
countering violent extremism, and we would like to see
more women's involvement in policy planning, right on
the ground floor. I think that was one ofthe conclusions
of the Informal Expert Group on Women, Peace and
Security in June.

We heard a lot yesterday in the open debate on
children in armed conflict (see S/PV.8305) about the
disproportionate stigmatizing of women returnees
when they go back to their communities, and I think
that is worth putting on the table again today. It would
be very good to hear from the countries concerned
about what can be done to address that particular issue.

Turning specifically to the Sahel, the United
Kingdom is increasing its regional presence there. We
opened a mission in Chad in March. As I understand
it, Chad and the Niger, sadly, sit at the bottom of the
gender-equality index and that is why we in the United
Kingdom want to do more to help those colleagues
develop women's empowerment. I think the efforts
that the Security Council, the United Nations system,
the African Union and the Group of Five for the Sahel
themselves have undertaken so far to ensure that we
can fine-tune adequate measures to empower women
are a very good step forward. From our perspective,
we concentrate a lot on providing reproductive-health
services to displaced populations and refugees, and we
are prioritizing access to voluntary family planning
for future support. We spend a lot of our programme
funds on climate and environment resilience in eastern
Chad, and the Building Resilience and Adaptation to
Climate Extremes and Disasters programme commits
to 50 per cent women beneficiaries and includes a
component on gender-based violence. All those things
are contributing, I hope, to what we are talking about
today.

We also have a partnership with France, arising out
of the Anglo-French summit in January, for working
on gender within the Sahel Alliance, supporting
greater mainstreaming on gender across the work of
the Alliance. If there are other colleagues in the United
Nations who would like to know more about that, or
even contribute with us, we would be very happy to
work with them on that.

You, Madam President, particularly mentioned
education and girls' education, and that is also a subject
that we spoke about yesterday under the heading of
children in armed conflict. I wouldjust like to highlight
the fact that in the Sahel, millions of children and
young people are out of school, thanks to the presence
of terrorist groups and militias, the conflict between
farmers and herders and the difficult economic situation
that many families are experiencing. Ofcourse, girls are
particularly affected, sometimes because of very basic
issues, such as a lack of hygiene facilities in schools to
accommodate girls' particular needs. The Sahel region,
as we heard, has one of the highest rates of child, early
and forced marriage in the world. The barriers to girls
enjoying a proper education are very severe, and the
United Kingdom has therefore been concentrating
on what we call the Girls Education Challenge, and
is already working to support 15 million girls in
achieving a quality education. We are also one of the
largest donors to Education Cannot Wait, of which
Chad is one of the four initial investment countries.

Ijust wanted to give a snapshot of some of the
things we have been doing, and also to say how much
we share your view, Madam President, that this is an
absolutely critical part of being able to embed peace,
security and stability in an important region.

