Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks the Peruvian presidency for its initiative to
convene today's open debate. I would like to thank the
Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Amina Mohammed,
and the Special Representative ofthe Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila Patten, for
their briefings. China also listened attentively to the
statement made by the civil society representative.

The current international security situation remains
complex and challenging, marked by frequent armed
conflicts and rampant terrorism. In some countries
and territories, people still live in the shadow of war
and conflict. Vulnerable groups, such as women and
girls, bear the brunt of such instability and fall victim
to sexual violence in armed conflicts. China strongly
condemns and firmly opposes the use of sexual violence
as a tactic of war and any act of sexual violence against
women and girls. The international community is duty-
bound to take comprehensive measures and effectively
strengthen its cooperation to address this issue.

First, it is necessary to promote the peaceful
resolution of armed conflicts and eliminate the
breeding grounds for sexual violence in conflict. The
international community should continue to exercise
diplomacy to achieve a political settlement of critical
issues and use negotiation, good offices and mediation
to achieve a peaceful settlement of disputes. The
Security Council resolutions concerning women and
peace and security should be implemented earnestly. At
each stage of the peace process, the unique perspective
of women should be leveraged and their safety and
security concerns addressed, in order to guarantee
women the right to full participation in, and clout
during, decision-making.

Secondly, vigorous support for the countries
concerned is required to help them strengthen capacity-
building, shore up protection through stabilization
and promote equality through development, thereby
effectively safeguarding the rights of women. The
countries involved shoulder the primary responsibility
for preventing and combating sexual violence in
conflict and for protecting women and children. The
international community should respect the sovereignty
and will of those countries and the measures taken
by their Governments in national contexts and
actively provide them with constructive assistance to
enhance their capacity-building in the areas of, inter
alia, security, the economy and governance, so as
to help bolster the status of women and fully realize
their empowerment.

Thirdly, we must resolutely crack down on
terrorism and transnational organized crime. The
international community should act firmly to put an
end to the horrific acts of terrorist and extremist forces
that harm women and children, closely integrate the
elimination of sexual violence in conflict with the fight
against terrorism, uphold uniform standards of counter-
terrorism and strengthen international coordination.
The countries concerned should scale up cooperation
in border control and law enforcement to provide a
safe environment and a dignified social climate for
terrorized victims of sexual violence.

Fourthly, it is necessary to ensure that all the
relevant United Nations bodies work in synergy. The
Security Council should fulfil its primary responsibility
of maintaining international peace and security and
improve its coordination with the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council, the Peacebuilding
Commission and UN-Women, so that those bodies
can work together to address issues in areas such as
women and peace and security, within the purview of
their respective mandates and expertise. In addition,
cooperation with relevant regional and subregional
organizations should also be strengthened so that they
can leverage their expertise and unique perspectives to
create a favourable environment in which women and
girls can live and thrive.

China stands ready to continue working with the
international community to create a peaceful, safe and
stable international environment and make greater
contributions to the early elimination of sexual violence
in conflict and to the continued development of the
global women's cause.
