Mr. Lamamra: On behalf of the Commission of
the African Union (AU), I wish to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council. I would also like to join previous
speakers in commending the United States presidency
of the Council and Secretary Rice for organizing this
open debate on the crucial question of women and
peace and security.

I wish to say how honoured I am to address a
formal meeting of the Council for the first time in my
new capacity as the African Union Commissioner for
Peace and Security. Indeed, I feel fortunate that I am
assuming office in a climate of increasing cooperation
between the African Union and the United Nations, and
with the Security Council in particular. I am confident
that we will continue to strengthen our relations as we
move forward.

The protection and empowerment of women is
indeed one of the founding principles of the African
Union, as enshrined in our Constitutive Act, the
Protocol on the Establishment of the Peace and
Security Council and other instruments of the African
Union. As Council members are aware, the Adoption of
the protocol on the rights of women to the African
Charter on Human and People's Rights and of the
declaration on gender equality, adopted following the
historic presidential debate of the Assembly of the
African Union in 2005, were important milestones in
that respect.

A clear vision and mandate on the issue of
women and peace and security in the continent have
thus been established in the African Union, which
stresses gender parity at all levels of our organization.
We continue to develop the necessary instruments and
the operational environment for their implementation,
as an integral part of our overall agenda for a peaceful,
united and prosperous Africa.

Furthermore, our regional economic
communities, African women and civil society
organizations have been the driving forces behind our
efforts and achievements, and we are committed to
continue to strengthen efforts towards addressing the

08-3908]
well-known range of challenges of peace and security
for women and for our peoples as a whole.

We therefore welcome the seriousness with which
the Security Council continues to address this question,
which also ranks high on the list of priorities of the
African Union. In that connection, we have launched
the preparatory process for the convening of an
important conference on women in post-conflict
reconstruction and development, to be held in 2009.

I would now like to focus on the theme of today's
debate: on some of the opportunities and challenges
which lie on the path ahead, from the peace and
security perspective in particular.

First, we have been greatly honoured by the
leadership and important contributions of women in
recent peace processes in Africa, such as in
Mozambique, Angola and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, and in ongoing efforts for lasting peace and
security in the Sudan and Somalia. I should, however,
like to underscore the need to strengthen the
involvement of women in such processes in the future.
Indeed, the efforts of the international community on
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
related instruments have made possible a deeper
understanding of the centrality of the gender
perspective in the maintenance of international peace
and security. The wide range of issues involved, such
as the specific challenges facing women in armed
conflict situations and sexual slavery and abuse, are
now well known. We must take concrete actions in
ensuring that the knowledge gained thus far is fully
integrated in the new and emerging era of closer
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations for the maintenance of international
peace and security. That includes the participation of
women in peacekeeping operations at all levels. The
coordination of efforts between the United Nations and
the African Union would be crucial in that aspect.

Secondly, we in the African Union face the
challenge of ensuring that our emerging peace and
security architecture, which includes the African
standby force, the Continental Early Warning System,
the Panel of the Wise and our subregional
arrangements for peace and security, adequately reflect
our vision on women and peace and security. We are
determined to address this challenge and continue to
count on the support of the Security Council and our
international partners in that respect.
Furthermore, the ongoing efforts for the reform of
United Nations, and of Security Council in particular,
also offer an excellent opportunity to address this
crucial question, through adequate representation and
participation of regions, such as Africa, that are facing
serious peace and security challenges for women and
for their nations as a whole, due to persistent conflict
situations. We also believe that the elevation of the
United Nations mandate on gender equality to the
highest possible level within the Secretariat could be a
major step towards addressing the issue of gender
equality as a whole, and we call on the Security
Council to encourage the efforts of the Secretary-
General on this question.

Finally, as part of ongoing efforts towards
strengthening the mobilization of resources and
support for international peace and security, I would
like to underscore the importance of ensuring that
efforts centred on women and peace and security are
adequately supported by the entire international
community.

With those few remarks, I wish to reiterate the
commitment of the African Union to our cooperation
with the United Nations and with our international
partners on this matter and other questions, and I wish
every success for this timely and important open
debate.

