Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, allow me thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict on the theme
"Protection challenges and needs faced by women and
girls in armed conflict and post-conflict settings". We
welcome the concept note (S/2015/32, annex) prepared
to guide our deliberations. We also welcome Ms. Kyung-
wha Kang, Ms. Helen Durham and Ms. Ilwad Elman
and we thank them for their valuable briefings.

Armed conflicts and the recurrence of violence
in post-conflict situations specifically and
disproportionately affect women and children. We
often receive alarming reports of unacceptable acts of
violence that have been perpetrated against them. The
inequality, lack of access to justice, restricted or no
participation and representation at all levels and areas
of society that women face daily are exacerbated in
situations of armed conflict, thereby increasing their
vulnerability.

The Government of the Bolivarian Repubublic of
Venezuela has established a development model focused
on the human being, in which equality between men
and women and human rights for all are guaranteed.
The Bolivarian Constitution of 1999, considered one
of the most progressive in world, incorporates and
institutionalizes gender equality in our society. It also
enshrines gender equality and non-discrimination on
the basis of race, ethnicity or religion. And it ensures
the promotion and protection of the human rights of
women. The inalienable rights of children are also
protected by our Constitution.

Venezuelan women have a leading role in the
political, economic, social and cultural life of our
country, as well as in the decision-making process,
thereby contributing directly to the building of a new
social order based on justice and the law. Equality
and gender equality are State policies in Venezuela.
Implementing the gender perspective in public policies,
defending the rights of women and promoting women's
empowerment and leadership form a substantial part of
our social policies.

Violence against women is the most repugnant
aspect of religious intolerance and violence in society.
For that reason, Venezuela strongly condemns
discrimination, exclusion and violence against women.
We therefore address promoting women's rights as
a priority of our agenda at the United Nations and
throughout the world, especially with an emphasis on
those places where armed conflict has destroyed a part
or all of the social fabric.
While women's participation, representation and
leadership in the national life of countries have a crucial
role in protecting the rights of women and children, it is
equally important that women be involved in all areas
and at all levels of United Nations peacekeeping and
peacebuilding missions. It is inconsistent to pretend to
properly care for half of the civilian population affected
by armed conflict - women and children - without
understanding the human characteristics and historical
legacy of their social and political vulnerability.
Neglecting the vision, needs, interests, experiences and
capabilities of this population serves to undermine any
initiative that aims to effectively and comprehensively
address efforts at maintaining and consolidating peace.

Resolution 1325 (2000), adopted 15 years ago, has
among its goals fostering the participation of women
in the police, military and civilian components of
the peacekeeping operations of the United Nations.
However, the results were not as expected: women's
representation does not yet exceed 10 per cent. That
commitment remains unfinished business for the
United Nations.

We firmly believe that the participation of women in
all levels and areas related to the protection of civilians
greatly enhances the management of peacekeeping
operations, making it more appropriate, assertive and
comprehensive. We also believe that the participation of
women in peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations
facilitates and enhances access, support and follow-up
for women and children affected by armed conflict;
broadens information-gathering capacity, including
for reporting and preventing sexual violence; and has a
positive effect on the promotion of gender equality and
security of the local populations.

In short, we believe that the participation of women
in United Nations missions is crucial to prevent the
discrimination, marginalization and exclusion of and
violence against women and girls, and to protect and
meet the needs of local populations. We therefore call on
the Organization tirelessly to ensure strict compliance
with the provisions ofresolution 1325 (2000). Reports to
the Secretary-General on violence against women and
children in ongoing armed conflicts and peacekeeping
missions are unacceptable and must be investigated,
and those responsible severely punished. We cannot
allow inaction to persist. We must ensure that all
peacekeeping operations incorporate broad women's
participation and that their main mandates always
include the protection of children and women. We must
do better as an Organization to go beyond mere words
and achieve results in alleviating the human tragedy
facing these people.

Our delegation agrees with the Secretary General's
statement in his report on the work of the Organization,
that

"humankind will not enjoy the peace and prosperity
that it seeks as long as half the population faces
violence and discrimination and mindsets that see
women and girls as second-class citizens." (A/69/1, para. 7)

Venezuela reaffirms the distinction between
protecting civilians and the concept ofthe responsibility
to protect. The protection ofcivilians has gradually been
accepted, universalized and codified in international
law over the course of decades. The Fourth Geneva
Convention and its Additional Protocols represent the
highest international legal expression thereof. The
concept of the responsibility to protect, however, is
nothing more than a political statement on which there
is no consensus within the Organization.

Afundamentaldistinctionbetweenthetwo approaches
concerns the use of force. The responsibility to protect
implies military action against the sovereignty ofa State
without its consent to bring an end to alleged violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law
falling within the definition of four specific crimes that
are often not verified in a transparent and independent
way. The protection of civilians, on the other hand, does
not address the strategic use of force and is applied in
the context of full respect for the Charter of the United
Nations and the guiding principles of peacekeeping
operations, including the consent of a host State or
parties to a conflict.

It is important always to recall that distinction, as
the protection of civilians must never be used as an
excuse for military intervention violating a country's
sovereignty against its will, fomenting regime change,
destroying its infrastructure, dismantling its institutions
and leaving its citizens in chaos. We have all witnessed
such examples in recent history, in which the Security
Council has played a leading role.

In conclusion, we wish to reaffirm our absolute
commitment to the empowerment and protection of
women, and to thank you, Sir, for having convened this
important debate. However, given the importance of the
topic, in our view, our discussion should transcend this
setting and be held in the General Assembly, which is
the universal democratic forum par excellence.

