Mrs. Arbour: A few weeks ago, I briefed the
Council on the situation in Darfur. On that occasion, I
drew members' attention to the plight of women and to
the many atrocities that they have suffered with very
little immediate hope of bringing the perpetrators to
justice. The very purpose of resolution 1325 (2000) is
to address the needs of women and girls in crises such
as that in Darfur. While progress has been made in
implementing that resolution, Darfur is not the only
conflict today where women continue to be subject to
grave human rights violations, to be excluded from
reconstruction efforts and to be refused access to
justice. Therefore, I welcome the Security Council's
willingness to engage in the promotion and protection
of women's rights in conflict situations.

Women do not seek a special kind of justice.
However, historically, they have been and continue to
be on the receiving end of a special kind of oppression
and abuse. That is particularly so in times of conflict,
when the rule of force obliterates the rule of law.

Conflict exacerbates gender-based violence and
the likelihood of impunity that perpetrators commonly
enjoy. Over the last 20 years, there has been increased
international recognition of the seriousness of gender-
based violence and a growing international
commitment to ensuring accountability and redress.
Following the systematic sexual violence associated
with the conflicts in the former Yugoslavia and
Rwanda, precise legal standards were developed
through the jurisprudence of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda to confirm
that such practices may amount to war crimes, crimes
against humanity and acts of genocide. Those standards
are now reflected in the Statute of the International
Criminal Court.

The violations women experience will never be
dealt with appropriately until justice issues receive
sufficient attention both nationally and internationally.
For too long, consultation with women has been
inadequate. Stereotypes and prejudices have unfairly
stigmatized women victims. The international
community and national Governments must more
effectively address impunity and the reconstruction of
justice systems. The pressure for political agreement to
resolve a conflict too often leads to a reluctance to
bring perpetrators to justice. The reconstruction of
effective justice systems rarely receives the financial
support that goes to delivering humanitarian assistance
or even to rebuilding physical and economic
infrastructure. Support for the establishment of any
justice system should involve women and should
include gender-sensitive procedures.

Women are invariably excluded from formal
decision-making processes and peace negotiations, and
yet their vision and contribution must be sustained
since, without their full participation, efforts to
reconstruct war-torn societies will be fundamentally
flawed.

In that context, we are now confronted with an
invidious practice the scale of which has yet to be fully
acknowledged and effectively addressed. Human
trafficking makes women in situations of conflict,
displaced and refugee women and asylum seekers
particularly vulnerable. Life-threatening situations in
the wake of conflict, including in refugee camps where
protection is not always guaranteed, drive women and
girls to seek alternatives for survival where they risk
falling into the hands of traffickers who promise safe
environments and job opportunities. It is therefore vital
to develop and to implement anti-trafficking strategies
that place the rights of the victims at their centre.

Above all, there can be no tolerance for the
sexual exploitation of vulnerable populations by those
entrusted with their safety, whether peacekeepers,
humanitarian personnel or other international staff. The
Secretary-General has already set out the responsibility
of senior managers and of every staff member of the
United Nations to ensure that the presence of
international organizations does not allow, encourage
or lead to involvement in such human rights violations.
Sexual predatory practice by international interveners
cannot just be condemned as the isolated, deplorable
actions of a few bad apples. The sexual exploitation of
vulnerable women and children is a crime compounded
by the gross abuse of power involved in its
perpetration, and for which we must collectively take
responsibility.

The initiatives undertaken by the Secretary-
General in that regard will go a long way to bringing
clarity to the duties and obligations of all those
involved in field operations on behalf of the United
Nations. His efforts will no doubt ensure greater
accountability. In addition, I urge the Council to
engage actively on this issue with troop-contributing
countries, insisting that undertakings be given that
impunity will not be tolerated.

On the fourth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), I call upon the Council to
provide explicitly, wherever relevant, for compliance
with all aspects of resolution 1325 (2000). That should
emphasize, in particular, the obligations to protect
women and girls during conflict; to ensure the equal
participation of women in peace negotiations, as well
as in conflict prevention; to ensure access to justice for
women; and to integrate a gender perspective into all
peacekeeping and humanitarian activities.

I urge the Council to combat impunity for gender-
based violence by advocating training for security
forces and law enforcement agencies in accordance
with international humanitarian law and human rights
law, and in particular in accordance with women's
rights.

I also urge the Council to ensure that all future
mechanisms for transitional justice created by the
Council build on existing norms and standards and that
they include judges and advisers with legal expertise
on women's rights, ensure that prosecutors respect the
interests and personal circumstances of women and
girls who are victims and witnesses and take into
account the special nature of gender-based crimes.

Finally, I would urge the Security Council to use
all its influence to generate the political will, as well as
the financial support, to protect women's rights and to
ensure women's access to justice, including through
the rebuilding of a justice sector that is responsive to
their needs.

The women and young girls in the camps in
Darfur are putting themselves at considerable risk to
collect firewood, which not only provides them with
cooking fuel but also allows trading opportunities upon
which they can build a modest sense of autonomy and
empowerment. In my view, their efforts will contribute
to the reconstruction of their devastated country in no
smaller measure than the attempts being made by the
men engaged in the political negotiations in Naivasha
and Abuja. I think that they should be supported
accordingly.

