Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would like to begin by welcoming you to
the presidency of the Security Council, Madam, and
wishing you and your team every success this month.
We are also grateful to our South African colleagues for
their leadership of the work of the Council in October.

We would like to thank today's briefers, Deputy
Secretary-General Amina Mohammed and Ms. Fatima
Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African Union
to the United Nations, for their information on the
outcomes of the joint solidarity visit by representatives
of the two organizations to the Horn of Africa. We
consider such visits useful, as they fully reflect the firm
commitment of the United Nations and African Union
secretariats to forging united approaches to Africa's
toughest problems.
The Horn of Africa is currently going through
a critical period in its history in which differences
between Governments are being dismantled and direct
contacts between countries revived. The awarding of
the Nobel Peace Prize on 11 October to Prime Minister
Abiy Ahmed of Ethiopia for his efforts in the peace
settlement between Ethiopia and Eritrea and in the
normalization of the situation in the region in general
is a striking confirmation of the epoch-making nature
of the developments in those countries. We also see the
process of normalization in relations between Eritrea
and Djibouti continuing. The situation in the border
areas remains stable. While we are aware that progress
on their bilateral cooperation has stalled somewhat, the
fact is that the resolution of that issue lies in sustained
dialogue with the potential mediation of regional
actors, foremost among them Ethiopia. On the whole,
this issue no longer poses a threat to international peace
and security, and we see no need for keeping it on the
Security Council's agenda.

The situation in Somalia continues to be troubled.
The increased activity of the Al- Shabaab terrorist group
in the centre and south of the country is particularly
worrying. In our View, the principal mechanism for
combating Al-Shabaab is still the African Union
Mission in Somalia. Given the difficult humanitarian
situation, we intend to continue providing aid to
Somalia and Somali refugees in neighbouring countries
through earmarked contributions to the relevant World
Food Programme (WFP) funds. We will also continue
training Somali civilian personnel with funds from our
federal budget.

We welcome the normalization of the situation in
the Sudan. A constitutional declaration has been signed,
a Prime Minister elected and a transitional Government
formed. The task now facing the international
community is helping the country with its economic
recovery. We support the Deputy Secretary-General's
call for lifting the remaining unilateral restrictive
measures on the Sudan.

We note the positive developments in the situation
in South Sudan. However, the prospects for complying
with the provisions in the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan aimed at the formation of a transitional
Government by the 12 November deadline are still
uncertain. We hope that the parties to the conflict will
make additional efforts to deal with the issue within the
agreed time frame.

We agree that the resolution of peace and security
issues in the region should be supported by efforts to
promote the socioeconomic development of its countries,
and we value the coordinated work of United Nations
bodies in that area. Economic development issues are an
integral and high-priority component of our country's
relations with the States of Africa, as was reaffirmed
by the first Russia-Africa summit, held in Sochi in
October. As an international development assistance
donor, Russia provides support to African partners
through bilateral and multilateral channels. Part of that
work is carried out through earmarked contributions to
international aid programmes for Africa. Just recently,
my Government decided to increase the amount of
its annual voluntary contributions to the WFP by an
additional $10 million. Those funds will be directed to
the WFP's funds for African assistance every year, and
we are working on other measures as well.

