Mr. Corman (Turkey): I thank the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive briefing and for his

presence among us today. We are also thankful for his
detailed report (S/2009/362).

A great number of the casualties in armed
conflicts continue to be civilians, and that number is
constantly increasing. We have been witnessing serious
challenges in securing a safe environment for women
in many parts of the world. Within this context, sexual
violence, particularly against women and children, are
also on the rise. We condemn in the strongest possible
terms all deliberate attacks on civilians, including
women and children, as well as any kind of sexual
violence used as a tool of war in armed conflict.

It is within that framework that we welcome the
Secretary-General's report, which gives us a
comprehensive account of the most recent situation in
various theatres and the difficulties that are being
encountered. The report shows the huge task we are
facing. We should make a collective effort to prevent
sexual violence against women, with the primary
obligation and responsibility resting first and foremost
with States.

The Secretary-General's report puts forward
useful recommendations. They are pertinent, detailed
and well crafted, and we support all of them in
principle. However, we also believe that any issue
related to the protection of civilians, including women
and children, should be handled carefully, since these
are all sensitive cases. In this vein, I wish to make four
preliminary observations.

First, we agree with the necessity of the Security
Council taking a fresh look at the protection of
civilians, in particular women and children. A few days
ago, here in this Chamber, we adopted resolution 1882
(2009) to protect children in armed conflict in a
comprehensive manner. We believe that that resolution
was the right step in the right direction. However,
when establishing new mechanisms we should also be
careful: creating a plethora of institutions carries the
risk of causing duplication. As the Secretary-General
rightly pointed out in his report, the United Nations
should deliver as one to prevent and respond to sexual
violence. Therefore, taking into account the system-
wide coherence process, we should first efficiently use
to their fullest extent, and perhaps sharpen, existing
tools and mechanisms, including all the avenues and
special procedures of the Human Rights Council-and
the machinery of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights.

Secondly, as rightly indicated in the Secretary-
General's report, data needs to be more systematically
collected, preserved and analysed. However, we are
also aware of the difficulties that United Nations actors
and non-governmental organization workers are
confronting while collecting data.

Thirdly, we believe that another important issue
is the situation of camps for refugees and internally
displaced persons. Protection of the civilian nature of
those camps is vital. The United Nations and the host
countries are responsible for the preservation of their
civilian status. Violation of that status, either by outsiders
or by insiders who bear arms, will only jeopardize
vulnerable persons in those camps, in particular women,
who could face the most heinous crimes.

Fourthly, we must prevent sexual violence, fight
impunity and address the issue of discrimination
against women, both in legislation and in practice. This
effort should be accompanied by assistance to victims.
We should also look into enhancing the possible role of
peacekeeping forces in the prevention of these
unacceptable crimes.

Finally, I would stress that it is only through the
strengthening of the rule of law, enhanced political
participation, human rights, democracy and good
governance that we can secure the long-term and
lasting protection of women. As a party to the United
Nations Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women since 1985 and having
ratified the Convention's Optional Protocol in 2002,
my Government believes that it should be our priority
to encourage all nations to adhere to the principles of
those international documents. We also support the
Global Campaign to end violence against women
initiated by the Secretary-General at the opening of the
fifty-second session of the Commission on the Status
of Women in February 2008.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that
Turkey is ready to participate in and positively
contribute to every effort to eliminate sexual violence
and discrimination against women.

