Mr. Lee Taeho (Republic of Korea): I would like
to express my sincere appreciation to you, Madam
President, for convening today's open debate. I also
appreciate the Secretary-General's strong message in
his recent report (S/2019/800) on the critical importance
of the full implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda. I also welcome today's unanimous
adoption of resolution 2493 (2019), which I hope will
strengthen the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda.

A number of meaningful strides have been made
since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). Among
others, the link between sexual Violence and peace
and security issues has been clearly established. The
normative framework has also been strengthened by
the nine follow-up resolutions, including resolution
1888 (2009), which created the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict. However, despite strenuous
international efforts and the subsequent major
achievements made over the past 19 years to address
the scourge of conflict-related sexual violence and
promote women's participation in peace processes, the
global implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) has
not fully lived up to our aspirations.

To date, 83 countries have adopted national action
plans for the implementation of the resolution, which
represents only 42 per cent of all States Members of the
United Nations. That number clearly demonstrates that
the commitment reached in the Security Council has
not automatically translated into reality on the ground.
Now is indeed the time to renew our determination to
ensure that the commitment we have made really makes
a difference in people's lives. I would like to underline
the three important elements that should be highlighted
in the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). They
are participation, protection and prevention.

First, the increased participation of women in the
full continuum ofpeace processes is essential. Women's
participation should be full, equal and meaningful.
Women must be adequately represented at all stages
of peace processes. In line with the Uniformed Gender
Parity Strategy of the Department of Peace Operations,
the Korean Government will continue to exert efforts to
ensure women's increased participation and to achieve
greater gender equality in each peacekeeping operation.
Korea has already pledged to increase the current level
ofwomen's share ofpeacekeeping officers and observer
positions from 17 per cent to 25 per cent by 2028.

Secondly, our protection efforts must be actively
materialized in a way that victims and survivors in
conflict zones feel they are being effectively protected
on the ground. In that regard, the Victim- and survivor-
centred approach should be at the core of protection.
As spelled out in resolution 2467 (2019), the survivor-
centred approach is crucial, not only for sustainable
conflict solutions but also fortheprevention of secondary
trauma or revictimization. That was the approach taken
by Korea in providing tailored assistance to survivors
in a few Asian and African countries, through the
United Nations Population Fund and UNICEF, under
the Action with Women and Peace initiative it launched
last year. Korea pledges to provide $8 million by next
year to further support those projects.

Thirdly, prevention should be the first priority
for sustaining peace and security. As we talk about
prevention in the context of the women and peace
and security agenda, I would like to emphasize the
importance of taking a longer-term approach to, and
promoting a deep understanding of, the root causes
of conflict and of making a more concerted effort to
build the capacity of affected countries. In that regard,
raising and promoting public awareness of the women
and peace and security agenda is critical. The Korean
Government promotes public awareness of the national
action plan for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), online and offline. Korea is also developing
education programmes for primary and secondary
schools in an effort to ensure that interdisciplinary
learning with regard to the women and peace and
security agenda is conducted throughout the educational
system. I believe that the international community must
make further efforts to provide countries in need with
the necessary support for developing their own national
action plans, while paying due consideration to the
need for improved public awareness of the agenda in
their local context.

Lastly, I would like to add one more point, ifI may,
to the three elements I mentioned, that is, persistence.
In putting women and peace and security at the heart
of the global agenda, we must remain persistent. We
should continue to show strong political will and full
commitment to implementing resolution 1325 (2000).
Last July, Korea hosted an international conference
on Action with Women and Peace, the first-ever such
conference in Asia. As part ofits persistent effort to help
strengthen the international community's collective
endeavours towards the implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda, my Government intends
to continuously host that conference on an annual basis.

For Korea, the successful implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) has a very special meaning.
Korea seeks to support and help recover the honour and
dignity of the so-called comfort women Victims during
the Second World War. It is therefore important to turn
their painful experiences into lessons of history and
ensure that the same tragedy is not repeated elsewhere
in the world, through the full implementation of
the resolution.

As we stand at the doorstep of the meaningful
twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), the
Republic of Korea hopes that the women and peace
and security agenda is firmly put in place as a global
challenge to be met by all Member States, and that all
commitments made over the past 20 years are translated
into tangible action by 2020. I would like to assure you,
Madam President, that my country is ready to work
together with the international community to that end.

