Mr. Moussa (Djibouti) (spoke in French): First, my
delegation would like to extend its warm congratulations
to your country, Sir, on assuming the monthly presidency
of the Security Council. This occasion also gives me
the opportunity to hail the quality and relevance of the
concept note (S/2017/402, annex) for our debate today
on sexual violence in conflict used as a tactic of war
and terrorism. The report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/249) provides us with a basis for a fruitful
debate in this respect.

We also welcome the briefings made by Deputy
Secretary-General, Ms. Amina Mohammed, and
Mr. Adama Dieng, Acting Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and
Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide.

Djibouti strongly condemns these atrocities, which
affect mostly women and children, and calls on all
actors in conflict to strictly comply with internationally
recognized principles ofhuman rights and humanitarian
law. Djibouti firmly condemns the use of such violence
by non-State actors. We therefore wish to commend the
tireless efforts of the Nigerian Government following
the release of 82 high-school students from the town
of Chibok after three years of captivity at the hands
of Boko Haram. We also hope that all arrangements
will be made to ensure their care as long as it proves
necessary. We call on the people and the brotherly
Government of Nigeria to pursue their efforts to find
the other high-school girls who remain missing to this
day, and express our full solidarity with them.

Under the impetus of numerous international
initiatives and resolutions on the women and peace and
security agenda, which emerged from the deteriorating
situation of women in conflict and post-conflict
situations in the 1990s, the adoption and implementation
of resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009), 1960 (2010),
2106 (2013) and, most recently, 2331 (2016)confirm the
ongoing determination of the international community
to combat by all means sexual violence as a tactic war
and terrorism.

The impact on the victims cannotbe overemphasized,
either in the case of rape, trafficking in human beings,
sexual slavery, prostitution or any other form of
sexual violence of comparable gravity, directly or
indirectly related to conflict. These horrors, generally
committed against women and children, engender
all sorts of pathologies and disorders, compounding
the other impacts of the wounds and scars previously
caused by serious situations of vulnerability, such as
migration, forced displacement, war or simply long-
standing precarious living conditions. In particular,
children exposed to such cruel treatment may develop
destructive behavioural patterns in the future because,
as psychologists and traumatologists point out, children
in danger are dangerous children. Lives torn apart
and spirits broken - that is the fate that awaits them.
Because of the devastating and destructive nature of
such violations in times of war, firm responses are
needed from the international community.

First, the international community must be firm in
implementing international norms to protect women.
To that end, priority must be given to taking concrete
steps in the field and ensuring that they are focused on
prevention, detection and early warning. An increased
number of advisers specialized in the areas of women's
rights protection and gender-related issues must be
deployed in the field, with the consent host countries.
Secondly, in order to be more efficient, we believe
that reporting on the number of victims is useful as it
assists in determining subsequent steps that must be
taken to ensure ongoing care for victims. The series of
reports all indicate that the figures quoted are always far
removed from the true numbers. That is an area that can
gain more visibility by highlighting the obstacles that
must be overcome to eliminate such violence. Despite
the scope of resolution 1325 (2000), more action must
be taken. Since its adoption, more than 15 years ago,
women's leadership and participation have remained
negligible, although undeniable progress has been made.
Women's priorities are still not adequately reflected in
peace talks and agreements. We would like to reaffirm
the relevance of resolution 1325 (2000), which includes
unquestionable comparative advantages.

Finally, Djibouti welcomes the Secretary-General's
initiatives to achieve visible and quantifiable
improvements in preventing and suppressing sexual
exploitation and abuse perpetrated by United Nations
peacekeepers and personnel. Djibouti monitors that
issue closely in the negotiations currently under way.
We fully support the zero-tolerance policy adopted by
the General Assembly. However, the establishment of
two offices - one for victims' rights advocates and
another for the Special Coordinator - should be used,
along with existing mechanisms, to reduce and prevent
the duplication of effort, given the Organization's
limited human and financial resources. Strengthening
the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations must also
be at the core of those strategies.

In conclusion, Djibouti welcomes the fact that the
international community has made this issue a priority.
We also firmly believe that it will help us to move further
along the path to a more humane and peaceable future.

