Mr. Liden (Sweden): Let me first associate
myself with the statement just made by the
representative of Finland on behalf of the European
Union.

By adopting resolution 1325 (2000) on women
and peace and security, the Security Council affirmed
six years ago that the strengthening of women's
participation in conflict prevention and conflict
management is of central importance for the promotion
of international peace and security and human rights.

The implementation of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) is not only an aim in itself, but
is also fundamental, because it is a way to reach the
objectives of security, development, human rights and
gender equality. It should therefore also be seen as an
important basis for the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission.

The United Nations system has undertaken
considerable efforts in developing a comprehensive
action plan to implement Security Council resolution
1325 (2000). Sweden strongly supports the
implementation and follow-up of the United Nations
System-wide Action Plan for resolution 1325 (2000),
adopted in 2005.

During last year's open debate (see S/PV.5294),
Sweden emphasized that we all have a responsibility to
provide ideas and good practices, and must not only
expect initiatives from others. In order to fulfil that
responsibility, Sweden has completed a national action
plan aimed at intensifying our implementation of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000). The action
plan was developed in cooperation with governmental
agencies and civil society. The Swedish action plan
recognizes the importance of implementation at the
national, regional and global levels.

At the national level, a number of specific
guidelines have been adopted for Swedish participation
in peacekeeping and other activities in conflict-affected
countries. The Swedish armed forces has launched a
more systematic effort to increase the number of
women conscripts and officers able to participate in
international operations. The Folke Bernadotte
Academy has systematically incorporated resolution
1325 (2000) in the planning and implementation of its
training courses and in special projects with regard to
missions abroad. Furthermore, the Swedish police has
implemented special initiatives that have resulted in
the percentage of women participating in peacekeeping
operations being close to or the same as at the national
level.

At the regional level, the European Union is
currently working towards a more gender-sensitive
atmosphere to encourage more women to apply for
European Security and Defence Policy (ESDP)
missions and positions. The appointment of a special
adviser on gender issues in the European Union
operation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
one concrete example.

Globally, in the United Nations, Sweden has
given political and financial support to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in United
Nations peace support operations, as well as in
security-sector reform measures and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes in a
number of countries through our bilateral development
cooperation.

When it comes to missions abroad in general,
whether European Union or United Nations missions,
we must all be aware of and condemn sexual
exploitation and abuse. For that purpose, we should not
stop asking for reports and documents that highlight
gender equality issues.

Sweden has put forward a proposal about civilian
observers in peacekeeping missions. The proposed new
category of seconded civilian personnel has the
potential to significantly increase the number of female
mission members at the field level, where military
observer teams very often constitute the only presence
of a peace mission, and would thus be an important
contribution to the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).
Sweden, together with South Africa, and with the
assistance of the United Nations Development Fund for
Women and the International Legal Assistance
Consortium is co-chairing the global initiative on
partners for gender justice in conflict-affected
countries. The partners have organized international
meetings in Sweden and Liberia, as well as here in
New York. The report from the high-level meeting on
gender justice in Liberia has recently been presented to
the Secretary-General. We have asked that the report be
brought to the attention of the members of the Security
Council.

Finally, we look forward to seeing the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding
Support Office working to implement the commitments
of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), in order to
include women in all peace consolidation initiatives.
Women should be seen as agents of security and
development.

