Ms. Torry: I would like to thank the Security
Council for the invitation and the honour to be here
today. I am here on behalf of the NGO Working Group
on Women, Peace and Security, a coalition of
international civil society organizations formed in 2000
to advocate for a Security Council resolution on
women, peace and security. We continue today to
advocate for full and effective implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). Unfortunately, we are not at a
point where we can say that implementation has been
coherent and effective. We value the opportunity to
discuss that as we mark the seventh year since the
adoption of that resolution.

Seven years later, we come here to ask this
question: what has the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) meant for the situation of women and girls
in Sierra Leone, in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in Liberia, in Burundi, in Cote d'Ivoire, in
Afghanistan, in Haiti, in Timor-Leste and in all other
situations on the agenda of the Security Council?

Seven years later, women and girls in situations
of armed conflict continue to be subjected to
widespread and systematic sexual violence. This is a
matter of international peace and security.

Seven years later, women remain largely
excluded from the very structures that make the
decisions to sustain peace or to engage in conflict.
They are still marginalized in peacemaking and
peacebuilding processes. This is a matter of
international peace and security.

Seven years later, the integration of resolution
1325 (2000) into the work of the Security Council
remains inconsistent. This means that in the situation in
Darfur, women are still struggling to be part of peace
talks in Tripoli. This means that in the situation of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, sexual violence
continues unabated and with impunity. Greater efforts
must be undertaken to end impunity and to prosecute
those suspected of crimes against women, particularly
sexual violence - not only in the States where the
crimes occurred and the States of which the suspects
are nationals, but also in other States where suspects
may be found.

Seven years later, there are still no monitoring or
accountability mechanisms to ensure the coherent and
effective implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
This is a matter of international peace and security.

We note the progress that has been made and that
has been mentioned by other speakers here this
morning. We would like to focus on the role of the
Security Council in driving progress in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

It does make a difference when the Security
Council integrates resolution 1325 (2000) into its
work. For instance, in the June 2006 mission to the
Sudan led by the United Kingdom, Council members
met with women's groups and gender experts in both
Khartoum and Darfur. Two months later, on 31 August
2006, the Security Council issued resolution 1706
(2006), which both invokes resolution 1325 (2000) and
contains useful gender-specific language.

Resolutions need to contain such language.
However, where mission mandates contain adequate
language on the integration of a gender perspective or
women's human rights, too often the gender mandate is
not reflected in the directives, guidance, terms of

reference and incentive structures for mission staff,
including the Special Representative.

Mandates also need to contain standard
provisions for regular and adequate monitoring of and
reporting on implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
by the field missions. Reporting is needed on concrete
and specific issues that address the following
questions: what is the status of women's participation
in the maintenance and promotion of peace and
security? What is being done to ensure that women are
able to effectively participate in elections? What work
is being done with national women's machineries in
regard to matters of security?

As the situation stands, some field missions do
have a mandate to monitor and report on, for example,
grave violations of human rights, but the data and
trends regarding many violations, such as sexual
violence, are still lacking. Reports need to provide a
picture of the security situation in regard to women,
especially the violence that affects their everyday lives.

Strong accountability mechanisms are imperative
to drive and to support timely and systematic
implementation. Such a mechanism would help to
address inconsistency in invoking resolution 1325
(2000) in the directives from the Council to the field
and inadequate monitoring and reporting on
implementation by field missions - particularly on
violations of human rights, such as sexual violence.

The NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and
Security respectfully urges the Council to consider how
it could provide more effective monitoring and
reporting on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), including through the establishment of a focal
point and an expert-level working group, with
appropriate leadership to ensure its active engagement
with all aspects of the work of the Council.

We would like to thank members for their
attention and to end with a quotation from Ms. Barbara
Bangura of Sierra Leone, who spoke in an Arria-
formula meeting in October 2006. She said that

"women rely considerably on the guidance and
assistance that the United Nations, in its many
forms, provides. Resolution 1325 (2000) can only
be successful if the Security Council is proactive
in the use of resolution 1325 (2000) in its work.
As such, the onus is on you here in New York to
cast your light on the path we follow. Our failure
is your failure; our successes, your successes."

