Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to once again welcome you,
Madam Minister, as you preside over this meeting,
which we thank you for organizing. We would also like
to express our gratitude to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflicts,
Ms. Bangura. As we can see, thanks to her persistence
and commitment to the goal of eradicating sexual
violence, the Special Representative has managed, in
less than a year, to do quite a bit.

The consideration of the issues relating to
women and peace and security should be based on a
comprehensive approach, as set forth in the Council's
baseline resolution on the matter, namely, resolution
1325 (2000). The varied nature of the violence that
occurs during armed conflict requires that attention be
paid to all its manifestations. Unquestionably, sexual
violence must be roundly condemned and severely
punished. We believe this problem is very real,
particularly in specific conflict situations where such
crimes are becoming increasingly widespread.

However, as we know, not all such situations
pose a threat to international peace and security
requiring intervention on the part of the Security
Council. Because of that, we feel that issues relating
to preventing and combating sexual violence at every
stage of armed conflict or post-conflict situations are
primarily the responsibility of national Governments.
Moreover, questions concerning combating sexual
violence, depending on the context and within the
framework of existing mandates, are handled not only
by the Council but by other United Nations organs,
particularly the General Assembly, the Human Rights
Council and the Commission on the Status of Women.
Artificially linking every issue of sexual violence to
the work of the Security Council would lead not only
to an imbalance from the standpoint of system-wide
coordination but would have a negative impact on the
effectiveness of work in that area. We believe that
priority attention should be given to those situations on
the Security Council's agenda where sexual violence is
one of the primary issues in terms of the protection of
civilians.

Combating sexual Violence is also an important
component of the range of measures needed in peace
processes and post-conflict restoration. This type
of crime is not a root cause of armed conflict, but
rather a result of prevailing impunity. We believe that
crimes committed require mandatory punishment,
whether they be acts of sexual violence, terrorism or
indiscriminate or disproportionate force. After all, the
victims of all such acts are totally innocent people.

We have studied with interest the report of the
Secretary-General for this meeting (S/2013/149). The
first thing that strikes us is the document's thoroughness
and the scale of the work done by the Special
Representative. However, the contents of the document
raises some questions. As we see it, in order to set up a
genuinely credible discussion of such a sensitive issue,
it is essential to act dispassionately, based on objective
and reliable information. For instance, responsibility
for sexual crimes in Syria is laid at the door only of
the Government forces and their supporters. Analogous
crimes committed by representatives of the opposition
are touched on only in passing, despite the numerous
assertions that have been made about them.
The principle behind the selection of the countries
mentioned in various sections of the report is unclear.
For instance, in the section on current and emerging
concerns regarding sexual violence as it relates to
international peace and security, besides countries that
are on the Council's agenda, situations in a number of
other States are also highlighted. It is striking that, in
a significant number of the cases cited in the report of
sexual violence in various parts of the world, the issue
at times is not one of trends or systematic practices
of sexual violence but of isolated incidents. Further
investigation of many such incidents reveals that
they are more likely to be criminally punishable acts
committed by criminal groups, rather than war crimes.

The scope of the work done under Security
Council auspices in this area was agreed to based on
an intergovernmental process and enshrined in the
relevant Council resolutions. We therefore feel that it
involves the onsideration of issues relating to sexual
violence in armed conflict. We appeal to the Special
Representative to adhere to the Council's mandate
in carrying out her work. We do not see a need for
establishing a special procedure or body for monitoring
the compliance of parties to a conflict with obligations
to combat sexual violence. As we see it, the current
mechanisms in this area are sufficient. First among
those is the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, while the Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence
in Conflict also plays a significant role. As I stated
previously, we believe issues of sexual violence must be
considered in the Security Council only in the context
of the agenda item on women and peace and security,
and in connection with the subject of the maintenance
of peace and security.

In conclusion, we would again like to emphasize
that the efforts of the international community will be
in vain without the consent and active participation
of national Governments, which bear the primary
responsibility for dealing with the whole range of
problems surrounding the protection of peoples in
armed conflict.

