Mr. Radomski (Poland): Let me join other
speakers in expressing our deepest condolences to the
people and the Government of Sri Lanka following the
tragic terrorist attacks that took place this past Sunday.
Poland strongly condemns such heinous acts of terror.

We commend Germany for convening this important
debate. We would also like to thank you personally,
Mr. President, for chairing this meeting. Allow me also
to extend our gratitude to today's excellent briefers.
We are truly honoured by their presence with us here
today, and we deeply appreciate their inspirational and
encouraging presentations. On the tenth anniversary
of the mandate of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
we would like to take this opportunity to thank
Special Representative Ms. Pramila Patten and all her
predecessors for their dedication and service. We fully
stand behind her mandate.

We are outraged by the persistent and widespread
sexual violence in armed conflict committed by State
and non-State actors, as documented in the latest
report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/280). Sexual
violence is a universal tragic phenomenon that needs
to come to an end, whether it be in conflict or post-
conflict situations. International cooperation is needed,
especially now at a time of increased violence against
women and girls and men and boys, to combat the use
of sexual Violence as a tool of terror and humiliation
during war. We would therefore like to commend the
efforts of the German presidency to present the new
draft resolution on conflict-related sexual violence
contained in document S/2019/328, which, in Poland's
View, will strengthen this important agenda.

The recent report of the Secretary-General
highlights the various challenges we face in addressing
conflict-related sexual violence. Allow me to emphasize
two areas that we believe need our particular attention
today, namely, accountability and the situation of
children born of sexual violence.

First, we welcome the focus on accountability of
the current report and of our debate today as one of
the means to fight and eliminate conflict-related sexual
violence. The issue of accountability for conflict-
related sexual violence should be of crucial importance
to the work of the Security Council, as it reflects the
effectiveness of its work. Despite all the challenges,
the accountability measures for conflict-related sexual
violence committed by both non-State and State actors
should be implemented decisively by the international
community. Otherwise, the lack of accountability
encourages and increases tolerance towards gender-
based violence in conflicts. In that context, we would
like to stress the significant progress in ensuring
accountability for sexual and gender-based violence
achieved by the International Criminal Court (ICC),
as well as the non-permanent international criminal
tribunals and similar courts. Nonetheless, it is important
to stress that the primary responsibility to act and
pursue accountability resides within States, as the ICC's
jurisdiction is complementary to national jurisdictions.

On the other hand, accountability cannot be
achieved without knowledge of the crimes. Regrettably,
the vast majority of victims do not report rape and other
forms of sexual violence because of the discrimination
and stigma behind them. That not only contributes to
the culture of impunity but also prevents survivors of
sexual violence from accessing medical care and legal
assistance. In that regard, we support the Secretary-
General's call on traditional and religious leaders to
engage, in particular to mitigate the stigma suffered
by survivors of conflict-related sexual violence and to
facilitate their reintegration and that of their children.

Let me now turn briefly to the issue of children
born of sexual Violence. Supporting victims of sexual
violence should be as important as preventing such
crimes in times of conflict. The voices of survivors
need to be heard in order to effectively implement
policies that protect them. The traumatic experiences
haunt victims for their whole lives and, unfortunately,
psychological and mental support is often omitted.

Sexual violence has massive long-term
repercussions. That is particularly true for children
born of sexual violence. It is difficult to think ofa more
tragic situation than that faced by innocent children
who, through no fault of their own, suffer not only
discrimination but also the most extreme forms of
stigma by their families and their communities. They
are often denied nationality, excluded from school,
deprived of medical treatment and subjected to physical
and psychological Violence only because they were born
of sexual violence. Such children are as much victims
of sexual violence as their mothers.

We are pleased to see that, with the latest Secretary-
General's report and the proposed draft resolution,
some light has been shed on the need for the protection
of children born of sexual violence and that the issue
has been receiving the attention of the international
community, including the Security Council. We hope
that the Arria Formula meeting organized by Poland
last October on children born of sexual violence
contributed to those efforts.

Let me conclude my statement by reiterating our
strong support for the important role of civil society
groups, human rights defenders, journalists and media
workers who assist victims and report on sexual
violence in conflict. Without their courage, passion and
dedication, the progress achieved by the international
community would not be possible.

