Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): Thank
you, Madam President, for convening this open debate
on conflict-related sexual violence and for choosing
this important topic as part of your agenda. May I
also congratulate you on your dynamic and effective
presidency of the Security Council this month.

The United Arab Emirates joins others in thanking
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
on conflict-related sexual violence, and the briefers
this morning for their thoughtful and important
presentations. The United Arab Emirates further lends
its voice in commending the work done by Zainab
Bangura in her tenure as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.

It is ofparticular significance that we are convening
this open debate under Jordan's presidency, as the
Middle East faces a rising tide of extremism and unrest.
In that light, we welcome Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Bangura's upcoming mission to the
Middle East, in the hope that her visit contributes to
creating a region-wide strategy to address conflict-
related sexual violence within the context of extremism.
As ever, the United Arab Emirates stands ready to
support the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General in this critical mission.

As we are confronted by distressing accounts of
rape, sexual slavery and forced marriage by extremist
groups, we must also recognize that some progress
has been made in a relatively short period of time. It
is remarkable to reflect that it was only eight years
ago that the Security Council formally recognized the
use of conflict-related sexual Violence as a matter of
international peace and security. The crime itself has
been used as a weapon of war for centuries, but it was
here, in this Chamber, that the international community
created the mechanisms to help national authorities
confront perpetrators and support the victims of these
crimes. And it is here where further progress can and
must be made.

Today, the Secretary-General's report (S/2015/203)
takes us a step further as we move away from looking
at conflict-related sexual violence as a tactic of war, to
recognizing it as a tactic of terror. The report accurately
pinpoints how sexual violence is deployed by extremist
groups to achieve their heinous objectives. As such, it
should be firmly dealt with under this rubric ofterror. In
this context, we fully endorse the Secretary-General's
recommendation to integrate the issue of conflict-
related sexual Violence into the work of the relevant
Security Council sanctions Committees, as part of
the designation criteria for the imposition of targeted
measures. We believe that the Security Council has a
key role to play and should remain actively seized of
this matter, in the interest of maintaining international
peace and security.

As the Secretary-General noted in his report, the
rise of non-State actors has made our landscape much
more complex. We are navigating a newly shifting
security context where the rise of violent extremism
has led to increased and targeted violence against
women and girls, men and boys. Extremist groups and
non-State actors are using sexual violence to achieve
tactical objectives and terrorize communities into
compliance, displacing populations and generating
revenue through trafficking, enslavement and ransom.
We need to develop more creative and innovative
solutions as part of a comprehensive strategy. While
the international community develops its responses to
counter these acts, we must at the same time develop
preventive approaches to empower women as their own
first line of defence. This includes promoting women's
participation in the design and implementation of these
programmes and supporting their leadership in local
contexts. The education and empowerment of women
are our strongest weapon against extremism and
conflict-related sexual violence.

In the larger context of conflict, this agenda must
be pursued comprehensively. A full-fledged response
to combating conflict-related sexual Violence will
be possible only with the full implementation of the
objectives outlined in 1325 (2000) in practice and not
simply in theory. We must emphasize and ensure that
women's agency and participation are an equal focus of
this agenda in order to address its underlying causes.

As many have noted here today, accelerating the
deployment of women protection advisers and gender
advisers is key to addressing conflict-related sexual
violence effectively. These differentiated roles are both
of importance and must be given equal weight and
resources. Let us commit to making the deployment
of both gender and women protection advisers a key
requirement of every mission.

Accountability for perpetrators is also fundamental
to our global strategy. This should include individuals
who commit, command or condone - by failing to
prevent or punish - conflict-related sexual Violence.
We need to ensure comprehensive justice strategies
in line with international humanitarian and human
rights law, which includes providing survivors with
the full array of support needed after a crime has been
committed.

Our attention, however, should focus not only on
the aftermath of these crimes, but also on preventing
their occurrence in the first place. To this end, we
would like to share specific recommendations arising
from the panel discussion series convened by the United
Arab Emirates in partnership with UN-Women and the
Georgetown Institute for Women, Peace and Security,
in contribution to the global study on resolution 1325
(2000).

First, we are better armed and better equipped to
respond to conflict-related sexual violence when we have
accurate data. We welcome comprehensive reporting,
investigation and documentation in order to bolster
the United Nations ability to better fulfil its mandate,
stressing the need for sex and age-disaggregated data.
It is critical for the international community to deepen
its information base on the nature, scope and objectives
of sexual violence carried out within conflict in order
to define appropriate interventions in consultation with
women and affected communities.

Secondly, in peacekeeping operations it is critical
that missions be able to predict emerging threats,
react quickly and efficiently to instances of violence
and understand community needs in their response.
Digitizing early-warning mechanisms enables women
and girls to protect themselves from conflict-related
sexual violence. This requires cooperation among local
communities and peacekeepers, as well as additional
funding to expand the use of early warning tools as part
of a preventive approach.

Thirdly, victims need to be able to safely and
effectively report and document sexual assault in
conflict zones.

In one recent mission, under the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, mobile technology was utilized
to allow civilians to register reports of violence directly
to United Nations peacekeeping forces. This kind of
reporting and documentation needs to be supported by
the increasing presence of women protection advisers,
who are deployed in peacekeeping operations to prevent
and respond to conflict-related sexual Violence.

Fourthly, crowd-sourced information can improve
women's voice and agency in peace processes.
Improving women's access to information and avenues
through which they can share their views helps ensure
that women are part of important discussions about
political processes, peacemaking and community
development as countries transition out of conflict.

All of these recommendations approach tackling
this issue in new ways and building on utilizing the
tools that have proven effective. We need to continually
improve our methodology by using new technology to
help us address this centuries-old crime.

It is the responsibility of the international
community and national authorities to promote gender
equality and empower women, not simply because it is
the right thing to do, but because we know it leads to
more stable and secure societies. As such, the United
Nations remains the central forum for addressing this
matter. Much progress has been made through the
continual, concerted efforts of Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Bangura, the Team of Experts on
the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, United
Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict and
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, among
other United Nations entities.

To that end, last month the United Arab Emirates
Government contributed $1 million to United Nations
Action's multi-donor trust fund specifically to support
the important work being undertaken by the Team of
Experts in their efforts to build capacity on a national
level in the rule of law and justice sectors. The United
Arab Emirates stands with the United Nations and
international partners in this important endeavour and
hopes 2015 will be the year where we place the agency
and participation of women and girls front and centre in
our agenda. This is not only an issue of gender, but also
a matter of international peace and security.

