Mrs. Berna] Prado (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the Bolivian delegation for convening this
debate, which highlights the importance of the role
that women play in conflict prevention and resolution
through their political and economic empowerment and
greater representation in decision-making levels related
to international peace and security.

Chile aligns itself with the statement to be made by
the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security and reiterates its
commitment to the promotion and rights of women in
situations of armed conflict, as well as to the initiatives
of the Secretary-General to promote gender equality in
the United Nations system.

Resolution 1325 (2000) is a symbolic resolution
of the Security Council, since it deals with one of the
most tragic consequences of modern conflicts, namely,
violence against women and girls during conflicts. We
therefore welcome the fact that, to date, 76 members of
the international community, including Chile, have put
in place national plans of action for the implementation
of the resolution. We express our hope that more
countries will proceed to adopt their own national plans.

The issue of women and peace and security is one of
the priority areas of Chile's multilateral foreign policy.
For that reason, we have promoted the strengthening of

regional and global cooperation in that area by working
on the implementation of public policies that ensure
women's participation in all processes to implement
resolution 1325 (2000) at the national level. Chile was
the first country in the region to develop a national action
plan in 2009 for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). That action plan was the result of coordinated
work by an interministerial committee made up of
the Ministry of Defence, the Ministry of Women and
Gender Equity and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
also highlighting the participation of civil society in
its preparation. The second national action plan was
launched in 2015, reflecting the recommendations of
the Security Council and relevant international good
practices and emphasizing education, staff training and
the inclusion of quantitative indicators.

Currently, our country is focused on the
development of a third-generation plan for 2019-
2022, with a view to strengthening the role of
women in negotiation, mediation, peacemaking and
peacebuilding. The areas of monitoring, evaluation and
accountability will also be included in its objectives
and budgetary allocations so as to ensure adequate
implementation. The interministerial committee is
working on expanding the scope of action to natural
disasters, humanitarian assistance and the displacement
of people, with the active collaboration of civil society
and other institutions.

In the context of the process of developing our
third action plan, our country is facing the challenge of
increasing the percentage of women in peace operations
and in leadership and decision-making positions
and of ensuring the presence of gender advisors in
those operations.

The promotion and protection of resolution 1325
(2000) continues to be part ofour national and collective
responsibilities. The same is true of achieving the
effective inclusion of women in all political, economic,
social and cultural processes that our societies face.

It is our hope that the award of this year's Nobel
Peace Prize to Nadia Murad and Dr. Denis Mukwege
for their efforts to end sexual violence as a weapon of
war in armed conflict will inspire the Security Council
and the international community to redouble their
efforts to comply with the resolution.

