Mr. Mardini: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important debate and
all the briefers for their compelling interventions and
courageous dedication.

In the work of the International Committee of
the Red Cross (ICRC) with affected communities in
armed conflict, sexual violence has been highlighted
as a top concern by young women in particular. Other
groups have named it among their major fears alongside
community tensions, loss of means and displacement.

Political attention on sexual violence has been
raised to the highest levels. The burning question now
is how it can compel a collective response, focusing
on the affected population, including those at risk of
sexual violence.

On behalf of the ICRC, a neutral, impartial and
independent humanitarian organization, today I wish
to outline three levels where there are challenges
and opportunities to work together among States,
humanitarian actors and other partners.

First, at the level of victims and survivors, there
is a lack of support in addressing medical care, mental
health, shelter, economic insecurity and exclusion.
We ask those present in their respective capacities to
support such needs and the acceptance of survivors.
One concrete request we have is to provide safe and
confidential access to health care to prevent further
risks to survivors who come forward.

For our part, at the level of victims and survivors,
the ICRC supports health centres in the Central African
Republic and Mali through training, financial and
technical assistance.

Secondly, at the community level, we see challenges
stemming from the lack of information on available
services, deterioration of safety leading to an increased
risk of sexual violence, and harmful coping strategies
for protection or income generation. We request
support for risk reduction. We ask for support for social
cohesion among community members or for economic
means as alternatives to harmful coping strategies.

For the ICRC's part, in the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of Congo and
Nigeria the communities themselves identify problems,
causes, consequences and capacities. Guided by the
communities, as experts of their own situation, we work
hand in hand with them on the solutions they propose to
reduce risk exposure.

Thirdly, at the State and institutional level, we see
challenges arising from the inadequate criminalization
of sexual violence and a lack of State and local capacity
to respond. Weak chains of command, poor judicial
systems and ineffective measures to reduce sexual
violence in detention create further obstacles.

Together, we must create and safeguard a
humanitarian environment that prevents sexual violence.
That is possible by establishing adequate normative
frameworks, building the capacity of judicial bodies
and ensuring respect for international humanitarian law
and other bodies of law. The 1949 Geneva Conventions
were the first treaties to prohibit rape and other forms
of sexual violence in armed conflict.

For our part, the ICRC will continue to engage
with all parties to armed conflict to ensure respect
for international humanitarian law. We will continue
to lend technical expertise to lawmakers and military
officials and to support structures to address sexual
violence, including in detention.

Let us work together to respond on those three
levels - Victim/survivor, community and State. As
we mark the seventieth anniversary of the Geneva
Conventions this year, let us also recall its spirit to
uphold human dignity in the midst of armed conflict.

