Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank you,
Madam President, for convening today's open
debate on this important subject. We also thank the
Secretary-General and Ms. Zainab Bangura, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, for their briefings. We appreciate
the statement made by the representative of the NGO
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security,
Ms. Rhoda Misaka.

Sexual violence, rape, molestation and different
forms of sexual abuse committed by individuals or
groups are egregious and reprehensible crimes. Sexual
violence has been systematically used as an instrument
of war in many parts of the world, as testimonies
this morning demonstrated. Sexual predators target
vulnerable women and girls, men and boys. Their
criminal acts inflict deep trauma, leave lasting scars,
cause serious moral harm and impose huge social
and economic costs on communities. Sexual violence
remains one of the major causes of people's fleeing
from their homes and of the resultant displacement.
Those crimes constitute a threat to international peace
and security.

The United Nations has done a lot, but needs
to do more. As the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2014/ 181) notes, the situation has actually worsened
in certain parts of the world. Our collective efforts
should therefore focus on converting commitments
into concrete action-oriented preventive measures. We
should collectively create a culture of zero tolerance
for sexual violence. In that context, I would like to
highlight the following points.

First, the Security Council should continue to
address the women and peace and security agenda
in accordance with its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. That
mandate pertains to sexual violence in armed conflict
and post-conflict situations. Those parameters should
be fully respected in order to preserve the strong
consensus that exists on the issue. We should guard
against the inclusion of peripheral issues that relate to
women's rights in general, or which do not fall within
the Council's mandate.

Secondly, ending impunity should continue to
remain the highest priority. Perpetrators should be
brought to justice and they should be removed from
their positions of authority. We strongly endorse the
appeal Special Representative Bangura made today to
shift the stigma from the victims to the perpetrators of
sexual crimes.

Thirdly, more human and financial resources should
be invested in security sector reform and disarmament
demobilization and reintegration efforts to erect barriers
against sexual violence. In post-conflict situations,
too, close attention should be given to punitive and
retributive justice. In that context, capacity-building of
the transitional criminal justice mechanisms, including
increased prosecutorial capacity, should be accorded
priority.

Fourthly, United Nations personnel operating in
areas of armed conflict should be properly trained
and equipped to provide services on the ground for
victims of sexual Violence. The inter-agency network
Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict is a useful
platform. The inclusion of women protection advisers
in peacekeeping operations is making a difference on
the ground.

Fifthly, multidimensional peacekeeping missions
with relevant mandates play a key role in combating
sexual violence. As a leading participant in
peacekeeping, Pakistan has contributed to that effort.
Gender sensitization has been a mandatory part of our
training for peacekeepers and is a core cultural value.
Pakistani women have also served as police officers,
doctors and nurses in various missions in Asia, Africa
and the Balkans. Our feedback about the work of police
officers is positive. Women police officers instinctively
and because of their training show empathy to women
trapped in conflict situations who in turn relate instantly
to those police officers.

Sixthly, women should participate in larger numbers
in the decision-making processes on ceasefires, peace
agreements and post-conflict peacebuilding.

Finally, the best way to eliminate conflict-related
sexual Violence is to prevent and resolve conflicts and
address the cross-cutting issues of governance, the rule
of law and economic development. The issues of sexual
violence and the overall objectives of protecting the
rights of women and children need to be pursued by
the Council and the United Nations system in a holistic
manner within their respective mandates. That requires
a comprehensive multisectoral and multidimensional
approach, as suggested by the Secretary-General.

