Mr. Terzi di Sant'Agata (Italy): Thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting on
the implementation of the landmark resolution 1325
(2000). Let me also thank Special Adviser Mayanja,
Under-Secretary-General Le Roy, Executive Director
Alberdi and Ms. Taylor for their statements.

Italy aligns itself with the statement made by the
representative of France on behalf of the European
Union.

The adoption of resolution 1820 (2008) in June
was a milestone in the Security Council's efforts to
protect women and a major step forward in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). Resolution
1820 (2008) clearly states that sexual violence in
situations of armed conflict, when used as a war tactic,
is a matter of peace and security and is therefore a
responsibility of the Security Council. That aspect was
clearly and well-underlined by Executive Director
Alberdi.

Women cannot participate effectively in decision-
making processes unless their security is guaranteed,
abuses are prosecuted and blanket amnesties are kept
off the table. Tragically, sexual violence continues to
be used as a weapon of war to destroy the very fabric
of society.

The Secretary-General's report foreseen by next
June is therefore crucial. We believe that it should
include detailed information on sexual violence in
conflict situations that are on the Council's agenda,
particularly on perpetrators and, more generally, on
emerging patterns.

While resolution 1820 (2008) was a major step in
implementing the protection pillar of resolution 1325
(2000), action is also needed on other pillars. We thus
welcome the President's initiative to focus today's
debate on women's participation. As the Secretary-
General indicates in his report, "in most conflict and
post-conflict societies women remain excluded from
conflict prevention and gender-based early warning
indicators are largely ignored" (S/2008/622, para. 38).
Far too often, women are excluded from negotiating
tables in peace processes, and that happens because of
the lack of political will and of adequate resources.
The participation of women in all phases of
conflict resolution and peacebuilding has a clear and
vast potential. I think, for example, of the participation
of Somali women as a "sixth clan" in the National
Reconciliation Conference and of the key contribution
of Burundi's women to the Arusha process. As that last
example shows, the participation of women in the
peace process since its inception has been a main factor
in encouraging a relevant segment of Burundi's civil
society to develop remarkable leadership skills, to
become a more effective political actor, and to be
perceived as a legitimate participant in national
recovery efforts.

This is not just a question of how many women
are included in a political or decision-making process;
it is about enabling them to champion issues that are
also vital to their empowerment. That is possible only
through the full engagement of civil society and
women's organizations. We should, at the same time,
consider women's resource needs, such as training and
capacity-building programmes.

In that area, the United Nations can contribute to
further progress by, for instance, considering how the
participation of women can be better reflected in
peacekeeping mission mandates and by providing those
missions with needed expertise and resources.

Other practical steps that could also be
considered are the appointment of more women as the
Secretary-General's special representatives or envoys,
the inclusion of a gender component in all United
Nations peacekeeping and political missions and the
establishment of structured gender expertise in the
mediation capacities of the Department for Political
Affairs. In the same light, we believe that creating a
strengthened and consolidated United Nations entity
for women is of critical importance.

The Peacebuilding Commission has proved that it
can make a difference by redressing inequalities and
creating the conditions for sustainable development on
solid, non-discriminatory foundations. It does so
through the inclusion of gender perspectives in its
integrated peacebuilding strategies. The Commission
must continue to engage women's organizations in
every phase of its work, ensuring their full involvement
in the planning, elaboration and monitoring of its
integrated strategies.

Women are key social, political and economic
actors in ensuring the success of stabilization and
rebuilding efforts. Every time a success is achieved in
a rebuilding effort, there is a critical presence of the
women's segment of society. At the same, women are
stakeholders who, more than others, face
discrimination. My Government, in its full
commitment to women's rights, would like to reaffirm
on this occasion its commitment to promoting the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in all United
Nations forums.

