Mr. Echeverri Lara (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the Government of Colombia,
I would like to thank the Spanish Government for its
leadership in convening this debate on the fifteenth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security, as well as welcome the presence of
Spanish Prime Minister Rajoy Brey here today. I wish
also to thank all delegations that spoke before me for
their expressions of support for the peace process in
Colombia, on which we hope an agreement will soon
be signed.

I wish also to thank the Executive Director of
UN-Women and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict for
their work and their commitment to this issue, which
is of particular importance. I wish also to express
our gratitude to the representatives of women's
organizations who are with us today for their briefings
and their contributions.

Resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, was a milestone in the recognition of the role
of women in peacekeeping and peacebuilding processes
and reaffirmed the importance of their participation
therein. The six subsequent resolutions adopted by the
Council on this issue have only enriched this agenda.

However, as pointed out in the concept note
(S/2015/749, annex) and as can be seen from the global
study on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
even though we have made major strides in terms of
this agenda, further implementation is still required in
order to expand the role of women in conflict prevention
and resolution and in peacebuilding, and to ensure their
equitable participation in peacekeeping efforts as well
as in the promotion of peace and security.

The global study is in agreement with the report of
the Secretary-General on the future of peace operations
and the report of the Advisory Group of Experts on
the 2015 Review of the United Nations Peacebuilding
Architecture. These three reports call for strengthening
the role of women in peacekeeping and peacebuilding,
not only as a party affected by war, but also as a
fundamental actor in the prevention, management and
resolution of conflicts and in achieving lasting peace.
The participation of women at the various post-conflict
stages also takes on particular importance in this
context.

Today I wish to reiterate our country's commitment
to the issue of women and peace and security. I wish to
highlight several aspects that we believe may be useful.

Colombia is close to achieving peace, as affirmed by
President Juan Manuel Santos Calderon in the General
Assembly Hall a few weeks ago (see A/70/PV.4). We
hope that the lessons that we have learned during our
many years of internal conflict and the progress that
we are achieving on the path to peace can serve as
examples in the context of addressing armed conflicts
in other parts of the world.

In the dialogue process that is moving forward
today with the guerrillas of the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia, the Government has
succeeded in ensuring that women are effectively
represented and have a voice at the negotiating table.
Currently, the Minister for Foreign Affairs and the
Human Rights Director of the Ministry of Interior,
both women, are part of the Group of Plenipotentiary
Negotiators, an advisory body in which women
members make up the a significant majority.

In addition, forums have been held in different
regions of the country, and several delegations of victims
have been given an opportunity to travel to address
members of the negotiating team. Women made up over
60 per cent of those delegations. A subcommittee on
gender was set up precisely for the purpose of ensuring
that the rights of women were reflected in the final
agreements.

Including in the past century, Colombia has
participated in various missions with military or police
personnel, in particular by sending observers and
experts. For many years, we have received support
from the international community. Now we are ready to
reaffirm our willingness to cooperate on security. In that
regard, we will continue to advise on capacity-building
for female police personnel, as we have been doing in
several countries, including Haiti. I would also like to
inform the Council that, in January, as an expression
of our willingness to support the strengthening of
international peace and security, Colombia signed
a framework agreement with the United Nations on
contributing to standby peacekeeping arrangements.

A joint effort by States is the best way of achieving
the principles of resolution 1325 (2000). Such is the
spirit of today's debate. The Council can count on
Colombia in this endeavour to address and overcome
the persistent challenges around the world that are
hampering progress on the agenda set forth in resolution
1325 (2000).

Since the Beijing Declaration and Platform for
Action, States have made significant progress towards
greater gender equality and the empowerment of
women, who now have real opportunities for leadership
at all levels. In that regard, my country is promoting
the initiative in support of women candidates for the
post of Secretary-General of the United Nations. The
Organization, faithful to its duty to uphold human
rights in an even-handed manner, now has a great
opportunity to lead by example by electing a woman to
head decision-making at the United Nations.

