Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We too thank the Secretary-General and the
briefers for their participation in today's meeting. The
problem of human trafficking in conflict situations and
terrorism was discussed by the Council in December last
year (see S/PV.7847). The victims of human trafficking,
including women and children, annually run into the
hundreds of thousands. The Security Council has
repeatedly condemned the depredations of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham, Al-Qaida, Boko Haram and
other terrorist groups, whose victims comprise the least
protected sections of the population.

Human trafficking today remains a serious
challenge in various parts of the world. It is particularly
dangerous when those activities cross over into
businesses controlled by organized crime. The proceeds
of human trafficking are used as sources of financing
for terrorism, compounding the threat to international
peace and security. Crimes in that sphere are often
accompanied by equally deleterious phenomena such
as abduction, sexual violence and the proliferation
of narcotics.

The exploitation of the victims of human
trafficking take various forms, including forced labour
and slavery. Today's meeting takes place on the eve of
the International Day of Remembrance of the Victims
of Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade. It offers
a good opportunity to once again recall the tragic
consequences of that centuries-old disgraceful practice,
which, even today, stands as one of the root causes of a
number of contemporary conflicts.

As to the modern forms of human trafficking,
we must address the root causes and take consistent
measures against criminal groups. In that context, a not
inconsiderable role is played by the demand for black
market labour and the legalization of the sex industry in
consumer countries. Effective results can be achieved
only by adopting a comprehensive approach, including
prevention and assistance to victims and the prosecution
of criminals with the appropriate level of international
cooperation, including in the sphere of legal assistance.
Coordinating action within that sphere, both within and
among States, should involve law-enforcement bodies,
social services and non-governmental organizations
that provide assistance to victims.

One of the natural partners of States should be the
institution of the family. As an important instrument
for sustainable development and social integration, the
family reduces vulnerabilities to various challenges
and threats, including those linked to the root causes of
human trafficking. By strengthening the institution of
the family States can minimize those risks.
Combating human trafficking is a sphere where we
very much need to draw on the potential for partnering
with the business community. Right now, together
with the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe's Special Representative and Coordinator
for Combating Trafficking in Human Beings, we are
making preparations to host in Moscow in 2017 a
conference devoted to that very theme.

Responsibility for combating human trafficking
and modern forms of slavery lies, above all, with the
States themselves. They must independently define
national policies and methods for eradicating the
phenomenon and investigate crimes and pursue and
bring to justice the perpetrators. We support initiatives
aimed at consolidating efforts on the part of States,
bodies of the United Nations and other international
and regional organizations geared towards combating
human trafficking. We participate in the financing of
those activities.

We note the work of the United Nations, particularly
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in
providing specialized assistance to States upon their
request. We believe that such assistance must strike a
balance between the needs of the countries of origin
and the countries of destination alike. Today, the
international community has created an entire series
of mechanisms aimed at fundamentally improving
cooperation among all stakeholders in combating
human trafficking. One of the most important initiatives
was the creation of the Group of Friends United against
Human Trafficking, in which our delegation takes an
active part. We welcome the holding in October of a
high-level meeting of the General Assembly to assess
progress in implementing the United Nations Global
Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons, which
is a key yardstick for States in that domain.

As for the role of the Security Council, it must be
limited only to consideration of the issue of human
trafficking in conjunction with the situations on its
agenda, in particular in the context offighting terrorism,
including its financing. We need to recall that in and of
itself, outside of those circumstances, phenomena such
as human trafficking, forced labour or slavery - as
dangerous and repugnant as they are - are not directly
related to the work of the Council, which bears
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security.

The Council is already dealing with a number of
similar cross-cutting issues, such as children and armed
conflict, sexual violence in armed conflict, and women
and peace and security. Overall, we need to ensure
that the work of the existing structures is as effective
and complementary as possible, while respecting their
purviews and the distribution of tasks among them.

In conclusion, and in response to the Ukrainian
statement and its unfounded accusations against Russia,
the theme of this meeting is highly relevant to that
country. It would seem, by the looks ofthings, that they
are treating people like slaves who have no rights and
cannot, for instance, claim to have a national identity
or use their native language. That is the attitude taken
by Kyiv towards the people living in eatern Ukraine. It
has tried to respond by clamping down with violence,
the way slave rebellions were handled in ancient times.
When that failed and despite thousands being wounded
and killed as a result of the use of force by the Kyiv
authorities, they then tried to stifle the residents of
Donbas, using any available means, such as imposing
an economic and transport blockade and stopping
social-services payments, among others.

Today, the Ukrainian authorities have adopted a
similar decision to fully cease transport communications
with Donbas, It is no secret that after achieving
independence, Ukraine has traditionally been one of
the countries with the worst records in terms of human
trafficking and forced labour. Now in times of conflict,
such criminal activity has acquired a particularly
repugnant form, manifesting itself in the exploitation
of the vulnerability and lack of protection of internally
displaced persons.

It is our hope that the Ukrainian authorities will
address those problems by other means than attempting
to place the blame on Russia, as they usually do.

