Mr. Van der Vliet (Netherlands): The Kingdom
of the Netherlands welcomes this debate, as well as
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/203). I
appreciate the opportunity to make additional national
remarks, as I align myself with the general statement
made by the observer of the European Union. Also I
would like to reiterate my country's commitment to the
fight against conflict-related sexual Violence across the
world.

I would also like to applaud the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Bangura, United
Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict and
the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict for their efforts worldwide, both
as advocates and through their expert support.
With violent extremism on the rise, the report of
the Secretary-General rightly draws our attention to
the disturbing trend of sexual violence as a tactic of
terror. The mass-scale violence against Yazidi girls
and, exactly one year ago, against the Chibok school
girls are two horrific examples of the specific targeting
of women and girls by extremist groups.

Violent extremism leads to the systematic
disempowerment of women. It is part of the objectives,
ideology and funding of extremist groups. All of that
is taking place while a couple of doors away, down the
hallway in this very building, we are negotiating, in good
faith, a sustainable development agenda that includes a
strong goal on gender equality and the empowerment of
women and girls. It is those efforts - our efforts and
our determination - that must prevail.

Sexual Violence is pervasive in conflict and post-
conflict situations and reflective of a broader and
unequal gender relations dynamic in those societies.
It is not a stand-alone problem that can be solved in
isolation. What is needed is a fully integrated approach
that addresses deeply rooted gender inequalities, that
is context-specific and that works to empower women.

The Netherlands strives to do exactly that. We
approach the issue of sexual violence in conflict
from several angles, using various concrete
instruments of foreign policy at our disposal. For
instance, in our civilian and military contributions to
multilateral missions - most recently to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Mission in
Mali - attention to the issue of gender inequalities
and sexual violence in conflict is an integral part of
our national preparation. Both our police and military
officers who are now in Mali received predeployment
training on gender, human rights and international
humanitarian law. Together with our valued partner,
Spain, we also offer regular training for other countries
on gender in operations to professionals from the
military, the police and the diplomatic community, as
well as to civilian experts and activists. Recently, we
launched a specialized pilot training, together with
UN-Women, for female military officers. This training
is meant to increase the number and capacity of female
peacekeepers.

Deploying women protection advisers and
gender advisers is another way to ensure the full
implementation of the resolutions on women and peace
and security. We make available such civilian expertise
on gender and combating sexual Violence to United
Nations missions. In the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, for example, we support the deployment of
a senior women protection adviser, and I am glad that
Ms. Van Deuren is present here today at our debate. The
more structural inclusion of women protection advisers
and gender advisers in peacekeeping budgets is an issue
that requires further consideration.

Through our programme flow, funding leadership
opportunities for women, we support women's rights
organizations around the globe, and our National
Action Plan 1325 comes with an annual fund for civil
society programming in support of women's political
participation and leadership. We contribute to several
United Nations Trust Funds, including the United
Nations Trust Fund to Eliminate Violence against
Women

In situations where the justice sector is ill-
functioning, survivors who have gone through the
trauma of an attack too often face additional risks, such
as rejection by their families and communities, double
victimization by State authorities, limited health
services, including a lack of access to safe abortion
and psychosocial support, and many other risks. They
should not go through this ordeal in getting the justice
and assistance they need and deserve. The perpetrators
of sexual violence, whether State or non-State actors,
should be brought to justice and held accountable. There
can be no justice or accountability in situations where
the stigma and shame associated with sexual Violence
remain with the victim rather than the perpetrator.
Equally, there can be no justice or accountability in
situations where women and young girls are abducted,
enslaved and traded openly, while these horrific acts
are justified by extremist groups on the grounds of
religion.

There is no religion or culture that commands or
justifies these evil acts. Therefore, we need to fight
ideologies or propaganda by non-State actors that
advocate sexual violence against women and girls and
that want to deny the rights of freedoms of citizens,
particularly those of women. There is also a clear role
for the International Criminal Court (ICC) and other
tribunals. The Netherlands very much commends the
broad jurisdiction of the ICC on the issue of conflict-
related sexual Violence.

We should not think of women and girls only
as victims. We know about the resilience of many
survivors. We also know that empowered women who
participate in decision-making and take up leadership
roles can make a real difference. Many brave women
are actively resisting the influence and rule of extremist
groups in Syria and Iraq. We believe in the power of
these women as agents for peace and justice and as
representatives of communities living in conflict, and
we work actively to support them.

In conclusion, if we are serious about realizing the
sustainable development goals, including achieving
gender equality and women's empowerment, then we
must put an end to conflict-related sexual Violence
everywhere and forever.

