Ms. Amin: I would like to thank the Security
Council for the invitation to speak here today. I am
speaking on behalf of the NGO Working Group on
Women, Peace and Security, a coalition of international
civil society organizations that advocates for the equal
and full participation of women in all efforts to
maintain international peace and security.

I am here today in my capacity as an advocate for
the political, economic and social rights of women in
Somalia. In 2000, my colleagues and I formed the
Sixth Clan, a Somali women's clan, to carve out a
space for women in the male-dominated political
world. Through this Sixth Clan identity, for the first
time in Somali history, women participated as equal
partners and decision-makers in the peace process, and
we ensured quotas for women in parliament. This was
the first time that women had been represented in a
peace process in Somalia. After numerous previous
attempts, the peace and reconciliation process in which
we participated was the first to be successful.

This open debate comes at a time of increased
international focus on women in conflict situations.
Last week, the Security Council adopted resolution
1888 (2009), and today the Council adopted resolution
1889 (2009), which lays out important next steps
regarding international obligations to ensure women's
rights in conflict. We welcome the advances heralded
by those resolutions, such as the new support structure
to combat the use of sexual violence in conflict
situations and to ensure justice for survivors of such
violence. We also welcome the continued recognition
that women in conflict situations are not only victims
but also powerful agents for peace and security in their
communities.

However, without accountability with regard to
these resolutions, persistent impediments to their
implementation will remain. The support of Council
members is needed to ensure the strong high-level
leadership, the coherent and systematic approach
towards implementation and the concrete monitoring
mechanism to address gaps in the system that those
resolutions necessitate.

As the Security Council rightly noted nine years ago
in resolution 1325 (2000), the meaningful participation of

women in all levels of decision-making is integral to
conflict transformation, post-conflict stability and post-
conflict rebuilding. The Council has reinforced that
sentiment in its subsequent resolutions on women and
peace and security, as well as in many country-specific
resolutions, but without providing an accountability
structure for implementation. As a result, women
remain on the margins of peace talks, to the detriment
of society as a whole.

As I know from my experience in Somalia,
women have the potential to add immense value to
peace processes and negotiations. The women with
whom I worked demonstrated tolerance, compassion
and forgiveness and came up with practical solutions,
all of which are the basic tenets of reconciliation. In
the Somali process, women often represented and
spoke for the silent majority: unarmed civilians, who
are mainly women and children. That silent majority
needs the voice that these women brought to the table.

We know that the contributions of women to the
peace process are vital and worthy. Women speak not
only about so-called women's issues; as we can see
from the practical lessons learned in Somalia, women
can speak at the highest level about key political,
social and economic issues relevant to sustainable
peace, such as clean water, health and education.

Women's participation in peace processes is not
optional; it is a requirement. However, it is not only the
job of women to bring these voices and issues into
conflict resolution and rebuilding efforts; men also
must ensure that women's rights and interests are
meaningfully addressed in all peace processes and
included in peace agreements and conflict
transformation planning, such as that involving
security sector and judicial reform and the provision of
services; in addressing impunity; and in the truth and
reconciliation process.

Twelve months from now, the international
community will again turn its focus to resolution 1325
(2000), to commemorate the tenth anniversary of its
adoption by the Security Council. We now look to you,
the members of the international community, to live up
to your obligations to women in conflict by ensuring
that women are engaged in all levels of decision-
making in conflict resolution processes and that the
rights and interests of women are addressed in such
processes, and by achieving a marked increase in the
number of women in any peacebuilding and civilian
peacekeeping support provided by your Governments.

Your concrete support for accountability, leadership,
and resourcing is essential. Over the next 12 months, we
urge each of you to support key developments within the
United Nations system by ensuring that the new
consolidated United Nations gender entity for women and
its Under-Secretary-General are well resourced; by
supporting the Secretary-General's appointment of a
special representative on women and peace and
security; and by ensuring that gender expertise is
further mainstreamed in United Nations entities such as
the Department of Political Affairs.

Finally, I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to address the Council today. We women
are not only victims in conflict, but also agents for
positive change. Women have shown courage,
commitment and determination in such situations. We
have been positive contributors to peace processes. We
often risk our lives to take such actions.

What women still lack is coherent and practical
support from the international community. Women need
such support to secure their places in decision-making
positions and to help end conflicts and rebuild countries
emerging from them in order to ensure sustainable
peace after they have devastated our communities.

We look forward to all of you here in this room
today and in the broader international community
providing that concrete support. Without your support
for women in conflict, our dreams of a safer world and
of ensuring true international peace and security will
be put at risk.

