Mr. Antonio: I would like to start by commending
Uruguay for hosting this very important debate on
sexual violence in conflict and to salute the presence,
this morning, of the Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Uruguay. I also wish to commend Deputy Secretary-
General Amina Mohammed for underlining prevention
as the ultimate key to tackling this scourge. Furthermore,
I wish to thank Under-Secretary-General Adama Dieng
for his very insightful briefing and to thank Ms. Mina
Jaf for her briefing. I would also like to join my voice
to those of others in congratulating Ms. Pramila Patten,
of Mauritius, as the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.

The commitment on the part of the Security Council
to giving visibility to the challenges and opportunities
faced by the women and peace and security agenda
simply confirms our responsibility to include a
greater gender-focused perspective to address and
find long-term solutions to destructive armed conflict
situations. I wish to praise the steps taken forward
by the international community last December with
the adoption of resolution 2331 (2016), which clearly
enunciates the interrelationship between trafficking
in persons in conflict situations and sexual violence
against women, children, internally displaced persons
and marginalized communities.

We are responding to a highly complex and
dynamic environment in our quest to enhance the
women and peace and security agenda and tackle
sexual violence in conflict. There is no other solution
than to rapidly address multiform patterns of conflict
in the face of transnational actors who are constantly
changing their modus operandi. At the continental
level, the African Union (AU) continues to develop
a resilient model of prevention, which includes
subregional and international partners such as the
United Nations, through a collaborative approach based
on comparative advantage.

In that respect, the African Union has demonstrated
relentless commitment and support for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, and resolution 1612 (2005), on
children and armed conflict. Although those two critical
agendas have galvanized important momentum, we must
acknowledge the fact that women and children continue
to account for the majority of casualties in conflict
situations. The public numbers of victims of sexual
violence during armed conflict remain horrendous. The
African Union has demonstrated the inflexibility of its
position on the recruitment and abuse of women and
children and sexual violence perpetrated against them
by parties to armed conflict. We have a zero-tolerance
position when it comes to sexual violence in conflict.

At the national level, several AU States members
have demonstrated their commitment to preventing
and deterring sexual violence in conflict - by
adopting codes of conduct prohibiting sexual violence,
through judicial investigations to hold perpetrators
accountable and by training police services to better
address sexual violence. While the number of women
among the uniformed personnel of military and police
forces remains limited, the AU leadership still holds
the position that proactive steps should be taken by
peacekeeping missions to increase the number of
civilian positions held by women.

The African Union Commission remains at the

forefront of the women and peace and security agenda.

The Chairperson early on recognized the valuable
advances that we can achieve by including women in
the practical and operational responses to peace and
security threats. The AU has made the protection of
women's and children's rights a continental priority,
notably by designating, in 2014, Ms. Bineta Diop as
the AU Special Envoy on Women, Peace and Security,
and by including the women and peace and security
and children and armed conflict agendas in the African
Peace and Security Architecture Roadmap 2016-2020.

The Chairperson placed a strong emphasis on
conflict prevention during the AU-United Nations
summit held in New York in April. By integrating
the two agendas within the five strategic priorities of
the African Peace and Security Architecture for the
next three years, the AU has reaffirmed that gender,
peace and security are essential elements of the overall
African peace and security strategy.

To date, the African Peace and Security
Architecture has striven to strengthen women's
participation in peace, security and post-conflict
reconstruction in Africa and to improve the quality of
early-warning mechanisms and the effectiveness of the
institutions responsible for addressing issues related to
protecting women and children in conflict and post-
conflict contexts. In that respect, the African Peace and
Security Architecture Roadmap should be seen as a key
contribution to mainstreaming gender issues into the
African peace and security agenda. It concretely seeks
to ensure women's and children's protection and the
increased participation of women in conflict prevention
and resolution and peacebuilding strategies.

As we seek to enhance women's participation in
prevention and mediation efforts, I have the pleasure,
as already mentioned by the German delegation, to
announce that the African Union Commission, in
partnership with UN-Women and the Federal Republic
of Germany, is organizing a high-level forum on women
leaders for Africa's transformation, from 31 May to
2 June here in New York. The three-day forum will
serve as a platform to launch the African Women
Leaders Network, a new initiative aimed at bolstering
women's leadership in governance, peace and security
for the transformation of Africa. The initiative
represents an important milestone in our shared path
towards implementing resolution 1325 (2000) and the
women and peace and security agenda in Africa.

The African Union Commission remains a key
partner in prevention strategies that seek to address
the scourge of sexual violence in conflict and to leave
no one behind. We have developed specific legal
instruments. However, it is clearly the time for all
stakeholders to accelerate the practical implementation
phase. We recognize the need to provide women with
funding and capacity-building on peace and security
issues and to strengthen initiatives and mechanisms to
combat conflict-related sexual violence.

