Mr. Plasai (Thailand) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I thank the presidency of Angola for organizing
this open debate. I also thank all the speakers for their
important perspectives. Today's debate is timely in
that it allows us to take stock of progress achieved thus
far and to reflect on how best to support the role of
women in the prevention and settlement of conflicts
in Africa and elsewhere. In that regard, I should like
to share the Kingdom of Thailand's views on how the
Security Council and the Member States can support
the effective participation of women in initiatives and
peace and security processes.

First, men and women must enjoy equal opportunities.
When women and girls enjoy social, economic and
political opportunities equal to those of men and boys,
their contributions to society are limitless. National
efforts should therefore focus on ways of ensuring
equality ofaccess for women to education,jobs, finance,
social security, health-care services and justice. The
emancipation of women involves the non-exclusive
promotion of development and growth, which is crucial
to preventing conflict and maintaining peace.

Secondly, women's rights must be promoted
and protected. In times of conflict, the suffering of
women and girls can be minimized if strong national
institutions exist to ensure the rule of law and the
effective monitoring of and response to human rights
violations. Post-conflict rehabilitation for those
affected should also be supported by a comprehensive
victim assistance programme.

Thirdly, women, who are too often seen exclusively
as victims, are also effective agents of change. Women
bring invaluable perspectives to the meaning of peace
and security. Sustainable conflict prevention and
resolution can be more easily ensured when women
participate actively and meaningfully in relevant
political decision-making and peace processes. In 2015,
the Permanent Mission of Thailand commissioned the
International Peace Institute to conduct evidence-based
research on this very topic. The research confirms with
substantial empirical evidence that peace processes
involving women have a higher percentage of success
and sustainability. We therefore urge more action on
the part of the United Nations and the Member States
to enhance women's capacity to play a more prominent
role in this regard.

Fourthly, recent initiatives in Africa to emancipate
women are already having a positive impact. We
welcome the African Union's five-year Gender, Peace
and Security Programme (2015-2020), launched in 2014,
and the African Women's Decade. They both provide
an excellent platform for implementing resolution 1325
(2000) and for supporting the role of women in conflict
prevention and resolution in Africa. We also see
benefits in the inclusion of women in the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme within
the African Union's five-year Programme. Clearly,
dynamic civil and women's organizations have also
united women in Africa to address common threats,
such as the rise of extremism.

We support strengthened cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union in conflict
prevention and resolution, particularly through
peacekeeping operations. In that regard, we have made
a concrete contribution by participating as the first
non-African country in the joint African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur. With this first-
hand experience, we can safely conclude that female
peacekeepers can effectively engage with the local
population with a very high degree of cultural and
gender sensitivity. In conflict situations, that can help
build trust and confidence and create an environment
conducive to peace for women and girls in particular. We
strongly urge the United Nations to appoint more gender
advisers and to integrate a stronger gender perspective
into the United Nations peacekeeping mandates.

Let me conclude by reiterating that in Africa,
as in all parts of the world, women and men must be
recognized as equal partners in conflict prevention and
resolution, as well as in other endeavours. That requires
strong common political will, which in our view is still
lacking despite recent progress in the promotion of the
role of women in peace processes in many parts of the
world. For our part, the Kingdom of Thailand is ready
and committed to joining the international community
in its efforts to promote women's effective participation
in peace and security in Africa and beyond.

