Mr. Carrillo Gomez (Paraguay) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the delegation of the Republic
of Paraguay, I welcome the Secretary-General's report
(S/2019/280) on conflict-related sexual violence and
the initiative of the German presidency of the Council
to convene this debate and to begin commemorating
the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) - a framework resolution aimed at
encouraging the representation of women at all levels
of decision-making for the prevention, management
and resolution of conflicts.

Like the Secretary-General in his report, we
acknowledge that, in order to prevent sexual violence,
it is necessary to promote substantive gender equality
before, during and after conflicts. In our experience,
including women at different levels of decision-making
has been a challenging process but one that continues to
progress steadily. For example, since 2006, Paraguayan
female career officers have been able to graduate from
military academy, serving in almost all specialist areas
of the army, the air force and the navy. Many of those
women have been deployed as part of the Paraguayan
contingents in United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Women will organically reach the highest ranks of
the military, occupy the corresponding positions at
different levels of command and be deployed in the
country's various military secondments.

Incorporating women into traditionally male roles
has been accompanied by active State measures, such
as the creation of public policies that are supported
by relevant legislation and the provision of the
infrastructure necessary for the smooth running of
military activity, while making arrangements for the
unique needs of women. Through the national education
system, the Paraguayan Government has also promoted
the population's awareness of the importance of the
participation of women in areas traditionally reserved
for men.

Finally, we welcome the call made to Member States
to assume new commitments for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) on the twentieth anniversary
of its adoption. In that context, the Republic of
Paraguay, through the Ministry of Women, will
convene an inter-institutional working group to update
Paraguay's national action plan 2013-2017 with a View
to implementing resolution 1325 (2000) on women
and peace and security and re-evaluating it for the
upcoming period.

