Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): Let me begin by
thanking and congratulating the Indian presidency of
the Council for the initiative to hold this open debate
today on women, peace and security, with a focus
on the role of women civil society organizations in
contributing to the prevention and resolution of armed
conflict and peacebuilding.

We believe that today's open debate will offer an
opportunity to reflect on the lessons learned and the
actions needed to accelerate the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions, as
well as related international commitments on women
and peace and security.

Botswana welcomes the Security Council's
continued focus on issues related to women, peace
and security, particularly its call for the enhanced
participation, representation and involvement of women
in the prevention and resolution of armed conflicts and
in peacebuilding, as well as a stronger commitment to
address challenges to the engagement of women at all
levels.

We sincerely thank the Secretary-General for his
informative report (S/2012/732) and for the detailed
analysis it contains on the progress made in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

By taking part in today's deliberations, Botswana
reaffirms the great importance and its recognition of
the contribution and role of women in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts and renews its commitment
to address issues related to women and gender equality
at the national level.

Botswana's support for United States-led resolution
66/130, aimed at encouraging the greater political
participation of women and their expanded role in
decision- making and peacekeeping, and which was
adopted by the General Assembly's Third Committee
in 2011, is a practical demonstration of our strong
commitment in that regard.

Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000)
in 2000, significant progress has been made in its
implementation, as demonstrated by the notable efforts
made by the United Nations system, Member States,
civil society and other actors. In that regard, a number
of activities covering a broad range of areas have been
undertaken over the past decade.

As noted in the Secretary-General's report, we are
encouraged by the fact that the number of countries
that have articulated their priorities on women and
peace and security through national action plans has
continued to grow.

We are, however, concerned that despite the
normative framework and the wide range of activities
spurred by the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
the underrepresentation of women in formal peace
processes, as well as violence against women and girls,
continues. This situation certainly has to be corrected.

To that end, Botswana reiterates its strong
condemnation of all violations committed against
women and girls, including sexual and gender-based
violence in armed conflict and post-conflict situations.
In that connection, we wish to stress the importance
of promoting and protecting the human rights of
women and girls in the context of the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) and bringing to justice those
responsible for crimes of that nature.

My delegation is convinced that peace is
inextricably linked to the issue of equality between
women and men, and, as such, we fully share the view
that gender equality should be recognized as a core
issue in the maintenance of peace and security.

In this regard, we also believe that if women are to
play a key role in conflict-prevention and peacebuilding
processes, the obstacles and challenges that limit their
involvement need to be addressed, including their
underrepresentation in formal peace and security
processes.

The effective participation ofwomen's civil society
organizations in conflict prevention and resolution
is essential for the sustainability of peace processes.
Learning from the examples of success stories
concerning the involvement of women and women's
organizations in conflict resolution and peacebuilding,
as was the case in Rwanda, Liberia, Sierra Leone
and Timor-Leste, we also recognize the important
contribution of women's civil society organizations in
the prevention and resolution of conflict. To that end,
the need to facilitate the inclusion and participation of
women in all efforts aimed at peacebuilding remains
critical.
Furthermore, we are also of the belief that in order
to achieve the goals of resolution 1325 (2000), the
efforts of women's civil society organizations should
be encouraged and supported.

I wish to conclude by reiterating the call made
in General Assembly resolution 66/130 regarding the
need to enhance the role of women in decision-making
with regard to conflict prevention and resolution, in
accordance with resolution 1325 (2000). In the same
vein, I wish to also stress the importance of creating
enabling conditions for women's participation during
all stages of peace processes and of countering
negative societal attitudes regarding the full and equal
participation of women in conflict resolution and
mediation.

I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity you have given me to address the Council.

