Mr. Normandin (Canada) (spoke in French): At
the outset, on behalf of the Government of Canada, I
wish to thank the Vietnamese presidency for convening
this open debate on resolution 1325 (2000). Addressing
the needs of women and girls in post-conflict situations
is a critical element of the Security Council's
responsibilities.

As we know, the needs of women and girls in
post-conflict situations are unique and, sadly, often
overlooked. Today's adoption of resolution 1889
(2009) is a response to a significant body of research
findings that reinforce what we have always known -
achieving durable peace, recovery and development in
post-conflict countries requires the meaningful
participation of women in all aspects and at all levels
of peace processes. Only a strong and sustained voice
will allow women in post-conflict environments to
transcend the status of victim and become empowered
as agents of positive change. We call on the Security
Council to ensure that their voices are heard loud and
clear.

In particular, Canada would like to draw the
Council's attention to the participation of women in
peace processes and to a study by the United Nations
Development Fund for Women, which has already been
referred to today, concluding that the participation of
women in negotiating delegations to peace talks has
averaged approximately 7 per cent. Member States, the
Secretariat and international peace mediators
collectively share the responsibility to ensure that this
number increases and that we systematically include
women in all peace processes, formal and informal.
Canada sincerely hopes that the Security Council and
the Secretariat will ensure that this becomes a standard
practice.

Canada co-sponsored both resolutions 1820
(2008) and 1888 (2009) on sexual violence in conflict.
Both resolutions elaborate on resolution 1325 (2000)
by outlining a number of concrete steps to be taken to
address sexual violence more systematically. Canada
welcomes the call for the nomination of a special
representative of the Secretary-General to provide
strategic leadership and to strengthen United Nations

coordination mechanisms in order to address sexual
violence.

Canada also warmly welcomes the
recommendations set out in the Secretary-General's
recent report (S/2009/465) on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). In particular, Canada would
like to echo the Secretary-General's calls for an
effective monitoring and accountability mechanism
with respect to all aspects of resolution 1325 (2000), in
particular the participation of women in peace
processes.

(spoke in English)

The implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) is
indeed a work in progress, both at a national level and
at the United Nations. With the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) approaching next
year, it is time to undertake a serious examination of
the gains that have been made as well as those aspects
of the resolution that remain unrealized.

On the positive side, there have been some
remarkable accomplishments by the many dedicated
actors who pursue the promotion and protection of
women's and girls' rights, including the efforts of civil
society organizations. On the other hand, we are still
short on some institutional mechanisms and action. In
this respect, the upcoming establishment of a steering
committee to enhance coordination within the United
Nations system ahead of the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of the resolution is welcome.

Currently, there are 13 full-time gender advisers
in United Nations peacekeeping operations, including
integrated missions. Every United Nations mission
should have a well-trained, full-time gender adviser
whose work is systematically integrated throughout the
operation and who has stable resources to carry out his
or her functions. By now, this should be standard
practice. We also welcome the call for the appointment
of women protection advisers, issued in resolution
1889 (2009), adopted earlier today.

I should like to say A few words on the
peacebuilding front. The Peacebuilding Commission
holds much promise for involving women and girls in
designing and then operationalizing post-conflict
strategies. In accordance with resolution 1820 (2008),
each of the four countries currently on the agenda have
strategies for engaging women in governance, security
sector reform, human rights institutions and other key

areas of post-conflict reconstruction. As chair of the
Commission's country configuration for Sierra Leone,
Canada has worked with the Government of Sierra
Leone and its international partners to ensure that
gender equality and the empowerment of women are
core components of peacebuilding efforts in that
country.

Finally, we would also like to raise the issue of
bringing violators to justice with respect to sexual
violence. As we all know, this type of violence remains
rampant in conflict-affected areas. Too often, these
crimes go unpunished and therefore perpetuate the
cycle of sexual violence. To this end, Canada reiterates
the call made in resolution 1888 (2009) for a team of
rapidly deployable experts on sexual violence and
suggests that a United Nations justice rapid-response
mechanism be considered as we move towards the
implementation of this commitment.

In conclusion, a peace that lasts is a peace owned
by all, including women. As we approach the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
we can acknowledge the progress made towards its
implementation. We can also recognize that more must
be done. Global indicators to track implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), as called for in today's
resolution, will be helpful in this regard. But let us not
wait further. We need to continue to act now,
particularly in the field, to make the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) a reality.

