Ms. Leskovar (Slovenia): At the outset, let me say
that Slovenia fully aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.

Let me also commend Bolivia for organizing
today's debate to highlight the role of women in peace
and security. I would like to thank the Secretary-
General for his annual report (S/2018/900) and express
our appreciation for his commitment to the women and
peace and security agenda.

The meaningful participation of women in conflict
prevention, conflict resolution and peace processes is
enabled through their effective political and economic
empowerment, their access to resources and the
realization and exercise of their fundamental rights.
Their voices in politics, including in Parliaments and
Governments, in the military, in business and the
corporate world and in civil society lend credibility
and sustainability to the measures that address security
concerns at all levels. We concur on the need for
improved data and measurements for monitoring trends
and progress in the relevant areas.

Obstacles to women's political and economic
participation contribute to prolonged insecurity and
threaten solutions for sustainable peace. Sexual and
gender-based violence continues to represent one such
obstacle, and we must do more to hold perpetrators
accountable. With regard to accountability, let me
reiterate Slovenia's strong support for the International
Criminal Court and the work done in previous years
by the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda and the Special Court for Sierra Leone.

I would also like to stress the need for an active role
on the part of men in promoting the women and peace
and security agenda, both with regard to the prevention
and elimination of conflict-related sexual and gender-
based violence and by promoting the meaningful
participation of women in peace efforts.

Let me inform the Concil oubriefly about our
national efforts. Slovenia's second national action plan
on women and peace and security for the period 2018-
2020 will be adopted by the Government in the coming
weeks. The new action plan is based on a review of the
implementation of the first action plan and takes into
account emerging challenges and trends. It encompasses
activities in five thematic areas: the integration of
a gender perspective, women's participation, the
protection of women and girls and putting an end to
sexual and gender-based violence in conflict, education,
training and awareness-raising about women and peace
and security issues, and accountability for conflict-
related sexual and gender-based violence. The plan
includes a monitoring and reporting mechanism, and
we believe that it will improve our results in terms of
the women and peace and security agenda. We are also
working on a new directive for the Slovenian armed
forces on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

We have defined gender equality as one of our
thematic priorities and a cross-cutting issue in terms
of our international development cooperation and
humanitarian assistance, and we are supporting projects
on the empowerment of women in the Western Balkans,
Lebanon, Jordan, Uganda and Rwanda. Those projects
contribute to women's resilience by encouraging
awareness-raising, education and employment,
balanced representation and the promotion of economic
and psychosocial empowerment.

Given the importance that my Government attaches
to the women and peace and security agenda, we have
decided to dedicate part of our biggest foreign policy
event - the Bled Strategic Forum, which we host
every summer - to marking the fortieth anniversary
of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women and the twentieth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000).
We welcome the efforts of the Security Council's
Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and
Security to stress coordinated and specific country-
level action. We join others in encouraging the Security
Council to pay due regard to the Group's work in its
deliberations and outcomes.

In conclusion, let me reiterate the appeal of the
Secretary-General for all of us to do more to close
the gap between what we are saying in this Chamber
and what we are doing outside of it in order to provide
more space for women's participation and secure more
resources, including financing. I assure the Council
that Slovenia remains firmly committed to the women
and peace and security agenda and to a comprehensive
approach to its implementation.

