The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Ms. Taha
for her very meaningful briefing.

On behalf of all the members of the Security
Council, I thank all the briefers for their very
informative briefings.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/20l6/1073, which contains the text of
a draft resolution submitted by Albania, Andorra,
Angola, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahrain,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Malta, Mexico,
Montenegro, Morocco, Netherlands, Nicaragua,
Norway, Palau, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Uruguay and Vanuatu.

The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.

A vote was taken by show ofhana's.

In favour:
Angola, China, Egypt, France, Japan, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Russian Federation, Senegal, Spain,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)

The President (spoke in Spanish): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft

resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2331 (2016).

I shall now make a statement in my national
capacity as President of the Government of Spain.

I wish to begin my statement by warmly thanking
the following for their presence participation in today's
debate: Secretary-General Ban-Ki-moon; Mr. Yury
Fedotov, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime; Ms. Zainab Hava Bangura,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict; Ms. Ameena Saeed Hasan;
and Ms. Nadia Murad Basee Taha.

This meeting is particularly important for Spain not
only because of the topic's relevance but also because
it is the last debate that my country shall convene as
a non-permanent member of the Security Council.
Moreover, human trafficking is a clear affront to human
dignity and also represents a threat to international
peace and security in conflict and terrorism-related
situations. It is a reincarnation of slavery in the midst
of the twenty-first century. Leaders from throughout
the world and representatives of civil society have
underscored the moral imperative of combating human
trafficking and all modern forms of slavery. The
victims, the majority of whom are women and children,
require - as was stated here - an urgent response, in
particular by the Security Council.

My delegation proposes a paradigm shift
recognizing that national judicial systems can break
down in conflict situations. Under those circumstances,
action by the Security Council becomes necessary. It is
on that basis that we proposed resolution 2331 (2016),
the first resolution in the history of the Security Council
on this tragic phenomenon.

With this open debate, we are beginning to engage
in what will be a deep reflection upon what contributions
the Council can make to condemn human trafficking in
areas of conflicts and the situations of exploitation to
which that trafficking leads. We also propose exploring
means of strengthening the normative framework in the
area of sanctions, financial flows, victim protection and
assistance and developing a more effective strategy in
the fight against human trafficking in areas of conflict.
The response of the United Nations to the scourge
of human trafficking continues to be fragmented.
Eradicating this scourge requires more than just the
efforts of a single region, country, or department or
agency of the United Nations. It requires efforts from
all parties concerned, including the Council.

Unfortunately, the connection between conflict and
human trafficking is not a new one. The novel element
is the use ofhuman trafficking as a tactic in terrorism in
the economy of war by groups like Da'esh, Al-Shabaab
and Boko Haram. We have just heard the shocking
account of a brave survivor, Ms. Nadia Murad Basee
Taha, who is now a strong defender of the rights of the
Yazidi people in Iraq and the winner of the Sakharov
Prize for Freedom of Thought. We have also heard
from someone who risked her life to rescue many of
those victims, Ms. Ameena Saeed Hasan. Both ofthem,
along with Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab
Hawa Bangura, have explained how Da'esh is openly
promoting the trafficking and enslavement of women
and children, thereby defying the most elemental norms
of international law.

However, trafficking in situations of conflict is
not limited to the context of terrorism. The conflicts
in Iraq, Syria, Libya and the Sahel - just to mention
a few - are leading to the mass displacement of
particularly vulnerable groups. That renders them
even more vulnerable to exploitation and trafficking
networks. Like many other countries, at the end of
2015, Spain adopted a new comprehensive plan to
fight human trafficking for the purposes of sexual
exploitation. Also in 2015, my Government strengthened
coordination between civil society organizations and
our State security agencies. We have worked to develop
a counternarrative to extremism as part of our national
strategy to fight violent extremism. My country has
put in place a communication strategy on cyberspace
that includes a counternarrative to radicalization. In
that regard, it is essential to monitor social networks in
order to prevent extremism and gain knowledge of any
radical content that could lead to trafficking.

The next five years afford us a historic opportunity
for us to place the fight against the worst forms of
exploitation at the top of the list of United Nations
priorities. While important progress has been made
in certain areas, much remains to be done. In that
regard, I would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his efforts in combating sexual exploitation and
abuse and his zero-tolerance policy regarding sexual
violence, which in some cases is perpetrated by Blue
Helmets. I would like to conclude by stating that my
country will resolutely support all efforts to ensure that
perpetrators are brought to justice and that they serve
their sentences. Let us strengthen our efforts to achieve
that goal. That is what I ask of everyone today.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Council.


