Mr. Kayobosi (Uganda): At the outset, I bring
warm greetings from our Minister for Foreign Affairs,
The Honourable Sam Kutesa, and convey his apologies
for not being able to come and participate personally
in this important debate due to other State duties.
He conveys his greatest appreciation to the United
Kingdom presidency for the invitation extended to him
to participate in this important debate on a topic that is
so critical to Uganda.

My delegation greatly appreciates the briefings
delivered earlier by the Secretary-General and
other briefers.

Trafficking in persons in conflict situations is
perhaps one of the most challenging evils that the world
is currently confronted with, and the organization of this
open debate by the delegation of the United Kingdom,
under its presidency of the Security Council, is very
timely in providing an opportunity to Member States to
share insights into how the root causes of this scourge
and the challenges being confronted in countering it
can be effectively addressed.

Uganda happens to be in a region that has
experienced a lot of conflict, which has exacerbated
the problem of human trafficking in the region. The
conflicts in our region have made the majority of
our people, particularly women and children, more
vulnerable to organized criminal networks that engage
in human trafficking to destination countries for mainly
forced and cheap labour, sexual exploitation and, in
some cases, slavery.

A number of reports have recently revealed some
of the most horrific experiences of women and girl
children who have been trafficked in some of the
destination countries, where they end up being sold
as objects. These trafficked persons, particularly
women and girls, have endured untold torture and
sexual abuse at the hands of their tormentors. Uganda's
delegation deeply deplores this phenomenon, which is
unacceptable, and calls for the concerted efforts of the
international community to decisively confront it.

As rightly pointed out in the concept note before
us (S/2017/198, annex), the link between trafficking in
persons, organized crime and terrorism is increasing
in magnitude and scope, as clearly demonstrated in the
case of Libya, where the smuggling of migrants and
trafficking in persons continue to provide both direct
and indirect funding to armed and terrorist groups. This
is a clear example ofhow conflict situations, whose root

causes are multifaceted, have engendered that linkage
and made it thrive to unimaginable proportions, leading
to a further exacerbation of human suffering.
Trafficking in persons in conflict is also closely
intertwined with other transnational organized crimes,
such as money-laundering and drug trafficking. The
financial resources that accrue from human trafficking
enable money-laundering to thrive and in turn largely
contribute to funding terrorist activities. And the cycle
continues. It is therefore evident that this requires a
holistic approach that addresses the interconnectedness
of these vices to our societies.

It is imperative that Member States, with the support
of the international community, develop comprehensive
mechanisms that promote a coordinated approach to
addressing the root causes ofthis phenomenon. Needless
to point out, some of the root causes of such conflict
situations that enable human trafficking to thrive
include, but are not limited to, widespread inequalities
in the global economic environment, poverty, foreign
occupation in some situations, discrimination based on
religion, gender and race, and other vices. Addressing
such root causes and mitigating the enormous adverse
effects associated with this evil phenomenon requires a
holistic approach with the full support of the Security
Council and the entire United Nations system.

It is in that context that my delegation welcomes this
open debate and extends its full support to measures to
be developed to address this problem. Working together
through the United Nations system would help to send
a strong message to the perpetrators of these crimes
and to undermine and curtail the capabilities of their
networks to execute their criminal activities.

