Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): I thank Mr. Hardeep
Singh Puri, Permanent Representative of India, and
his country's presidency for organizing this open
debate. I also thank the Deputy Secretary General,
the Executive Director of UN-Women and the Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations for
their insightful presentations this morning.

I welcome the Secretary-General's most recent
report on women and peace and security (S/2012/732).
In the report, the Secretary-General calls for enhanced
women's participation and a stronger commitment to
addressing the challenges to women's engagement in
the prevention and resolution of armed conflicts and in
peacebuilding at all levels.

Twelve years ago, we adopted the landmark
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security in the Council. As a member of the Council
at the time and one of its core sponsors, Bangladesh
was closely associated with the adoption of that
historic document. That was our humble contribution
to ensuring the rights and role of women in peace
and security. Thereafter, several resolutions, such as
resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009), 1889 (2009) and
1960 (2010) were adopted to strengthen the process
initiated through resolution 1325 (2000).

There have been some developments in women,
peace and security, such as the steps taken to implement
the seven-point action plan on gender-responsive
peacebuilding, the adoption of the United Nations
strategic results framework on women and peace and
security and the civilian capacity review. Prevention
also gained an increased focus with the inclusion of the
protection of civilians in the mandates of 8 out of 16
peacekeeping missions.

However, women and girls still suffer violations of
international human rights, humanitarian and refugee
law, including forced displacement, constraints on
humanitarian access and sexual and gender-based
violence. Therefore, much needs to be done.

The core message of resolution 1325 (2000)
was to ensure women's equal participation at all
decision-making levels. In the United Nations context,
women's participation should be ensured through
achieving a 50/50 gender balance, with a special
emphasis on the recruitment of women at higher levels.
In general, more female military and police personnel
need to be deployed to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. For an adequate global balance, women
from the South should be considered with special
preference for such leadership positions. For all gender-
based violence, there should be a zero tolerance policy,
and all incidents of such violence must be unequivocally
condemned.

The participation of women in mediation and
peacebuilding efforts needs to be enhanced. In 2011,
out of 14 United Nations peace negotiations, only four
included woman delegates. As agreements without
gender-sensitive provisions can limit the opportunities
for women to achieve basic security, as well as their
political, economic and social empowerment, the
gender dimension of mediation should be clearly and
consistently articulated. It is also important to ensure
measures to improve security for women in elections.

Poverty, the struggle and rivalry for resources,
socioeconomic injustices and forced occupation lie at
the heart of conflicts. They create a breeding ground
for such social scourges as conflicts, including violence
against women and girls, increase. The impact of that
violence not only weakens the safety and security of
women and girls but also tears the entire political,
economic and social fabric. Therefore, we need to
prevent conflict and establish sustainable peace.

When we talk about the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), we see the presence of women's
civil society organizations at the grass-roots level.
They can help implement peace agreements, ensuring
the protection of women's human rights defenders in
conflict and post-conflict settings and integrating
women's and girl's security into the priorities set
during transitions, such as drawdowns of United
Nations missions. We strongly believe that our debate
and discussion should transcend boundaries and reach
grass-roots women, who sometimes lack even the
language to express their agony. That has to be done
through people's empowerment - the empowerment
of distressed people, particularly women at the grass-
roots level.
In Bangladesh, from our experience of nation-
building, we have embraced a perspective of
women's empowerment and developed a model that
our Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina calls a "peace
model". The central message conveyed in the model
is the empowerment of people, including women and
vulnerable groups, through a focus on seven interlinked
issues. The model advocates empowering people by
eliminating hunger and poverty, by providing them
with skills, education and training, by including the
excluded, by eliminating all forms of discrimination,
by providing decent jobs, by guaranteeing participation
in governance, and by ending terrorism. I am pleased
to note here that at its sixty-sixth session the General
Assembly adopted resolution 66/224, entitled, "People's
empowerment and development", and we have proposed
a follow-up draft resolution in the current session of the
General Assembly. We seek Members' support for it.

Women occupy top political leadership positions
in our country, from the Prime Minister to ministers
of many important ministries. The Constitution of
Bangladesh guarantees the equality ofmen and women,
within the broad framework of non-discrimination on
the grounds of religion, race or gender. The Government
has adopted the National Policy for the Advancement
of Women and the National Action Plan for the
Advancement of Women. The Women's Development
Implementation Committee, headed by the Minister of
Women and Children Affairs - basically the Prime
Minister - monitors the implementation of policies for
women's empowerment. The result is highly positive.
To cite just one example, the enrolment of girls in both
primary and secondary schools exceeds that of boys,
helped by a waiver of tuition and the provision of
stipends for girls in the secondary level.

The Government has enacted laws to protect
women against domestic violence, and is currently
implementing a number of innovative projects for
developing women's capabilities. In order to involve
women in decision-making processes, the Government
has adopted a quota system for women in the national
Parliament and in recruitment for our civil service
jobs - alongside direct election and open competition.
It also expanded effective gender-based budgeting in
20 of the country's ministries. It has been providing
microfinancing, mostly to women, and has started
providing small business enterprise loans to women-
run small and medium-sized enterprises at preferential
rates.

In the maintenance of international peace and
security, we take pride in our modest contribution
of troops and police to United Nations peacekeeping
missions. We have made the necessary provisions
to recruit women in the police and military. We are
pleased that we could deploy two full contingents of
all-female formed police units to the United Nations
peacekeeping operations in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and in Haiti. We are committed to
continuing our contribution of women to operations for
the maintenance of peace and security. I am pleased
to report that our all-male troop contingents are fully
briefed on gender issues and we have zero tolerance for
sexual misconduct.

In conclusion, I reiterate that we in Bangladesh
have been making our best efforts to ensure women's
empowerment and participation in all spheres of our
lives. We know that much more needs to be done. We
are willing to replicate in our national policy any good
practices that we learn about from around the world,
and we are similarly ready to share our experience with
others.

