Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the 10 member States of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), namely, Brunei
Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao People's
Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar, the
Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and my own country,
Viet Nam.

We express our sincere thanks to the Bolivian
presidency for convening this important debate. We
also extend our appreciation to the Secretary-General,
the Executive Director of UN-Women Executive and
the other briefers for their insightful statements.

ASEAN member States share the view that
women's equal, full and effective participation is of
great importance at all stages of peace processes, given
their necessary role in the prevention and resolution of
conflict, peacebuilding and peacekeeping, as embodied
in resolution 1325 (2000) and many subsequent
resolutions. In that regard, we are pleased to inform the
Council that, inNovember 2017, ASEAN leaders adopted
a joint statement on promoting women and peace and
security in ASEAN. In that statement we encouraged
the integration of a gender perspective in all conflict
prevention initiatives and strategies, which must ensure
the full participation of women in peace processes as
well as encourage the inclusion of the women and peace
and security agenda in policies and programmes for the
protection of women and girls from sexual and gender-
based violence before, during and after armed conflict.
That also includes the creation of greater and wider
spaces for participation in peacebuilding and post-
conflict reconstruction processes.

While welcoming the positive progress achieved
in the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda, we all see that challenges
persist. Women continue to be excluded from, and
underrepresented in, peacebuilding and negotiation
processes. Violence, intimidation, discrimination
and gender stereotypes, inter alia, impede women's
engagement and contributions. In the face of that
reality, Member States, United Nations entities, the
relevant international and regional organizations and
other stakeholders need to redouble their efforts to
promote women's empowerment and increase women's
involvement in economic and political spheres,
particularly in decision-making processes. Such efforts
may include, but are not limited to, awareness-raising,
capacity-building, education, training and the exchange
of best practices.

Within the United Nations system, ASEAN looks
forward to greater recruitment and promotion of women
from developing countries, so that gender parity and
equitable geographical representation can advance
hand in hand. At the regional level, ASEAN is fully
committed to the promotion of gender equality and
women's empowerment as a means of contributing to
long-lasting peace and prosperity. We have continued
to adopt a wide range of frameworks in that regard. In
2017, ASEAN leaders adopted the Action Agenda on
Mainstreaming Women's Economic Empowerment.
Among other things, the Agenda will address the
barriers that impede efforts to maximize women's full
economic potential, increase women's representation
and leadership roles in the workforce and encourage
public and private-sector collaboration to create more
opportunities for women in business.

ASEAN attaches high importance to gender-
mainstreaming across all three pillars, namely, the
political-security, economic and socio-cultural pillars.
The ASEAN Declaration on the Gender-Responsive
Implementation of the ASEAN Community Vision
2025 and the Sustainable Development Goals reflect
our high-level political commitment to ensuring the
realization of a people-oriented and people-centred
ASEAN, where all women and girls are able to reach
their fullest potential. To that end, ASEAN member
States will intensify efforts to promote women's
leadership and economic empowerment; eliminate
gender-stereotyping and violence against women and
protect and empower women in vulnerable situations.
At the national level, ASEAN member States have
made great efforts to increase public spending and
investment in social services, notably on education and
health, which serve to address the gender inequality
gap and contribute to sustainable and inclusive growth
in the region.

ASEAN also gives high priority to strengthening
collaboration and collective efforts with international
and regional partners on promoting the role of women in
building and sustaining peace. On that note, we welcome
the fourth annual ASEAN-United Nations Regional
Dialogue on Political-Security Cooperation, held under
the theme "Women, Peace and Security - The Role
of Women in the Prevention of Violent Extremism".
In addition, ASEAN, in partnership with UN-
Women, launched the ASEAN HeForShe campaign
in conjunction with the 16 Days of Activism against
Gender-Based Violence campaign. The campaign seeks
to raise awareness about gender equality in the ASEAN
region, promote a culture of respect for women and
girls and mobilize the participation of men and boys as
advocates for gender equality.

We face increasing and unprecedented threats in
today's world. Peace and security are essential to the
achievement of sustainable development. As partners
in development, peace and security, women play an
indispensable role at all stages of peace processes,
from conflict prevention and resolution to post-conflict
recovery and sustaining peace. In that regard, ASEAN
renews its commitments and will work closely with
other Member States, the United Nations and regional
organizations to further advance the women and
peace and security agenda at the global, regional and
national levels.

