Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): Georgia aligns itself with
the statement just made by the observer of the European
Union. I should like to make some additional comments
in my national capacity, but at the outset let me first
thank the French presidency for having organized
this important debate and also thank Ms. Bangura,
Ms. Giammarinaro and Ms. Davis for their statements
earlier this morning.

Sexual violence in conflict is one ofthe most serious
human rights violations that we deem to be a threat to
peace and security. Effectively combating violence
against women and girls and protecting women's rights
and fundamental freedoms has become a key issue in
the maintenance of international peace and security.

Much has been done at the global level in order
to increase the protection of women in conflicts. In
October 2000, the Security Council adopted landmark
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security. It plays a crucial role in our joint efforts,
together with the follow-up resolutions addressing the
same topic, including resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888
(2009), 1960 (2010), 2106 (2013), and the most recent
one, resolution 2242 (2015).

Although resolution 2242 (2015) does not explicitly
talk about the trafficking of women and girls, it does
acknowledge that acts of sexual and gender-based
violence are part of the strategic objectives and ideology
of terrorist groups, used as a tactic of terrorism and as
an instrument to increase their power.

We welcome the recent report by the Secretary-
General on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2016/361)
as well as the statement by the President of the Security
Council of December 2015 on human trafficking
(S/PRST/2015/25), which identifies the link with sexual
violence and stresses the need to deter, detect and
disrupt trafficking in persons, in particular by violent
extremist groups. We look forward to the Secretary-
General's report on progress in better implementing
existing mechanisms to counter trafficking in persons.

The Government of Georgia spares no effort to
develop and implement higher standards for the full
protection of women's rights. We fully recognize
the benefits of enhancing women's leadership and
participation in decision-making in conflict-resolution,
prevention and management processes. As an
illustration of our strong commitment, in 2012 Georgia
adopted its national action plan on women and peace
and security for the period 2012-2015 and became one
of the first countries to have a separate policy document
on that important topic.

Gender-specific violence is part of the bigger
picture related to conflict and insecurity. In that regard,
let me draw the Council's attention to the human rights
and humanitarian situation in the occupied territories
of Georgia, which represent black holes where no
international monitoring mechanisms are allowed to
operate or have access to. Unfortunately, protecting
women's rights continues to be a serious challenge as
well. Women in the occupied territories continue to
suffer from grave violations of their fundamental rights
and freedoms, such as the freedom of movement and
the right to education and other civil, social, economic
and cultural rights.

Worldwide, including the Middle East and West
Africa, conflict and post-conflict situations often
provide favourable conditions for human trafficking
and sexual violence. In order to prevent sexual violence
against women, special attention needs to be paid to
prevention. Georgia shares the view that, as stated in
the global study on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000),

"[e]ffective conflict prevention must therefore
start from an understanding of the broad and deep
insecurities that permeate women's lives prior to
conflict, and the ways that pre-conflict structural
inequality can facilitate violence and insecurity."

With the aim of raising awareness among
peacekeepers, the Ministry of Defense of Georgia has
included gender-related issues and United Nations
resolutions in special training courses for peacekeeping
predeployment. The topics cover violence against
women, prevention and protection in operations,
a gender perspective in reconnaissance and peace
operations and general fulfilment and consideration of
the relevant Security Council resolutions.

In conclusion, let me reiterate our commitment to
further contribute to our joint international efforts to
prevent and combat conflict-related sexual violence
and human trafficking.

