Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): As a representative
of a country of seasoned peacekeepers, I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening today's
debate on what we see as the critical issue of women
in peacekeeping.

We are speaking today over lunchtime because it
is important that the Action for Peacekeeping pledges
and the Secretary-General's reform agenda on United
Nations peace operations be acted upon. The targets
for increasing the number of women in peacekeeping
at every level are significant. That means ensuring that
we apply a gender perspective and empower serving
women, in order to improve the actual effectiveness of
United Nations peacekeeping across the globe.

Despite some progress, we in Ireland remain
concerned about the rate at which we are succeeding.
The uniformed gender-parity strategy, gender
mainstreaming and the introduction of technical
expertise are of course all very welcome, but the
fact remains that we are still falling short. We need
to understand why, and we need to do something
about that.

With over 60 years of United Nations peacekeeping
experience, the longest unbroken record of any Member
State, Ireland well knows the importance and urgency
of ensuring increased female participation. The
presence of women peacekeepers challenges traditional
gender norms: it challenges them for the better. It also
means that local women find it easier to engage with
peacekeepers, not least in preventing sexual exploitation
and abuse. Nonetheless, we recognize that our women
peacekeepers are trained for the most dangerous of
situations, and it should not even be questioned that
they are capable of performing the same tasks as their
male colleagues. Every role in the Irish Defence Forces
is open to both men and women.

Ireland's Defence Forces has initiated its own
gender, diversity and inclusion office and developed its
own action plan on resolution 1325 (2000). We firmly
believe that making positive, practical and quantitative
changes to increase the number of women peacekeepers
is essential. However, we are also conscious that that
is not a panacea to the inequality that persists in
peacekeeping. Put simply, one cannot just add women
and stir. We very much recognize the need for broader
cultural and structural shifts in security organizations
and institutions across the board.

To put it in concrete terms, our own Defence Forces
are actively implementing gender adviser roles across
their headquarters. We have gender focal points to
back that up, including in all overseas deployments.
We have also implemented family-friendly policies,
such as shortened or shared overseas deployments and
the semesterization of professional military courses.
Those are designed to benefit both men and women, of
course, but also to address the obstacles that can inhibit
women's active and meaningful participation.

However, we are not stopping there. Going beyond
what we are doing ourselves, we are also working
with our partner peacekeeping Member States. We are
asking them to nominate women for the training that
we provide. In our next pledged training, over one third
of those participating will be women. We see that as
progress, but the job is not yet done.
We recognize the United Nations own efforts
in mainstreaming gender, including through fully
resourced senior gender advisers in its own United
Nations operations across the globe. The Department of
Peace Operations gender-parity strategy holds mission
leadership to account for meeting gender-related goals.
That is how it should be. We want to see that the full
value of women peacekeepers' skills and training is
realized, and that our valuable women peacekeepers
are not sidelined, or that their work is confined to so-
called women's issues. Acting on those commitments
should bring about the structural and institutional
transformation that we all want to see. All of those
kinds of issues are the type on which we would shine
a light should Ireland be lucky enough to be given a
non-permanent place at this table in the Security
Council 2020 elections.

In conclusion, our own President, Michael D.
Higgins, has called on all of us to act "as conscious
agitators", who must work to "place the dignity and
participation of women and girls' rights at the heart
of our actions globally". Quite frankly, we need to
do better. We need to do better to ensure women's
participation in peacekeeping, not only because it
makes peacekeeping better but, put simply, because it
is our right.

