Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): The need to
fully involve women in all efforts in the area of peace
and security was recognized in the Beijing Platform for
Action. Security Council resolution 1325 (2000)
provides the necessary momentum and concrete
recommendations for implementation in that respect.

The Secretary-General's first report in response
to resolution 1325 (2000) again placed strong emphasis
on the need for women to be actively involved in all
decision-making processes relating to armed conflict.
There is ample evidence that effective peacemaking,
peacekeeping, peace-building and post-conflict
reconstruction, as well as the delivery of humanitarian
assistance, greatly benefit from the active participation
of women. Shifting the perception of women as victims
to women as participants is, therefore, at the core of
change in the issue before us today.

However, and in spite of important advances,
women continue to be both disproportionately affected
by armed conflicts and disproportionately uninvolved
in decisions related to them. In the key area of
participation, progress is still very slow. We continue
to believe that the United Nations itself can and should
lead by example in order to galvanize this process and
that the posts of Special Envoys and Special
Representatives, as well as other senior operational
positions, are of crucial importance in this respect.

Resolution 1325 (2000) has been widely
disseminated and is known to a large constituency.
Nevertheless, we are certainly still far behind the goals
that we had set for ourselves in that resolution. Our
annual debate must be an exercise of stock-taking and
of identifying the areas where action is most urgently
needed. The practical work on implementation must be
carried out throughout the year, on a consistent and
regular basis. It seems, therefore, important to establish
mechanisms of mainstreaming resolution 1325 (2000)
into the daily work of the Council. The proposal made
by the European Union to designate a focal point for
that purpose seems to us a very valuable contribution
in that respect.

In the area of criminal prosecution of gender-
based violence, very significant progress has been
made. The ad hoc Tribunals have made historic
contributions to international jurisprudence, in
particular through the Akayesu case before the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, and
increased awareness around the globe that sexual
violence will not go unpunished.

The Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) and its supplemental documents
criminalize gender-based and sexual violence
committed as war crimes and crimes against humanity.
Applying the relevant provisions of the Rome Statute
in individual cases before the Court is instrumental not
only in providing redress to victims but also in
advancing the law at the international level. Perhaps
even more importantly, the entry into force of the
Rome Statute and the commencement of operations of
the ICC provide the legal and political incentive for
States to include definitions of these crimes in
domestic legislation and to apply them in their courts.

In spite of all these important developments,
there is still the risk that gender-based and sexual
violence is neglected in proceedings before Courts, not
least because they often involve considerable
difficulties and sensitivities. It is, therefore, important
to reinforce the message that sexual violence will not
go unpunished, in particular because those forms of
violence are some of the most commonly used and,
sadly, most effective ways of terrorizing entire
communities and populations.

In order to prevent gender-based violence in
armed conflict, the vigorous promotion and protection
of human rights of women and girls must hold centre
stage. Report after report, including the one before us
today, have made it clear that the effects of armed
conflict on women are particularly grave where a
culture of Violence and discrimination against them
existed prior to an armed conflict.

The gender-based early warning indicators in
conflict prevention, such as gender-specific migration
and rising violence against women, may indeed alert us
to horrors to come in armed conflict. But they also
reflect deep-seated forms of discrimination against
women; indeed, they are indicators of the level of
discrimination against them. To effectively prevent or
fight the excesses of gender-based violence in armed
conflict, discrimination and violence must also be
addressed at a much earlier stage.

United Nations action in this area can be effective
only if we keep our own house in order. Gender-based
violence in United Nations-led operations - in
particular in peacekeeping, where the population
concerned is likely to be particularly vulnerable -
should never occur and must never be condoned. We
welcome the ongoing efforts aimed at preventing such
acts, which do great damage to the goals set forth in
resolution 1325 (2000).

