Ms. Diaz (spoke in Spanish): I should like to
thank the members of the Security Council for this
opportunity to participate in the open debate and the
delegation of Japan for inviting me to describe the
situation in East Timor, in particular the role of women
in peacebuilding. I represent Rede Feto, a network of
women's groups that is present throughout the country.
On 28 April, to the surprise and dismay of all the
people who have been working so hard to consolidate
peace in East Timor, armed conflict broke out again.
The crisis was caused by bad governance, weak
government institutions, corruption, a lack of respect
for basic human rights and the lack of empowerment,
which leads to disappointment in youth, who were the
main actors in the conflict. Innocent citizens lost their
families and their scant possessions. For example, a
woman and her six children were burned alive inside
their house, merely because she was the relative of a
controversial minister. Many couples are forced to
separate temporarily for their security as a result of the
North-South conflict. Thousands of students have had
to give up their studies for lack of security or because
schools have been burned down or merely because they
come from the north of the country.

In the struggle for reconstruction, we women
have played and continue to play a crucial role.
Members of Rede Feto have tried to mediate between
the two parties to the current conflict. We made the
men sit down at the table, and we invited them to talk
to each other. Right now, we are engaged in talks, both
with the head of the rebels as well as with the leaders
of the armed forces to bring about a meeting between
them, so they can discuss the possibility of putting an
end to hostilities. In collaboration with other civil
society organizations, we are also meeting and working
with youth gangs in towns and refugee camps to find
out what these boys and girls need in peacetime. These
boys and girls have tremendous problems. They need
education, work, hope and self-respect.

The fact that the conflict flared up again shows us
that there are at least five important elements involved
in preventing future outbreaks of violence. First, there
is the participation of women and youth, who have
been significantly marginalized in the decision-making
processes. Their inclusion is particularly urgent,
because young people, specifically, young men, are the
main perpetrators of the current conflict, having been
manipulated in large part to pursue violent acts that
were initially carried out by the rebels, the police and
the military.

Secondly, the treatment and resolution of trauma
is necessary for everyone, in particular, to avoid that
the wounds of trauma suffered will create another
dangerous situation.

Thirdly, we need economic security. We have to
create work opportunities for all male and female
persons, in particular, for young people and women.

Fourthly, we need justice. We must bring before
the courts all the perpetrators of the acts of violence
that took place this year. We must resolve the 2,500
pending cases, most of which involve sexual or
domestic violence.

Finally, we need security. It is urgent that
international police forces throughout Timor-Leste be
enlarged, particularly in the context of the upcoming
elections to be held in 2007.

To achieve long-term peace and stability in
Timor-Leste, we must invest in education and promote
a culture of peace and gender balance. It is particularly
urgent to strengthen the Vulnerable Persons Unit, a
Governmental and civil society mechanism that
provides support to victims, particularly those who
have suffered gender-based violence. It is equally
necessary to create a parliamentary committee that will
monitor gender balance. Similarly, I would like to
voice my great satisfaction at the very significant
gender content of the recent assessment mission of the
United Nations to Timor-Leste. I hope that the
recommendations of the Secretary-General's report
will be implemented and that the organizations that
work with women's groups, such as the United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM), will be
adequately funded.

In view of the foregoing, we have the following
recommendations to make. We call upon the United
Nations to re-evaluate its activities during the two
years when it was in charge of the Timor-Leste
Government, in order to identify the weak points that
made the flare-up of violence possible. We call upon
the United Nations to ensure that all information about
Timor-Leste is transparent and accessible to civil
society, so that there is a balance between the
information available to the Government and that
available to the population. The United Nations must
set up formal mechanisms for consultation that will
enable women and young people of both sexes to be
heard. They need the support of women's organizations
and women journalists in carrying out activities to
disseminate information, to build peace and reform
communities.

