Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): At the outset, I would like
to note that this statement was supposed to have been
delivered by the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs,
Ms. Viola Onwuliri, but, as the meeting was postponed
and rescheduled for today, I am very happy to deliver
this statement on her behalf.

On behalf of my delegation, Mr. President, I
should like to join other speakers in commending your
leadership of the Security Council for this month.
We also commend your initiative of organizing this
debate on women and peace and security. We wish
also to commend the delegation of Guatemala for the
presidential statement (S/PRST/2012/23) that it put
forward under its presidency.

We thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report on the subject (S/2012/732). We
also thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson for
his introductory remarks this morning, as well as Under-
Secretaries-General Michelle Bachelet and Herve
Ladsous, and Ms. Bineta Diop for their statements.

The Council adopted resolution 1325 (2000), which
was a milestone achievement towards the recognition
of the importance of women's equal participation and
full involvement in the maintenance of peace and
security, including conflict management, peacekeeping
and post-conflict peacebuilding. It is particularly
significant that this debate is breaking new ground
by focusing on the specific role played by women's
civil society organizations in the areas of conflict
prevention, resolution and recovery. We are delighted
to see Ms. Diop involved in this activity for so long.

It is common knowledge that women seldom
or hardly ever initiate violent conflicts, yet they
bear a great burden on various levels: physical,
psychological, economical, social and political. Their
suffering is compounded by their exclusion from key
decision-making processes that could potentially lead
to peace and stability.

Today's discussion affords us the distinct
opportunity to reflect on our achievements so
far, but more importantly to make an assessment
of outstanding requirements to realize those objectives.
As the Council strives to ensure that the provisions
of the women and peace and security agenda are
integrated into its work, it stands to benefit from the
unique grass-roots perspectives that women's civil
society organizations could provide. In that regard,
we acknowledge the progress made in the promotion
of women's rights in conflict prevention, resolution
and peacebuilding, as demonstrated by the increase in
the number of dedicated implementation frameworks,
strategies and coordination mechanisms.

We believe that more needs to be done to create an
enabling environment for the participation of women in
all stages ofthe peace process. Such efforts to create the
right conditions for ensuring women's full participation
should include increasing their participation and
representation in preventive diplomacy and in conflict
resolution and peacebuilding initiatives. They should
also include strengthening the capacities of the relevant
Government institutions and women's organizations
involved with conflict and post-conflict issues.

Nigeria recognizes the central role of UN-Women,
working in close partnership and collaboration
with the Special Representatives of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and for
Children and Armed Conflict, respectively. The gaps
and challenges hindering the full implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) are indeed substantial.
National, regional and international actors must
rededicate themselves to addressing them. We believe
that developing and implementing national action
plans constitutes a viable strategy for fulfilling the
obligations under resolution 1325 (2000).

As a signatory to the Dakar Declaration of the
Economic Community of West African States, Nigeria
has committed itself to accelerating the national and
regional implementation of that important resolution.
Nigeria is also committed to fulfilling its obligations
under the African Charter of Human and Peoples'
Rights on the rights of women in Africa. Violence,
poverty, lack of access to education and health care,
and limited economic opportunities all combine to
undermine the role of women and girls in conflict
prevention, peace negotiations and peacebuilding. It is
therefore necessary that we develop and take measures
to address these inherent obstacles.

Promoting women's equality and empowerment
is, in our view, one of the best ways to address the
root causes of conflicts and thereby prevent them. We
recognize the relevance of and relationship between
the Council's preventive diplomacy initiatives and its
women and peace and security agenda.

We remain committed to improving the status
of women in all parts of Nigeria and to enhancing
their vital and meaningful participation in conflict
resolution. Nigeria has over the years proved its
consistent commitment to the achievement of women's
empowerment and gender equality. Gender equity and
equality have gained a high degree of prominence in
Nigeria's national development agenda. At the level
of legislation, for instance, the Gender and Equal
Opportunities Bill, as a means to further enhance
women's equal access to social and economic activities
and resources, is now before our National Assembly
for consideration. The Bill seeks to domesticate the
provisions of the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women and the
protocol to the African Charter of Human and Peoples'
Rights on the rights of women in Africa.

In compliance with those principles and the
provisions of the various gender frameworks, and as a
means to confront the challenges of meeting gender
equality and women's empowerment, Nigeria, under
the leadership of President Goodluck Ebele Jonathan,
has for the first time attained 33 per cent representation
for women in the decision-making process, appointing,
for instance, 13 women ministers in the federal Cabinet.
We have also attained 50 per cent representation in the
judiciary, with the Chief Justice ofthe Federation being
a woman for the first time in Nigeria's history.

In the area of assistance to women, Nigeria will
ensure the provision of social security and safety
nets that can guarantee a better future for vulnerable
members of society, especially women and children.
We look forward to the high-level review to be held
in 2015 on the progress made in the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) and will remain confident
that this and future initiatives of the Council will play
pivotal roles in national, regional and global strategies
on the women and peace and security agenda.

