Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank the Peruvian
presidency for organizing today's open debate on the
women and peace and security agenda relating to the
prevention of conflict-related sexual violence. We
express our appreciation for the Secretary-General's
annual report on this topic (S/2018/250). I would also
like to thank the briefers for their respective remarks.

Conflict-related sexual violence has indeed
become rampant in various conflicts and post-
coanict situations. We note that the Secretary-General's
report contains useful recommendations that could
form an important basis for addressing this serious
challenge. The recommendations will have particular
significance in the consideration of specific conflict or
post-conflict situations, and the Council could explore
ways and means of ensuring their implementation.

The Council should encourage or pressure,
as appropriate, all parties to an armed conflict to
fully comply with international humanitarian law,
particularly in relation to the protection of civilians.
The implementation by Member States of relevant
regional and international legal instruments for the
prevention, punishment and eradication of all forms of
violence against women would also contribute to the
national, regional and international response to victims
of sexual violence.

We note that progress has been registered,
including through the alignment of national legislation
to international standards and implementation of joint
communiques and actions plans in several Member
States, as indicated in the report of the Secretary-
General. This notwithstanding, sexual violence
continues to be used by belligerent parties in conflict
and post-conflict situations in different parts of the
world. In particular, extremist and terrorist groups,
such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, Boko
Haram and Al-Shabaab, are using it as a tactic ofwar to
terrorize civilian populations and achieve their strategic
objectives. The stigmatization faced by victims of
sexual violence and the challenges in their reintegration
process, as well as the impunity that the perpetrators of
this heinous crime enjoy, are indeed deeply troubling.

Therefore, there is need to redouble our efforts in
preventing conflict-related sexual violence, providing
the necessary support to victims and fighting impunity.
In this regard, the three-pillar priorities identified by
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Patten
could serve asthe basis. In addition, the recommendations
of the Secretary-General to the Security Council
contained in his latest report, particularly in relation to
engagement with relevant parties to an armed conflict,
exploring the use of periodic visits to address the issue,
as well as the possibility of accelerated deployment of
protection advisers, could form part of a comprehensive
framework for preventing and addressing conflict-
related sexual violence.

The Council should also continue to attach the
utmost importance to preventing and addressing the
root causes of conflict. Furthermore, measures aimed
at reducing the vulnerabilities of civilians, including
by enhancing the capacity of peacekeeping missions,
as well as the Council's using all the available tools at
its disposal, will be critical. In this regard, the Council
could explore the recommendation of the Secretary-
General to include sexual violence as part of the
designation criteria on a case-by-case basis, particularly
in the context of the use ofmass rape and other forms of
sexual violence by extremist and terrorist groups.

In post-conflict situations, the Council could
further strengthen its peacebuilding efforts aimed
at rebuilding national capacity and institutions,
particularly the capacity of security and judiciary
services to prevent and punish conflict-related sexual
violence and addressing its root causes. That will enable
the Council to fight impunity and bring perpetrators to
justice, as well as to ensure the non-occurrence of such
grave crimes.

We have noted from the report of the Secretary-
General that some of the information concerns
incidents of conflict-related sexual violence that
are linked, or alleged to be linked, to Government-
affiliated forces. In our View, such information should
be communicated to the relevant authorities in a timely
manner with a view to investigating and verifying its
objectivity, accuracy and reliability. That, we believe,
would contribute to fighting impunity and providing
the necessary assistance to victims of conflict-related
sexual violence and their families.

Finally, I would like to conclude my remarks by
reaffirming the commitment of Ethiopia to working
with all the relevant actors, including the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, in
preventing conflict-related sexual violence and fighting
impunity in this regard.

