Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We welcome
the convening of this debate under your auspices,
Mr. President. We are grateful to the Secretary-General
for his insightful briefing and for his strong leadership in
advancing the agenda on women and peace and security.
Pakistan welcomes the statements made this morning by
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, the Executive Director
of UN Women, and by Ms. Navanethem Pillay, United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. We
also appreciate the important civil-society perspective
shared with us by Ms. Brigitte Balipou.

Appreciable progress has been made over the years
in promoting the agenda on women and peace and
security, but much remains to be done to fully translate
the objectives of resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent
decisions of the Council into more tangible results on
the ground. We do have a solid and comprehensive
normative framework in our hands; resolution 2122
(2013), adopted today, further consolidates it. We
should now focus on its implementation, which is key
to overcoming operational gaps and challenges, and
to delivering on our promise of peace and security for
women, who are the most vulnerable group in armed
conflicts. In conflicts, violence against women is
widely used as an instrument of war. Urgent steps must
be taken to stop gender-based and sexual violence and
end impunity for perpetrators of sexual crimes.

Pakistan fully supports the objectives of the agenda
on women and peace and security. We have played an
important role in advancing those goals as a major
participant in United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Pakistani women peacekeepers have served as police
officers, doctors and nurses in missions in Asia, Africa
and the Balkans. Gender sensitization is a mandatory
part of our peacekeepers' training.

We speak on the subject from experience, and
our feedback to the Security Council is positive. The
Council's decisions and direction are helping women
caught in situations of armed conflict. We believe
that the Council should continue to address those
issues in accordance with its primary responsibility
of maintaining international peace and security. The
mandate for women and peace and security pertains to
conflict and post-conflict situations on the Council's
agenda. We should all adhere to the parameters of that
mandate, which has set new standards, established new
practices and raised expectations for improving the
situation of women. Diverging from it would dissipate
the consensus around the issue.

The rule of law is one of the key elements in
the promotion of the agenda on women and peace
and security. Gender-responsive transitional justice
and reform of the justice and security sectors are
prerequisites for promoting and protecting women's
rights in conflict and post-conflict situations. The
rule of law and transitional justice should continue to
be developed so as to protect the rights of women in
such situations. The emphasis should be on addressing
the root causes of conflicts. Chronic conflicts and
relapses into conflict blight some societies, countries
and regions and keep them in a state of perpetual
instability. The resolution of conflicts is, therefore, the
best way to promote and protect the rights and interests
of women in conflict situations. We must harness all
our resources to prevent and resolve conflicts.

Given women's strong stake in peace and in how
peace is negotiated, kept and consolidated, the role
of women as peacemakers and peacebuilders must
be integrated into the various stages of engagement,
outreach and decision-making. Increased integration in
pursuing the agenda on women and peace and security
is useful for enhanced coordination and for avoiding
duplication and the overlap of efforts and resources.
However, too much integration can also carry the risk
of losing the original focus on the primary objectives of
that agenda. Including peripheral issues in the Council's
work relating to women and peace and security would
not only blur the focus but affect implementation.

The discourse on women and peace and security
has followed two broad trends - women seen primarily
as victims of conflict, on the one hand, and women
as stakeholders and drivers of change, on the other
hand. Both aspects are interrelated and require equal
attention. As the Secretary-General said this morning,
it is important that women's representation around the
peace table be enhanced. But to enable women to act as
agents of change, we need to invest more in capacity-
building and training and in the economic and political
empowerment of women.

We believe that the real value of thematic discussions
in the Council is to help identify the related aspects
in the Council's country-specific work in practical
terms. It is there that the gaps in implementation lie
and it is there that action is needed the most. As the
Council saw first hand during its recent mission to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, there are
continuing challenges in implementing the women and
peace and security agenda on the ground. A proactive
rather than a reactive approach is required to enhance
implementation. Considering women as agents of
change is an affirmation of such a proactive approach.

We hope that some of the practical recommendations
contained in the resolution adopted today will infuse
new momentum and vigour into our collective efforts
to promote the women and peace and security agenda.

