Mr. Pildegovies (Latvia): Allow me to start by
commending the South African presidency of the
Security Council for convening this debate. I also wish
to thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and the
other briefers for their remarks and valuable input in
today's discussion.

Latvia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the observer of the European
Union (EU).

The empowerment of women and their inclusive
engagement, as well as gender equality on the whole,
are not a whim of our century but rather the building
blocks for a more peaceful, secure and sustainable
world. Gender equality comes with a positive spillover
effect that benefits our children, families and entire
communities and steers us closer to achieving the
Sustainable Development Goals. The Security Council's
resolutions on women and peace and security are
important for the integration of a gender perspective
within a broader security context, thereby representing
an important step towards conflict prevention and
resolution and sustainable peace. Hence, we need to put
the utmost effort into reducing the disparity between
women affected by conflict and the role assigned
to women in conflict prevention and resolution. It is
often overlooked that women's participation in conflict
prevention and resolution has a meaningful effect on
the outcome of the process. In the meantime, special
attention must be paid to the needs of women and girls
in post-conflict situations, including physical security
and access to sufficient health care. The same applies
to eradicating all forms of sexual violence and abuse in
conflict. That must remain high on our agenda.

As we approach the twentieth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000), Latvia reiterates its strong
support for the women and peace and security agenda,
recognizing that the close link between global security
and the equal participation of women should not be
underestimated. We applaud the Secretary-General for
his strong commitment to putting women's meaningful
participation high on the United Nations agenda. We
have put gender equality high on our own agenda, and
we are in the process of finalizing a national action
plan on women and peace and security. As a State
member of the European Union, we contribute to the
implementation ofthe agenda through the EU's internal
and external policies. Many of the guidelines have
already been integrated into our national system. Other
examples of improved gender equality include recent
parliamentary elections, during which the highest
number of women ever were elected to the Parliament
of Latvia - 31 per cent, which is also slightly above
the EU average. Moreover, 16 per cent of the soldiers
in Latvia's national armed forces and 30 per cent of our
State police force are women. We are proud that Latvia
has the highest percentage of women researchers in
Europe, at 52 per cent.

On a greater scale, Latvia is pleased to recall that
a robust plan of action on gender and gender-based
violence was adopted under its recent presidency of
the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT). That can be considered
to be the first intergovernmental agreement that aims
to improve the meaningful participation of women in
disarmament forums, as well as outlining the practical
steps that States parties will take to implement the
provisions of the ATT with regard to carrying out risk
assessments based on gender-based violence criteria. We
call on all States parties to the ATT to strongly adhere to
that plan of action. At the same time, we recognize that
gender equality is not just about the number of women
in positions of power. It is crucial that gender equality
and the participation of women go beyond the numbers
and ensure that the voices of women and girls are heard
and integrated into decision-making processes. That is
what we must strive for so that our tomorrow may be
better than our today.

