Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): I would like to
thank Executive Director Mlambo-Ngcuka, Assistant
Secretary-General Mulet, Special Rapporteur Chaloka
Beyani and civil society representative Suaad Allami
for their insightful briefings.

The Republic of Korea welcomes the progress made
at the normative level to support the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda since the
adoption ofthe landmark Council resolution 1325 (2000).
We also note with appreciation the continued efforts of
the international community to ensure the protection of
women and girls in situations of armed conflict, as well
as their participation in conflict prevention, conflict
resolution and peacebuilding. However, Korea is of
the View that much greater efforts are needed to meet
the commitments set out in resolution 1325 (2000).
As pointed out by the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2014/693), in the past year there was a series of
heinous crimes linked to conflict, leading to new mass
displacements, humanitarian catastrophes and serious
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights. Many of the Victims of such increased violence
in conflict are women and girls. Over 51 million people
were forcibly displaced as of 2013 - the highest
number since the end of the Second World War - and
three quarters of the refugee and IDP population are
women and children.

Displaced women and girls continue to face
tremendous threats and violence in the conflicts
in Afghanistan, the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, South Sudan and
Syria, among other places. Even more troubling is the
fact that many armed groups bent on violent extremism
are deliberately targeting women and girls. In addition,
the high risk of violence that women and girls face
during the period of displacement usually continues
until the process of return and reintegration. Their
vulnerability increases when gender is compounded
with other factors, such as disability.

Having said that, I would like to make a few
observations on the protection of displaced women and
girls.

First, it is imperative to tackle sexual and gender-
based Violence committed against displaced women
and girls. Sexual exploitation, forced marriage and
human trafficking are just a few of the human rights
abuses perpetrated against displaced women and girls.
Preventive measures, including heightened security at
camps for refugees and internally displaced persons
(IDP), as well as accountability for perpetrators,
must be ensured. There should be zero tolerance for
sexual harassment and abuse by any troops, including
Government forces, non-State armed groups and even
peacekeepers, who take advantage of the victims'
vulnerability. In that regard, we express our particular
concern over the persistent allegations of the sexual
exploitation of women and girls in IDP camps in
Somalia.

Secondly, displaced women and girls are not only
Victims, but also survivors and leaders. They often show
remarkable courage and resilience in protecting and
supporting their families. Currently, one in four Syrian
refugee families in Egypt, Lebanon, Iraq and Jordan
are headed by women struggling to take care of their
traumatized families. We should strengthen their self-
reliance by supporting their economic empowerment,
legal rights and education.

Thirdly, it is critical to ensure that the voices of
displaced women and girls are heard. In order to
reflect their special needs, they must be included in
decision-making procedures and play a leadership role.
The participation and representation of refugee and
IDP women must be improved during the process of
developing, implementing and evaluating policies and
programmes that affect their lives.

Lastly, improving compliance with international
law serves as a comprehensive measure for the protection
of displaced women and girls. We urge all parties to
armed conflict to uphold their obligations regarding
international human rights and humanitarian law. We
need to close the implementation gap of international
law through awareness-raising, capacity-building and
follow-up legislation.

Displaced women and girls in conflict constitute
one of the most vulnerable groups. They are too often
invisible, forgotten and overlooked. Our empowerment
and humanitarian support is essential for them to
overcome the hardships they face. As part of our
efforts to support the implementation of this important
agenda, the Republic of Korea is supporting Afghan
women refugees by making a multi-year contribution
to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees for the returnees. We also made efforts
to improve the status of women refugees and asylum
seekers in the Republic of Korea, based on our refugee
act. Such efforts include support for their livelihoods,
vocational training and social and cultural adaptation.

As the 2015 high-level review of resolution 1325
(2000) approaches, the Republic of Korea reaffirms its
steadfast commitment to the protection of women and
girls in situations of armed conflict.

