Ms. Graham (New Zealand): New Zealand
welcomes this opportunity to focus on women and
peace and security, and once again reaffirms its strong
support for resolution 1325 (2000). New Zealand is
committed to seeking ways to enhance and strengthen
the implementation of the resolution through our
development cooperation programmes, peacekeeping
efforts and domestic policies.

Resolution 1325 (2000) remains the
internationally accepted blueprint for a multifaceted
response to the issues facing women in conflict and
post-conflict reconstruction. It has played an
invaluable part in highlighting the important role of
women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts.

New Zealand welcomes increased Security
Council attention to the reality of sexual violence
during conflict and to the need to end impunity for
crimes, including sexual violence. Sadly, sexual
violence continues unabated in conflict and post-
conflict situations around the world. It is a gross
violation of women's human rights, which further
exacerbates the vulnerability of women and girls in
times of conflict. Sexual violence is an attack not only
on the dignity of women but also on the peace process:
it raises significant barriers to reconciliation and peace.
New Zealand attaches great importance to the need to
eliminate such violence.

We welcome the advances that have been made in
these areas by the United Nations and Member States.
We strongly endorse the Secretary-General's
forthcoming report on all forms of violence against
women. New Zealand has actively supported General
Assembly resolutions on the intensification of efforts
to eliminate all forms of violence against women and
on eliminating rape and other forms of sexual violence
in all their manifestations, including in conflict and
related situations.

New Zealand's response to resolution 1325
(2000) is proactive and includes a number of specific
steps to encourage implementation both domestically
and internationally. Here are four examples of that.

First, New Zealand is committed to encouraging
women to undertake assignments on peacekeeping
missions. Women from the New Zealand Defence
Force, New Zealand Police and our wider society are
an integral part of New Zealand's regional, United
Nations and other international peacekeeping efforts.
This includes women working in high-risk areas, such
as Afghanistan, and on operational missions, such as in
Timor-Leste. Furthermore, up to 30 per cent of all of
our police peacekeeping deployments are female -
among the highest rate in the world.

Secondly, the New Zealand Defence Force has
worked hard to integrate women at all levels and in all
trades of the Force, including combat. Its diversity
strategy recognizes the full value of integrating women
into the Defence Force and the benefits of having
women at more senior levels.

Thirdly, New Zealand attaches priority to
promoting women's rights through the delivery of
official development assistance. Gender-based violence
is a core focus area for New Zealand's International
Aid and Development Agency (NZAID). NZAID
supports a number of initiatives in the Pacific region
aimed at empowering women and mitigating their
exposure to violence. For example, New Zealand is
currently involved in the Pacific Prevention of
Domestic Violence Programme, a joint initiative of
NZAID, the New Zealand Police and the Pacific
Islands Chiefs of Police organization. It seeks to tackle
domestic Violence and influence social change.

Fourthly, the NZAID conflict and peacebuilding
policy identifies women and girls in conflict and post-
conflict areas as a priority group for attention and
specifically includes the need to provide support for
the full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). It
highlights the gender impact of conflict and the role of
women in peacebuilding.
In conclusion, New Zealand commends you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity for this debate on
resolution 1325 (2000), but we agree that progress
towards achieving its major goals has been slow and
uneven. There remains an urgent need to increase
political commitment and resources to ensure its
systematic implementation.

