Ms. Taha (spoke in Arabic): I would like to thank
the delegation of the United States for having convened
this meeting and for having invited me to speak to the
Council.

It is with great sadness, gratitude and hope that I
address the Security Council. As a Yazidi survivor, I
am a descendant of one of the world's oldest religions,
which is today threatened with extinction. I am here to
talk about the practices against us by what is called the
Islamic State/Daesh - trafficking in persons, sexual
enslavement of women, recruitment of children in war,
displacement and the genocide of our society. I am here
to tell the Council my story, of what happened to my
society, which has lost hope for life and is now moving
into unknown territory. I am also here to tell the Council
about the more than 3,400 women and children who
have been abducted. I am here to tell the Council about
this global terrorist organization, the Islamic State,
which is trying to destroy our culture and take away
our freedom. I am here to talk about the nightmare that,
just overnight, turned the life of an entire community
upside-down.

Prior to 3 August 2014, I was living with my family,
my brothers and sisters in the pretty, quiet village of
Kocho. But then the Islamic State attacked our region,
and we found ourselves facing a true genocide. A large
number of those forces of evil had come from different
States with weapons, equipment and uniforms. Their
aim was to eliminate all Yazidi existence under the
pretext that - according to them - we were infidels.
The Islamic State did not just come to kill us, women
and girls, but to take us as war booty and merchandise
to be sold in markets for a bit of money, or even for
free. Those crimes were not committed without design,
they were part of a premeditated policy. The Islamic
State came with the sole aim of destroying the Yazidi
identity through force, rape, recruitment of children
and destruction of all of our temples, which they took
control of. All of this can be interpreted only as an act
of genocide against our identity, in particular against
Yazidi women. Rape was used to destroy women and
girls and to ensure that they could never again lead a
normal life.

On 15 August, elements from the Islamic State

summoned us to the village school. They separated the
men from the women and children. I saw them from the
second floor of the school as they took away the men
and killed them. Six of my brothers were killed, while
three survived the mass killing. We, the women and
children, were taken by bus from the school to another
area. They humiliated us along the way and touched us
in a shameful way. They took me to Mosul with more
than 150 other Yazidi families. There were thousands
of families in a building there, including children who
were given away as gifts. One of the men came up to
me. He wanted to take me. I looked down at the floor. I
was absolutely terrified. When I looked up, I saw a huge
man. He was like a monster. I cried out that I was too
young and he was huge. He kicked and beat me. A few
minutes later, another man came up to me. I was still
looking at the floor. I saw that he was a little smaller. I
begged for him to take me. I was terribly afraid of the
first man. The man who took me asked me to change
my religion. I refused. One day, he came and asked me
for my hand in what they called "marriage". I said that
I was ill; most women were menstruating because they
were so scared. A few days later, this man forced me
to get dressed and put on my makeup. Then, on that
terrible night, he did it.

He forced me to serve in his military company. He
humiliated me daily. He forced me to wear clothes that
barely covered my body. I was not able to take any more
rape and torture. I decided to flee, but one of the guards
stopped me. That night he beat me. He asked me to take
my clothes off. He put me in a room with guards, who
proceeded to commit their crime until I fainted.

I was finally able to escape three months after my
abduction. I currently live in Germany. Thankfully,
Germany provided me with the necessary medical
attention, for which I thank that country.

But this is not just about my suffering; it is about
collective suffering. Daesh gave us two options:
become a Muslim or die. And even men who agreed to
become Muslims out of fear for their lives were killed,
their women enslaved and their children recruited.
Sixteen mass graves have been discovered so far. One
of them contains the remains of 80 women - including
my mother - whom they did not desire and so decided
to kill. More than 400,000 thousand people have been
displaced, and over 40 per cent of our land is still under
the control of Daesh.

Our liberated areas are uninhabitable because of
the devastation, and Yazidis have no confidence that
they will ever live on their land again. Just last week,
more than 70 Yazidis drowned during their perilous
journey to Europe. Thousands are looking for a way
out, and a great many see migration as their only option.
The Islamic State has made Yazidi women fodder for
human trafficking. To the Council today, I lay out our
demands, and I very much hope that humanity has not
yet come to an end.

First, we demand the liberation of the more than
3,400 women and children still suffering and living
under the mercy of the merciless.

Secondly, we demand that the incidents that took
place, including the murders, collective slavery and
human trafficking, be defined as genocide. I am asking
the Council today to find solutions to the issue of
genocide before the International Criminal Court.

Thirdly, demand the liberation of all of our areas,
including my own village of Kocho, so that we can bury
our dead. We demand the establishment of international
protection for the Yazidi areas and for the minorities
under threat so that, one day, we can return to our regions
and live in peace. I also request the allocation of an
international budget, under international supervision,
to compensate the victims and rebuild the region.

Fourthly, we ask that members open up their
countries to my community. We are victims and we
have the right to seek a safe country that safeguards
our dignity. Every day, hundreds of people risk their
lives. We entreat you today to consider the resettlement
option for the Yazidis and the other minorities under
threat, especially the victims of human trafficking, as
Germany has done.

Fifthly, and finally, we ask the Council, please, to
put an end to Daesh once and for all. I suffered the pain
they inflicted on me. I saw their evil. All those who
commit the crimes of human trafficking and genocide
must be brought to justice so that women and children
can live in peace - in Iraq, Syria, Nigeria, Somalia
and everywhere else in the world. These crimes against
women and their freedom must be brought to an end
today.

