Mr. Le Hoai Trung (Viet Nam): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the 10 member States of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
namely, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia,
the Lao People's Democratic Republic, Malaysia,
Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and my
own country, Viet Nam.

We commend the Nigerian presidency for convening
today's open debate on women and peace and security
with a focus on sexual violence in armed conflict. We
thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2014/ 181)
and we thank him and his Special Representative for
their briefings to the Council.

Sexual violence in both armed conflict and post-
conflict situations continues to affect and threaten the
well-being of women and girls in many regions of the
world. Indeed, sexual violence in armed conflict and
post-conflict situations leaves lasting scars for nations,
communities and, above all, its victims, and may have
a significant bearing on the durability of peace and

prospects for sustainable development.

ASEAN strongly condemns all forms of violence
against women and girls, in particular sexual violence.
We condemn the use of rape and other sexual violence
as a tactic of war to deliberately target civilian
populations. ASEAN therefore welcomes the important
actions taken by the Council to address that atrocious
crime, including its landmark resolutions 1325
(2000), as well as subsequent relevant resolutions and
presidential statements. Those actions, together with the
enormous efforts by the entire United Nations and the
international community, have helped raise awareness
about the catastrophic impact of sexual violence in
armed conflict and post conflict situations, which
needs to be addressed in a comprehensive manner.

In that connection, ASEAN is of the view that
the international community, with the United Nations
at the centre, must redouble its efforts to address
the three interrelated dimensions - namely, the
prevention of sexual violence, care for its victims and
the empowerment of women.
First, the prevention of armed conflict-related
sexual violence must be addressed at its root cause,
that is, the prevention of armed conflicts itself.
Mechanisms for conflict prevention and resolution
must be implemented. States must promote the rule
of law, justice, good governance, democracy, poverty
eradication, sustainable development, gender equality
and respect for and protection of human rights at
national and international levels as the means of
tackling the root causes of conflicts.

Secondly, breaking the silence and raising awareness
are essential to the prevention of sexual Violence and
the protection of victims. Political discussion and
initiatives at international and regional levels are of
crucial importance to send the message of intolerance
toward sexual violence, and that must combined with
measures aimed at raising awareness at the grass-roots
level. Therefore, eliminating sexual violence requires
not only sanctioning perpetrators, but transforming the
mindset of societies and the underlying economic and
social conditions that allow sexual violence to thrive.

Thirdly, victims of sexual violence must be
provided with multisectoral assistance and services
tailored to their specific needs. They must be protected
against stigmatization and exclusion, and given the
opportunity and capability to re-engage and reintegrate
with their communities.

Fourthly, the full and equal political, social and
economic participation of women is key to addressing
sexual violence at its roots. The inclusion of women
and their priorities in all aspects of a peace process is
crucial. Attention should also be paid to both civilian
women and those having served in the armed forces
or been involved in military activities during their
reintegration efforts.

Lastly, while States bear the primary responsibility
for preventing and addressing conflict-related sexual
violence, the United Nations system has a special role
to play, as mandated by its Member States. ASEAN
recognizes the constructive role of civil society, the
media and other stakeholders, many of whom are
working hard to protect the rights and interests of
women under difficult situations, and encourages them
to work closely with States and the United Nations
system in those common endeavours.

ASEAN represents a region where women have a
long tradition of playing an important role in national
economic and political life, during conflicts, in
conflict resolution, as well as in post-conflict national
reconstruction.

ASEAN is strongly committed to the prevention
and fight against sexual violence, particularly sexual
violence in armed conflict. All ASEAN member States
are parties to the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women and have
supported all the relevant Security Council resolutions
and presidential statements related to women and peace
and security, including those on sexual violence in the
context of armed conflict.

At the regional level, ASEAN has established the
ASEAN Intergovernmental Commission of Human
Rights and the ASEAN Commission on the Promotion
and Protection of the Rights of Women and Children.
Initiatives like Stop Violence Against Women and
workshops on women, security and peace in ASEAN
are also important steps undertaken by ASEAN to raise
awareness on the issue.

Much remains to be done to address the challenges
faced by women and girls in armed conflicts, as well
as in post-conflict situations. ASEAN reaffirms our
strong support and commitment to the implementation
of the relevant Council resolutions to end sexual
violence whenever and wherever it occurs.

