Mr. Lavald (Norway): In the interest of time, I
will give a brief version of the statement that is being
circulated.

The adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) has
undoubtedly increased our awareness and recognition
of women's contributions to peace and security around
the world. Today a growing number of State leaders,
policy makers, non-governmental organizations and
international organizations are advocates of gender
mainstreaming in conflict management and conflict
prevention. The United Nations has played an
important role in mobilizing for such new norms and
standards.

As important as it may be, the time is ripe to
move beyond the mobilizing phase and look at where
we stand in terms of implementation. In that regard, I
wish to thank Under-Secretary-General Guehenno and
Senior Gender Adviser Smythe for their reports this
morning.

Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) requires
that the Secretary-General's reports to the Security
Council address the gender aspects of the conflict
situations in question. The analysis recently completed
by the Office of the Special Adviser on Gender Issues
and Advancement of Women reveals that two thirds of
reports make no, or only one, mention of women or
gender issues. That is not good enough. There is a need
to place greater emphasis on gender issues in all
reports to the Council. Furthermore, we call on the
Security Council to mainstream elements of resolution
1325 (2000) into all future resolutions on peace and
security.

Mr. Guehenno informed us this morning of the
status of the work by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations with regard to its efforts to mainstream
gender issues into the training and planning for
peacekeeping operations. In that regard, Norway hopes
that the recruitment process for the gender focal point
position within the Department will be completed as
soon as possible. A single position can be only a first
step. Further strengthening and, not least, upgrading is
necessary.

Gender issues form an integral part of Norway's
United Nations training courses and programmes. We
will work actively to make sure that a gender
perspective is included in all relevant training
activities. We also welcome and strongly support the
Secretary-General's policy of zero tolerance with
regard to United Nations personnel engaging in acts of
sexual exploitation and abuse.

Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) urges
Member States and actors involved in negotiating and
implementing peace agreements to adopt a gender
perspective on their work and to invite women to the
peace table. In Afghanistan women have been invited
to be members of the Constitutional Commission,
which is crucial in order to ensure the rights of women
in the new Afghan constitution. It was interesting to
note during the public consultation process that
respondents put the rights of women high on the
agenda of the new constitution. However, there are
many challenges ahead.

In Sri Lanka the parties to the peace process
agreed to establish a mechanism to ensure a central
role for women and to have women's issues properly
incorporated into the peace process. To support that
important initiative of the parties to the peace process
in Sri Lanka, Norway has appointed a senior adviser on
gender issues to the Sri Lankan peace process.

What more can Member States do to speed up the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)? A good
basis for that is found in the recommendations included
in the report of the Secretary-General on the follow-up
to the resolution (S/2002/1154) and in the proposals
put forth in the report commissioned by the United
Nations Development Fund for Women entitled
"Women, war and peace". Those reports paint a painful
picture of the situation of women in conflict zones, but,
just as important, they also paint a promising picture of
the potential of women as peace-mongers and peace-
builders.

Gender issues have a bearing on both peace and
development, and women's active involvement is an
asset in the promotion of both.

