Mr. Thorns (Germany): I would like to thank
Azerbaijan, which holds the presidency of the Security
Council this month, for organizing today's open debate.
My thanks also go to the Secretary-General, Ms. Pillay
and Ms. Balipou for their very insightful briefings. I
congratulate Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka on her appointment,
and I thank her for her first briefing to the Council.

Germany aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union.

Germany welcomes the detailed analysis of
the Secretary-General's report (S/2013/525), which
identifies many achievements in the women, peace and
security agenda in the past years. We also share the
concerns addressed in the report, such as an increasing
focus of the international community on women as
Victims of armed conflict, instead of on their role as
actors in peace processes and agents of change in all
spheres of society.

We therefore welcome the fact that resolution
2122 (2013), adopted earlier today, emphasizes the
positive role that women can and will play if they are
fully included in all aspects of conflict-prevention and
peacebuilding. The potential of women in building a
sustainable peace cannot be underestimated, nor can
the imminent problems for post-conflict societies if
those who bear the burden of reconstruction on the
ground are not fully included in decision-making.

We should ask ourselves what more Member
States and the United Nations itself could do to ensure
an implementation of the full agenda as laid out in
resolution 1325 (2000).

Transitional justice and the rule of law are crucial
elements for the prevention and solution of conflicts.
We therefore very much welcome the theme of today's
debate, which emphasizes the importance of gender-
sensitive systems. Women need to be part of all truth
and justice commissions, and women's concerns
need to be addressed in those fact-finding bodies. At
the same time, perpetrators of violence, crimes and
human rights Violations need to be held accountable
for their actions. That is the most promising way to
promote lasting reconciliation. Germany has supported
several projects in Rwanda and Burundi to train female
police officers on the prevention and investigation of
sexual and gender-based violence. In Cambodia and
Uganda, Germany has supported the access of women
to the justice system through legal and psychosocial
counseling.

Secondly, 43 countries have adopted national
action plans on women, peace and security. That is
an important first step. However, any progress on
the ground depends on the political will to abide by
those commitments. The German national action plan,
which was adopted last year, covers the four focus
areas set out in resolution 1325 (2000) and additionally
includes the areas of preparation for peace missions
and the prosecution of crimes. The implementation
of the action plan is monitored by an inter-ministerial
working group in collaboration with representatives
from civil society. German diplomatic missions abroad
have been instructed to support the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), for example by advocating
for the inclusion of women in local crisis prevention,
conflict management and post-conflict peacebuilding
or by supporting gender-sensitive projects on the
ground.

Thirdly, the Security Council, for its part, should
start to systematically mainstream women's issues
in all relevant spheres of its work. Whenever the
Security Council mandates or renews United Nations
missions or requests briefings from envoys and special
representatives, women, peace and security should
be a central part of all considerations. We welcome
that the resolution adopted today contains provisions
addressing that.

Fourthly, women protection advisers play a central
role in monitoring and reporting to the Council, training
mission personnel on preventing and responding to
sexual Violence, and engaging in dialogue with conflict
parties. Although we welcome the deployment of women
protection advisers to the missions in South Sudan and
Mali, the remaining women's protection advisers in
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire and the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur,
which were already mandated by the Council, should
also be deployed as rapidly as possible and, where
necessary, be included in mission budgets.

Germany will continue its support to UN Women
and all other relevant actors, including civil society
organizations, to ensure that women's roles and their
important contribution in conflict resolution and
peacebuilding are adequately taken into account.

