Mr. Buffin (Belgium) (spoke in French): Belgium
fully associates itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union, as well as with the
statement delivered by the representative of Switzerland
on behalf of the Group of Friends of the Protection of
Civilians.

We also thank the Chilean presidency of the
Security Council for having convened this open debate
today, and the various speakers for their contributions.

Current events once again make this debate even
more relevant. The situation in Syria and Iraq continues
to deteriorate, and every day children are the first to
suffer the effects of conflict. In Nigeria, the cynicism
of the Boko Haram terrorists seems to have no limits.
After kidnapping several hundreds of young students,
who are still being held, Boko Haram recently used
young girls wearing suicide vests to commit attacks. In
those three countries in conflict, women and girls are
being targeted by Boko Haram, in Nigeria, and by the
psuedo Islamic State, in Iraq and Syria, precisely owing
to their gender. It is the responsibility of all of us to
ensure that the horrific crimes that are being committed
do not go unpunished. We need to help the States in
question to prosecute the perpetrators of such acts
and, on the basis of the principle of complementarity,
to allow international justice to be administered, in
particular by the International Criminal Court.

We can guarantee the protection of civilians
in conflict only if we involve women more in the
design of strategies, policies and specific missions
for that purpose, as well as in their comprehensive
implementation. We encourage the Security Council
and the contingent-contributing countries to ensure
greater involvement by women. Furthermore, beyond
conflicts and the protection of the civilians affected,
greater involvement by women in social life - whether
through equal access to justice, education, the means to
earn their subsistence, the right to vote or the effective
right to have access to the highest political and economic
offices - would facilitate the reduction of community,
religious and social tensions. Every one of us must rise
to meet that goal and that challenge.

For its part, in 2013, Belgium put in place its
second national action plan on women and peace
and security for the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). Consistent with the fundamental goals
of the resolution, the plan sets up concrete policies
that allow Belgium - at home or abroad, through
participation in the activities of the United Nations and
other international organizations - to better promote
and protect the rights of women and increase their
participation in the decision-making process.

Better protection of civilians in armed conflict
requires better anticipation of the occurrence of
conflicts. Similarly, in an armed conflict, every
United Nations official should know exactly what his
or her responsibilities and obligations are, as well as
those of the Organization as a whole. Good internal
and external coordination of United Nations action is
also required for that purpose. Through the objectives
designed to meet those needs, the Secretary-General's
Human Rights Up Front initiative makes a significant
contribution to the protection of civilians. The same
can be said about the recommendation made by the
Secretary-General in his 2013 report on the protection
of civilians, which called for

"work[ing] together to establish a common United

Nations system to systematically record civilian

casualties as part of broader efforts to monitor and

report on violations of international humanitarian
and human rights law, drawing on good practice and
expertise from within the United Nations, Member

States and civil society." (S/2013/689, para. 71)

The fight against all forms of Violence against
women, especially sexual violence, and the
condemnation thereof has been a foreign policy and
development-cooperation priority in Belgium for nearly
20 years. Therefore, under the Belgian presidency ofthe
Donor Support Group of the International Committee of
the Red Cross (ICRC) and the Red Crescent, Belgium
has decided to work on that issue. The approach of
the ICRC in that area is particularly interesting and
worthy of note. As part of its action, the ICRC shifts
the burden of proof of the existence of sexual Violence
in situations of armed conflict and other situations of
violence. Acts of sexual violence are now presumed to
have taken place in such cases unless proven otherwise,
which enables the ICRC programmes to mainstream
that presumption in its response.

Belgium also wishes to emphasize the need to
provide peacekeeping missions with clear mandates to
protect civilians. The protection of civilians is one of
the core missions of the United Nations. However, in a
2014 report, the Office of Internal Oversight Services
highlighted the tendency in peacekeeping missions not
to use force to defend civilians under attack, despite
the fact that the use of force is legal and in accordance
with the Security Council's intentions. One explanation
for that state of affairs would be a lack of clarity in
mandates. By contrast, resolution 2098 (2013), on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which creates
a special Intervention Brigade and authorizes it to use
force to protect civilians, shows that with a clear and
specific mandate, a peacekeeping mission can truly
ensure the protection of civilians in armed conflicts.

The clarity of mandates is therefore fundamental
but not sufficient. There must be three other elements
in place - strong operational control of activities of
the contingents, clarity among the troop contingents on
the tactical approach, and a good working relationship
between the peacekeeping operations and the
humanitarian actors on the ground.

Finally, let me take this opportunity to reiterate
the support of my country for France's initiative in
favour of a voluntary limitation on the use of the veto
in cases of mass crimes and on the implementation of
the concept of responsibility to protect. This year is
the tenth anniversary of the official acceptance, during
the United Nations World Summit, by all Member
States of the responsibility of each State to protect
its population from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity. In that context,
we welcome the launch by the Secretary-General of
the Framework of Analysis for Atrocity Crimes. Like
the rigorous application of principles of international
humanitarian law at the heart of the legal obligation
to protect civilians in armed conflict, the effective
implementation of the responsibility to protect allows us
to ensure that children, women and men do not fall prey
to unnecessary suffering. Again, it is the responsibility
of each ofus, of each State, to ensure that that goal does
not fall by the wayside.

