Mr. Guehenno (spoke in French): In the year
since I briefed the Council on the efforts of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to implement
resolution 1325 (2000), we witnessed the historic
election in Liberia of President Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf,
Africa's first woman head of State. That election has
been a source of hope and inspiration to many women
and girls in Africa and beyond. In the same period,
Liberia adopted a law on rape to combat gender-based
violence; the women of Sierra Leone succeeded in
having laws adopted in the areas of human trafficking,
civil inheritance rights and property rights; and the
women of Timor-Leste submitted to parliament a draft
law on domestic violence. We should pay tribute to all
the women in those countries for their tangible efforts
to translate the goals of resolution 1325 (2000) into
reality. We in the international community have a duty
to extend to them our full support.

Despite those positive developments, challenges
and assaults on women's rights and gender equality
continue to be rife in every post-conflict situation. I
would like today to highlight three priority issues
facing peacekeeping missions as they endeavour to
provide support for women's participation in
transitional processes and beyond. Those issues require
the urgent attention of the Council.

First is the problem of insecurity, a threat which
many women continue to experience even after the
guns have fallen silent. In many societies violence
continues to be used as a way to control the movement
and actions of women and girls as they work to rebuild
their homes and communities. In Afghanistan, for
example, attacks on schools put the lives of girls at risk
when they attempt to exercise their basic right to
education. In Darfur, women and girls are raped when
they go to find firewood for cooking and heating. In
Liberia more than 40 per cent of women and girls
surveyed have been the victims of sexual violence. In
the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo over 12,000 rapes of women and girls have been
reported in the last six months.

As we know, rape has long-lasting consequences
for women. Not only does it have very negative effects
on their health and psychological well-being, it also
places them at greater risk of contracting the AIDS
virus, stigmatizes them socially and limits their
freedom of movement - which affects their ability to
fulfil their frequent role as household breadwinners, a
responsibility that many women in post-conflict
situations must often bear on their own. The
persistence of sexual violence is a basic indicator of
our failure to provide adequate security to human
communities in post-conflict situations.

The second priority - beyond the initial step of
supporting the participation of women in electoral
processes - entails the need for us to work to ensure
sustained support for women in the political arena in
order that they may be part of the decision-making
process. To date, the most notable successes in electing
women to political office have taken place in situations
where constitutional guarantees have been put in place
establishing quotas regarding the participation of
women. In that regard, I should like to refer to the
cases of Burundi and Afghanistan. No quota system
was in place for the most recent elections in Haiti, and
only five women won elective office. In Liberia only
14 of the 94 seats in the legislature were won by
women, while in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo women constitute only 8 per cent of the new
legislature. It is not enough to ensure that women are
elected. Their election - and women make up 30 per
cent of the Assembly in Burundi and 25 per cent of
Afghanistan's lower house - is a significant success,
but only the very first step in a lengthy process to bring
women into positions of responsibility. Let us not
forget that, in Timor-Leste, four female
parliamentarians had to leave office three months after
their election in 2002 because of the chauvinism they
faced and the difficulty of surviving in an environment
hostile to them in Parliament. Newly elected women
must be supported by their peers to help them establish
themselves and resist the pressures that may be brought
to bear against their full exercise of their parliamentary
activities.

The third priority is to amend and reform
discriminatory laws that undermine equality of rights
so as to enable the effective participation of women in
the peacebuilding process. In Burundi, the southern
Sudan and Cote d'Ivoire, women are unable to inherit
land. Even when such rights are guaranteed by law, as
they are in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
implementation of the law is often sporadic. That is
why, for many widows and female heads of household,
access to land is an essential precondition of economic
equality and of their ability to emerge from the
desperate economic situation of many post-conflict
societies. We must therefore continue to support all
legislative efforts to adopt national and customary
legislation to guarantee effective equality of rights for
women and girls in terms of access to resources and
economic rights.

(spoke in English)

I want now to turn to our collective
responsibilities. My Department has adopted a set of
very concrete strategies to support implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). We have developed a
comprehensive action plan whose implementation is
being monitored by my senior management team. We
are making policy guidance and training tools available
to peacekeepers and Member States. We have
developed operational guidelines for our mission
personnel to enable them to translate resolution 1325
(2000) into practice, and we have established gender
components in missions and at Headquarters to oversee
that work. We continue to invest in efforts to ensure
that our peacekeepers adhere to the highest levels of
professional conduct and discipline. As part of that
process, on 4 December in New York we will be
convening a high-level conference on sexual
exploitation and abuse by United Nations and non-
governmental organization personnel to take stock of
achievements to date and challenges in stemming the
problem.

Notwithstanding those necessary and important
foundation blocks, real gaps remain in our
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). In seeking
to transform our working culture, there are
undoubtedly pockets of resistance. We have made
progress, but some of our personnel have yet to
understand their own responsibility for implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) - that it is not the sole
responsibility of gender advisers, nor can it be just
outsourced to our United Nations partners. I also
recognize the need to build a critical mass of male
champions to advocate and support the translation of
our commitments to gender equality into practice. In
that regard, I believe that my department needs a senior
male envoy to support our political advocacy efforts.

Clearly, my Department can do better to
implement resolution 1325 (2000) and we are stepping
up our efforts to do so. Our Action Plan, and a policy
directive that I shall issue in the coming days to my
Department and all missions, provide the framework to
guide our future efforts. We count on all the Member
States to provide the support and resources required to
fully implement the directive.

Beyond the actions of my Department, some of
the outstanding challenges can best be addressed
through partnerships with Member States and our
broader United Nations family. For example, our
predominantly male profile in peacekeeping
undermines the credibility of our efforts to lead by
example in the host countries in which we are engaged.
We need Member States to nominate more women
candidates for senior civilian positions in missions.

Fewer than 2 per cent and 5 per cent,
respectively, of our military and police personnel are
women, yet our peacekeepers are increasingly required
to interact with women and men in the host country for
purposes of information gathering, screening during
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes, and monitoring elections processes, amongst
other things. To engage more effectively with the local
population, a greater number of women peacekeepers
must be deployed. That is an operational imperative.

We also recognize the need for stronger
partnership with United Nations agencies to sustain the
investments of peacekeeping missions during the
transitional period. Our experiences from Sierra Leone
and Timor-Leste have highlighted the need for a
smooth transitioning of gender-related programmes to
the United Nations country team, following the
completion of a peacekeeping mandate. Otherwise, we
risk creating a programmatic gap that can unravel the
modest gains made by peacekeeping missions.

Oftentimes, the only full-time and robust capacity
to support gender-related activities in the countries in
which we are engaged resides in the peacekeeping
mission. Our United Nations partners need to be on the
ground from the very beginning with the capacities and
resources required to support women in the wide range
of areas that fall beyond the scope and mandate of
peacekeeping missions.

Finally, we must continue to invest resources in
creating a stable and secure environment that will
allow women to restore dignity, normalcy and hope to
their lives in the post-conflict period. Programmes for
women's economic and political empowerment and to
support the education of girls can be sustained only
under conditions of security. That means that the
Member States must meet their obligations to
contribute sufficient troops to enable our peacekeeping
operations to deliver that much-needed security. I
5
count on the Security Council's support and
partnership in that process.

