Ms. Bolafios Perez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank you, Madam President, for
having organized this open debate on a topic of such
relevance to the work of the Council. We also thank
the main briefers for their participation and invaluable
presentations.

We note the report of the Secretary-General which
is the basis for our discussions (S/2014/693) and express
our special appreciation to the Republic of Argentina
for the lucid concept note prepared for this annual
meeting on women and peace and security (S/2014/693, annex). We also welcome the adoption of presidential
statement S/PRST/2014/21 this morning.

Today's debate gives us the opportunity to consider
the comprehensive implementation of the important
resolution 1325 (2000), given our firm belief in the
essential role women have to play in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts; promoting justice and
reconciliation; supporting demobilization, disarmament
and reintegration; and rebuilding national institutions,
all of which are essential pillars for building a lasting
peace.

It is undeniable that women and girls suffer the
most devastating effects that come with conflict, in
particular the increasingly widespread use of gender-
based violence, rape, sexual exploitation, sexual slavery,
forced pregnancies resulting from these deplorable
acts, and stigmatization in their communities. All of
these aspects affect their mental and emotional stability
and even threaten their lives.

All assistance provided to such women and girls
must take into account the trauma they have suffered
and continue to suffer as displaced persons, through
flashbacks, constant rejection and prolonged family
separation. There is therefore a major need for
counselling, but the road towards recovery also requires
efforts to restore normalcy to their lives. This includes
a job and the dignity won by earning one's own money
and the freedom to spend it, and education for one's
children, which in turn holds the promise of a better
future.

It should be underscored that a child's ability to
attend school, even in a bombed building or a refugee
camp, symbolizes having a system, a routine and a path
towards normalcy - recovering from and overcoming
trauma. Women should be empowered from girlhood,
with access to education, the certainty that their rights
are protected and promoted, and the knowledge that
they are part of any process affecting their welfare and
future.

We will not rest until we see the special needs of
women and girls on the ground receiving the special
and privileged attention they deserve, with the
active collaboration of the relevant agencies, funds
and programmes of the United Nations system and
Member States, with the support of non-governmental
organizations and civil society. In this context, my
delegation would like to acknowledge the important
work of UN-Women and the progress achieved to date
in mainstreaming gender throughout all activities on
the ground of United Nations missions. We urge them
to continue their valuable contribution to the challenges
at hand.

In the light of the fact that human rights abuses and
violations - including discrimination, sexual violence
and gender-based violence - can occur at various stages
of the displacement cycle, the primary challenge for
Member States, the United Nations and humanitarian
actors face is the need to ensure and improve a protective
environment for displaced persons. We reiterate that it
is the responsibility of Member States to protect their
populations, in particular displaced women and girls,
who are the most vulnerable.

In order to protect and improve the rights of
displaced women and integrate a rights-based approach
into national governance structures, there is a need to
step up the capacity-building of public institutions,
which often lie broken or weakened following a conflict.
This means ensuring that the practice of protection is
more consistent and effective; training national security
forces and raising their awareness; supporting local
civil society groups working on human rights and the
protection of displaced women; and advocating for the
rights of displaced women with relevant stakeholders.

We agree with the report of the Secretary-General
that the process of strategic reviews of United Nations
peacekeeping operations and sanctions and, in turn, the
review the peacebuilding architecture should guarantee
the inclusion of the commitments and priorities of the
women and peace and security agenda. The use of gender-
and age-disaggregated data remains indispensable to
ensure adequate attention is given to protecting the
human rights of women and girls, promoting their
empowerment and effectively implementing activities
that will lead to the full application of resolution 1325
(2000) and full respect for international humanitarian
law and human rights.

In conclusion, let me underscore how important it
is that gender equality and the empowerment of women
be placed at the centre of the post-2015 development
agenda, and that that goal should put an emphasis
on building peaceful societies and institutions, both
of which are central for realizing the commitments
undertaken on women and peace and security.

