Ms. Loj (Denmark): Let me begin by thanking
the delegation of Romania for having convened this
meeting, once again focusing the attention of the
Security Council on the indispensable role of women in
all efforts to build and maintain peace and security.

I would like to associate my delegation with the
statement to be delivered later by the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom on behalf of the
European Union.

Armed conflict affects women and men in
different ways. The scale and the character of the
violence committed against women and girls in conflict
situations is shocking. It is unacceptable and utterly
deplorable when rape, sexual abuse and HIV/AIDS are
used deliberately as weapons of war.

But women are not only victims. The resources
women possess are striking. In many cases women are
the sole providers and protectors of their families -
often under extremely difficult circumstances - in the
local community, in refugee camps or as internally
displaced persons. Their engagement must be at the
core of any peacebuilding initiatives and reconstruction
efforts.

Experience shows that the involvement of women
in conflict resolution and peace negotiations speeds up
the peace process and contributes to sustainable
solutions. It is important, however, to underline that the

early involvement of women in the peace process can
create a platform for women's further engagement in
the reconstruction and development of their countries.

Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) is
unique. It focuses on the need to protect the rights of
women. It also underlines the need to use the resources
possessed by women before, during and after a
conflict. Resolution 1325 (2000) has great potential
because it is comprehensive. The challenge is to
transform words into action. Unfortunately, the
challenge is as great today as it was five years ago.

Coordination between the various actors involved
and their civilian and military instruments and
capabilities must be improved. That applies to the
United Nations, to the multilateral and regional
organizations and to Member States, as well as to non-
governmental organizations. Denmark is convinced
that the Peacebuilding Commission can play a key role
in achieving that. It goes without saying that the
provisions of resolution 1325 (2000) will be important
guiding principles for the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission.

As Member States, we also have an obligation to
implement the resolution in the best and most effective
way. In June, the Danish Government launched a
national action plan for the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000). Denmark is firmly
committed to implementing all elements of resolution
1325 (2000). The action plan is the result of the fruitful
cooperation between Denmark's Ministry of Foreign
Affairs and its Ministry of Defence. It outlines a series
of political and operational actions engaging foreign,
defence and development cooperation policies, each of
which is of equal importance for the full
implementation of the recommendations set out in
resolution 1325 (2000).

We warmly welcome the system-wide action plan
for the implementation of Security Council resolution
1325 (2000) presented here today. The action plan
responds to the need for more systematic
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in all United
Nations activities related to conflict and for greater
coordination throughout the United Nations system.

The Secretary-General's report points out the
need for the formulation of strategies, actions,
programmes and enhanced inter-agency cooperation.
Denmark is especially happy to see that strengthened
commitment and accountability at the highest level in
the United Nations is one of the objectives. It is of
crucial importance that the United Nations - now and
in the future - demonstrates full commitment to the
action plan at all levels.

The report contains 12 areas of action, including
the full range of activities before, during and after
conflict. The issue of responding to sexual exploitation
and abuse by United Nations staff, related personnel
and mission partners is one of the key areas of action.
Sexual exploitation and abuse by peacekeeping forces
and other United Nations staff must be stopped. We -
the United Nations and Member States - need to
demonstrate firm action and prosecute the perpetrators,
who are violating not only our trust, but the trust of
those they were send to help and protect. The policy of
zero tolerance has to be implemented.

When resolution 1325 (2000) was adopted it was
a major accomplishment. However, the resolution will
truly benefit women living in conflict only when the
recommendations have had an impact on all areas of
intervention and cooperation. As is always the case at
the United Nations, the real challenge is to move from
good intentions and strong words on paper to concrete
results on the ground. That is always difficult, but it is
never impossible.

Denmark believes that national action plans are
the first step on the way. We urge other Member States
to systematize their efforts and develop national action
plans to ensure the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). The members of the Security Council could
lead the process and set an example.

Only by taking action can we make a difference
for the millions of women in conflict situations. Let us
take the responsibility upon ourselves to make the
resolution on women, peace and security a reality.

