Ms. Jobe-Njie (Gambia): I am deeply honoured
and humbled to address the Security Council on the
issue of women and peace and security, and resolution
1325 (2000), on behalf of the Vice-President and
Minister of Women's Affairs of the Republic of the
Gambia, Ms. Isatou Njie-Saidy.

First and foremost, my delegation would like to
take this opportunity to thank the Secretary-General for
his explicit report and the practical recommendations
therein on resolution 1325 (2000) (S/2010/498). We
also align ourselves with the statement that will be
delivered on behalf of the Group of African States.

Allow me at this juncture to recognize and
acknowledge the United Nations for taking bold steps
towards the reforms that gave birth to the new entity,
UN Women, inter alia, holistically providing for
improved collaboration and greater efficiency in order
to achieve a speedy and positive impact. In that regard,
we join other Member States in congratulating and
applauding the appointment of the dynamic lady sitting
next to me right now as head of UN Women,
Ms. Michelle Bachelet. We have no doubt that her level
of experience and dynamism will help to usher in a
new impetus, enhancing existing efforts of the United
Nations to promote gender equality, increase
opportunity for women and girls and tackle
discrimination and gender-based violence around the
world. Those efforts are being made in tandem with
commitments that were made at the twenty-third
special session of the General Assembly, entitled
"Women 2000: gender equality, development and peace
for the twenty-first century" (see A/S-23/10/Rev.1), in
particular the commitments concerning women and
armed conflict.

The Government of the Gambia, having
recognized the prevailing poor indicators for the social,
economic and health status of women and girls in
developing countries, has joined the rest of the
international community as signatory to several
relevant treaties and resolutions, including the 1990
Convention on the Rights of the Child, the Programme
of Action of the 1994 International Conference on
Population and Development, the 1995 Beijing
Platform for Action, the 2000 Millennium Declaration
and the Millennium Development Goals, the 2006
Maputo Plan of Action, the African Charter on Human
and Peoples' Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa,
as well as Security Council resolution 1325 (2000).

The various Security Council resolutions on
women and peace and security allude to the necessity
of ensuring the active participation of women in peace
processes, particularly in conflict prevention and the
protection of women from gender-based violence and
the use of sexual violence as a weapon of war, as well
as the promotion of women's and girls' rights during
and after conflicts and in post-war rehabilitation and
reconstruction. Furthermore, resolutions 1325 (2000)
and 1889 (2009) also call for the elevation of women
to leadership positions, while resolutions 1820 (2008)
and 1888 (2009) emphasize the importance of
prevention and protection from sexual violence as a
weapon of war.

As it seeks to fulfil the vital commitments
contained in these resolutions, the Government of the
Gambia, in collaboration with relevant stakeholders,
has embarked on a series of actions and has been
guided by the slogan "From commitment to action".
Key among these actions are the following.

First, the Gambia is actively participating in
conflict prevention, peace negotiations and
peacebuilding in affected countries in our subregion
and beyond. The Gambia has also maintained a central
role in peacekeeping missions at the subregional,
regional and international levels, and more than ever
before, the outstanding performance of our female
contingent has been widely recognized and applauded
by recipient countries.
Secondly, the Gambia has adopted, ratified and
enacted the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women, the African
Union Protocol on the Rights of Women in Africa, the
Trafficking in Persons Act in 2007, the Children's Act
in 2005 and the Women's Act in 2010.

Thirdly, the Gambia's validated Gender and
Women Empowerment Policy 2010-2020 has been
submitted to the Cabinet for approval before submission
to the National Assembly - our Parliament - for
enactment.

Fourthly, in line with relevant provisions
contained in Chapter IV, Section 3, of the Gambia's
Constitution of 1997, women have been proactively
involved in all spheres of national development, both
from the peaceful transition to the second Republic and
to date. The Gambia has the longest serving woman
Vice-President in Africa. Women have assumed key
ministerial posts in such areas as finance, justice,
education, health, tourism and culture - which is my
Ministry - and energy. The Speaker of our National
Assembly is also a woman.

Suffice it to mention that the Gambia, popularly
known as the smiling coast of Africa, has - knock on
wood - enjoyed relative peace and stability since
independence in 1965. As a result, it has served as a
safe haven to brothers and sisters from the subregion
fleeing from conflict. The Government of the Gambia,
together with its partners in its proactive efforts to
build the capacity of women, continues to sponsor
women counsellors from the National Women's
Council, the advisory organ of the Government on
women's issues, to attend international meetings on
gender and women's affairs, including on resolution
1325 (2000), in order to broaden their knowledge base.
It is worth mentioning, however, that no country
is immune to threats to absolute peace and that no
country is an island. In that regard, the Gambia
continues to use various traditional mechanisms, such
as the Council of Elders and religious and community
organizations, to enhance peace and participation,
prevent conflicts, support refugees, and continue to
promote and nurture peace and stability.

We are happy to inform the Council that the
Gambia is in the process of finalizing its national
action plan and is grateful to both the Economic
Community of West African States Gender
Development Centre and the United Nations
International Research and Training Institute for the
Advancement of Women for their support in that
regard. We call on other organizations, in particular
other United Nations agencies, to partner with us in our
efforts to realize the implementation of landmark
resolution 1325 (2000).

In conclusion, allow me to mention some
challenges that we expect to encounter on our way
forward. There is still a low level of awareness at all
levels of the existence and content of resolution 1325
(2000), which explains why the Gambia has yet to
attain a 50 per cent involvement of women in
peacebuilding and negotiation processes undertaken
pursuant to the resolution.

Secondly, as women attempt to take on new
political roles, they continue to be challenged by
traditional beliefs and values, certain sociocultural
factors and misguided religious interpretations. They
are further constrained by the limited nature of their
skills as they try to influence peacebuilding processes
in an effective manner, and sometimes they feel
threatened, reluctant to participate, especially if they
were victims of sexual violence.

But there is a way forward. National
Governments, as far as the Gambia is concerned, must
sustain the political will and momentum now being
given to women's empowerment and must satisfy the
need to establish gender-responsive budgeting, where it
is nonexistent, or strengthen it, where it does exist,.
Governments must strengthen donor coordination in
order to enhance funding for the implementation of the
action plan under resolution 1325 (2000). All Member
States are urged to conduct aggressive campaigns to
raise awareness at all levels on the content and
meaning of resolution 1325 (2000) and associated
resolutions.

Because setting indicators is crucial to monitor
progress and aid reporting, Member States should
receive assistance in the country assessments or
situational analyses they are conducting to obtain
baseline information with a view to developing, inter
alia, evidence-based policies, planning and target
setting. Standardized and functional coordination
mechanisms need also to be put in place, and common
strategies and indicators to facilitate subregional
collaboration and reporting on progress are also
crucial.

