Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): It is an honour
for my delegation to participate in today's open debate
on the fourth anniversary of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security. We associate ourselves with the statement
made by Canada on behalf of the Human Security
Network.

In today's conflicts, it is civilians - women and
children - who bear the brunt of gross abuses of
human rights. That notwithstanding, the time has come
for the international community not only to recognize
women as victims in conflicts, but also to take note of
the important role they play as key players in peace
processes. The point was made during the Conference
on Gender Justice in Post-Conflict Situations - held
by the United Nations Development Fund for Women
and the International Legal Assistance Consortium in
September 2004 - that we must strive to integrate
women's concerns more effectively into peace
processes worldwide and achieve full, equal and
effective participation by women in those processes.

Given the central role that women play in the
social, political and economic development of our
societies, we believe that it is logical and morally right
that the full realization of equal political and economic
rights for women must be treated as an essential
component of our collective approach to preventing
and resolving conflicts. In most cases, women do not
have access to resources, political rights, authority or
control over their environment. We therefore support
the Secretary-General's recommendation that resources
put into post-conflict phases should also cover
programmes aimed at women's empowerment. Our
own experience in South Africa has taught us that,
given a chance, women can bring an important and
much-needed perspective to all stages of peace
processes and peace-building.

My delegation believes that resolution 1325
(2000) remains a landmark document in the history of
the United Nations. The resolution calls for special
measures to protect women and girls from violence,
particularly rape and other forms of sexual abuse. It
also calls for the full inclusion of women in
international peace and security processes. In addition,
we believe that the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women provides
us with the guidelines necessary to respond to women's
needs in a comprehensive manner.

In the African context, we have realized that the
exclusion of women from political and economic
decision-making is a significant obstacle to the
realization of sustainable peace. The African Union has
thus taken steps and adopted legislative measures to
address that problem. South Africa is also making its
contribution to support those efforts. Recently in South
Africa, we hosted a group of women from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi to
share their experiences with South African women,
who - despite the fact that they were the most
vulnerable - managed to make their voices heard
during our political transition. The success of the South
African political transition is, in no small measure, a
result of the pivotal role played by women.

A number of initiatives have been put in place by
the international community to address the question of
gender mainstreaming, but we believe that more work
must still be done to ensure that all obstacles to
women's equality are eliminated. My delegation
believes that the full implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) requires the resolve of Member States. It is also
crucial, in our View, that partnerships be formed with
civil society to promote women's rights and
participation in peace processes. Gender experts and
expertise need to be included at all levels and in all
aspects of peace operations.

Women are victims of unbelievable atrocities and
injustices in conflict situations, and we need to put
more effort into the monitoring and reporting of such
atrocities. Those efforts must be complemented by
practical measures to end impunity and to bring to
justice those who are responsible for abhorrent crimes
against women and girls. In that regard, we believe that
States must adopt legislation incorporating human
rights and humanitarian and international criminal law
into their own legal systems.

My delegation is of the View that the
establishment of the International Criminal Court has
strengthened the international legal framework in
addressing such crimes against women and that it holds
the promise of meaningful accountability for gender-
based crimes against women during armed conflict.
However, for those measures to succeed, adequate
resources, gender expertise and training for all staff
and gender-sensitive programmes for victim and
witness protection are required.

We must uphold the objectives of resolution 1325
(2000). Women's rights must be protected, and the
obstacles to their equal participation and full
involvement in the maintenance and promotion of
sustainable peace must be removed. We can uphold
those objectives by eliminating all forms of gender-
based violence during conflict and post-conflict
situations. It is said that when women are safe, so are
nations, and when women feel secure, peace is
possible.

In conclusion, my delegation supports the report
of the Secretary-General before the Council
(S/2004/814), as well as all the initiatives undertaken
by the entities of the United Nations system and
Member States in implementing resolution 1325
(2000).

