Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, I would like to convey my thanks to the United
Kingdom for organizing this open debate, and to the
Secretary-General and the briefers for their inputs.

I align myself with the statement to be made by
the representative of Venezuela on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

The nexus between conflict-related situations
and human trafficking, sexual exploitation, forced
labour, slavery and other similar practices and their
cross-border dynamics have been well recognized and
acknowledged by the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2016/949) as a global challenge. But we all know
that the global and growing phenomenon and challenge,
with its acute humanitarian emergencies, is not the
cause; it is just a symptom.

Underlying factors contributing to the
phenomenon - particularly foreign aggression and
intervention, occupation, war and protracted conflicts,
political instability, terrorism, genocide and ethnic
cleansing - create conditions under which millions
of people become displaced in their own countries, or
migrate or seek refuge overseas in a quest for safety,
stability and opportunity, at the risk of becoming more
vulnerable to crimes such as human trafficking, forced
labour or contemporary forms of slavery. Dealing with
those underlying causes is the primary responsibility of
this Council, and if the Council chooses to ignore them
and instead to focus on the symptoms in its debates and
deliberations, it will certainly fail to address them in a
proper manner.

Complex conflicts created in the Middle East and
North Africa have led to the formation of many armed
groups, terrorists and powerful international criminal
networks and the upsurge in the exploitation of people
through trafficking. Such exploitation takes many
forms, including forced labour, slavery and recruitment
by armed groups. Exploitation in those situations can
occur because of the increased vulnerability of people
fleeing conflict as a result of widespread human,
material and economic losses and general erosion of the
rule of law in the affected territories.

Under those circumstances, civilian populations
are viewed by some armed groups as a resource or
commodity to be trafficked. They are subjected to
widespread targeting and killing of ethnic and religious
minorities, abductions and cross-border trafficking of
women and children, internally displaced and refugee
women and girls, as well as forced marriages to fighters
or wealthy foreigners, as in cases involving Da'esh,
Boko Haram and similar terrorist and extremist groups.
Those cases can emerge as genocide, war crimes and
crimes against humanity.

First and foremost, we need full respect for Article
4 of the Charter of the United Nations, to deal with the
underlying causes of the mass influx of persons. The
next step would be to reaffirm the responsibility of
all Governments to safeguard and protect the rights of
refugees and migrants in accordance with international
and domestic laws, reinforcing existing laws against all
related illegal or violent acts.

The United Nations Global Plan of Action to
Combat Trafficking in Persons is a basic document
endorsed by the General Assembly. It should be fully
and effectively implemented. The upcoming review of
the Plan of Action later this year is a unique opportunity
to analyse and evaluate that document at this critical
juncture and to improve shared international efforts in
and responsibility for combating trafficking in persons
by all States Members of the United Nations.

