Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): Ijoin others
on this solemn occasion to convey Senegal's sincere
condolences to the Russian Federation following the
assassination of its Ambassador in Turkey. This is
also an appropriate opportunity for my delegation to
reaffirm Senegal's firm condemnation of all forms of
terrorism whatever their origin.

The Senegalese delegation welcomes the presence
among us this morning of His Excellency Mr. Mariano
Rajoy Brey, President of the Government of the
Kingdom of Spain, who is presiding over today's open
debate, which his country has decided to devote to
an important subject, namely, trafficking in persons
in conflict situations. The choice of this essential
topic, as well as the unanimous adoption of resolution
2231 (2016) this morning, are undoubtedly further
illustrations of the outstanding work carried out over
the past two years by the Spanish delegation under the
leadership of Ambassador Roman Oyarzun Marchesi,
whom we congratulate, together with the entire
Spanish delegation.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his briefing and the other briefers this morning for
the quality of their statements, which have increased
our understanding of the magnitude and gravity of a
scourge that shocks the conscience of everyone.

Multiple conflicts in various parts of the world
are exacerbating emigration and are even forcing the
displacement of populations compelled to flee their
homes, exposing them to numerous threats and making
them increasingly vulnerable, including to trafficking
in persons organized by criminal networks, terrorist
groups or armed gangs. The link between migration
and human trafficking during conflict was highlighted
in the 2016 report of the UNODC on the subject, which
states that 60 per cent of victims of trafficking during
armed conflict are refugees and asylum-seekers who
have fled conflicts in their countries and are simply
seeking better prospects.

Unfortunately, instead of realizing their dreams,
many of these migrants are abducted and sold or held
captive. The phenomenon becomes an even greater
source of concern because these people are often
subjected to forced marriage or even sexual slavery, for
women and girls, or to forced labour, for men and boys,
including in the mining sector, if they have not already
become slaves or combatants.

I should like to echo the words of the Special
Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially
women and children, who said that trafficking in
human beings is an umbrella term that comprises a
range of barbaric practices, one more inhuman than
the next. The phenomenon is of even greater concern
when the perpetrators are extremist or non-State armed
terrorist groups who are using the tactic to sow terror
or as a strategy of war, with the aim of consolidating
their ideology or power; strengthening their financial
flows; changing the composition of a community; or
humiliating a given ethnic or religious group.

Even more unacceptable are the various forms of
sexual violence and exploitation, particularly when
they are linked to trafficking in persons in the context
of armed conflict. This is a centuries-old phenomenon
that unfortunately continues, as we have seen with
respect to the fates of the Chibok schoolgirls, abducted
by Boko Haram in Nigeria in 2014, and of the Yazidi
women and the women sold at the Raqqa market by
Da'esh. In addition, such trafficking is facilitated
through social networks.

Senegal reiterates its firm condemnation of all
forms of sexual violence and exploitation. It believes
that in the fight against this scourge, due attention
must be given to the rehabilitation of victims and of the
affected communities. We must wage a resolute fight
against human trafficking during armed conflict, which
not only constitutes a grave violation of human rights
and international humanitarian law but also contributes
to instability and to promoting terrorism.

Resolution 2331 (2016), which we have adopted
today and of which Senegal was a sponsor, is surely a
step in the right direction. The resolution calls on States
to implement the provisions ofresolution 2195 (2014), on
the link between terrorism and transnational organized
crime. It is also key to implement the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime.

We also call for a recasting of the global debate on
the financing of violent extremism. We must combat
this scourge in order to address fresh challenges and the
economic and strategic underpinnings of trafficking in
human beings, in particular women and children, in
armed conflict.

Allow me to note here that Senegal has ratified
virtually all international and regional instruments
on migration and human trafficking. Furthermore, my
country has a number of legislative and regulatory texts
that address migration and human-trafficking issues,
including a specific law pertaining to human trafficking
and related practices and victim protection, which was
adopted in 2005 and which supplements our criminal
code. This law criminalizes trafficking in persons and
related practices by highlighting the various forms of
exploitation of vulnerable persons to which it leads
and its transnational organized character. It also
criminalizes organized illegal migration and trafficking
in visas or other travel or identification documents.

In order to better ensure the effective suppression of
trafficking in persons and migrant trafficking, chapter
III of the 2005 law confers two types of jurisdiction
on Senegalese courts: universal jurisdiction, through
article 10, and passive personality jurisdiction, through
article 11. This legal arsenal is further reinforced by a
number of frameworks that have been set up to address
problems related to migrant trafficking and flows.
For example, we have a centre that offers guidance
to children in difficult situations, known as GINDI;
an intersectoral committee to fight child labour;
a directorate of correctional education and social
protection; and a national unit to fight trafficking in
persons, among others.

In terms of migration, Senegal's strategy is based
primarily on a number of partnership agreements
with countries of destination or transit for Senegalese
migrants. Senegal and France signed such an agreement
in September 2006 to jointly manage migratory flows
between the two countries, and we also signed a
memorandum with Spain on 9 November 2007. Senegal
has devised an integrated national migration strategy,
which has already shown some technical success, so as
to more effectively address this phenomenon.

We wish to reiterate the importance of prevention,
protection, reintegration and accountability in our
tools to fight all of the problems facing humankind.
Cooperation with traditional and religious leaders can
play a significant role in setting up a communications
strategytodeconstructandcountertheterroristnarrative.

Finally, I should like to recall that parties to
conflict bear the responsibility, with the support of
the international community, to put an end to sexual
violence in armed conflict, through a number of efforts,
including in the areas of prevention, assistance and
protection. Beyond that, we must also deter, detect and
put an end to human trafficking, particularly by violent
extremist groups, as highlighted in the presidential
statement on trafficking in persons adopted in
December 2015 (S/PRST/2015/25).

Human trafficking during armed conflict poses
a threat to stability, peacekeeping and national
reconstruction. We must therefore work together to
put an end to these heinous practices, which will be
possible only if we all make a commitment to that end.

