Mr. De Laiglesia (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Spain welcomes today's thematic debate on women
and peace and security, and specifically on sexual
violence in conflict, which is a priority issue for my
Government. We appreciate the presidency of Togo's
initiative in holding this debate, and we hope that the
Council will continue addressing the issue regularly.

We also thank the Secretary-General for his
report on Conflict-related sexual violence (S/20l2/33)
and the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Wallstrom,
for her briefing. We endorse the recommendations in
the report and we fully support the work and mandate
of the Special Representative, as established in
resolutions 1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010), as well as
that of the Group of Experts on the Rule of Law and
Sexual Violence in Conflict.

Spain associates itself with the statement made by
the observer of the European Union. I will only make
some brief observations in my national capacity.

In recent months, in application of Spain's
national action plan on resolution 1325 (2000) and
other associated resolutions, we have engaged in
several activities, especially in the area of training, that

I wish to highlight. We are firmly convinced that
training is an essential aspect of our efforts to prevent
sexual violence in conflict.

First, last November the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation and the Ministry of Defence
organized, together with the Ministries of Foreign
Affairs and Defence of the Netherlands, the second
offering of the international pilot course on the gender
perspective in peacekeeping operations, which took
place in The Hague. The purpose of the seminars is to
promote the inclusion of the gender perspective in all
peacebuilding activities and to ensure specific training
of personnel participating in those missions. We plan to
continue to offer the courses every six months,
alternating between the Netherlands and Spain.

Moreover, in order to raise the profile of gender
advisers and ensure the inclusion of the gender
perspective in peacekeeping missions, the Ministry of
Defence of Spain organized a course in late October
2011 on the gender perspective in operations, with
conferences for members of the armed forces on equal
opportunity, setting norms on gender issues, and the
fight against rape and sexual violence in conflict.

The next course for high officials in
peacekeeping operations, to be organized in
coordination with the United Nations Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and held in May in Kigali,
Rwanda, will deal specifically with the issue before us
today, with particular emphasis on the fight against
sexual violence in conflict.

My Government is currently conducting its third
review of the national action plan on women and peace
and security, incorporating the recommendations
contained in the Secretary-General's reports and in the
resolutions, statements and decisions of the Security
Council, especially those relating to sexual violence in
conflict. My delegation welcomes the fact that the
members of the Security Council have also been able
to reach agreement on this important issue.

Finally, I again thank the Special Representative
for her words and for her work. We hope that her work
and the work of her Team of Experts, together with
UN-Women, in cooperation with all other actors, will
help to cement the commitments needed to finally put
an end to sexual violence in conflict. We hope that the
Council will continue to regularly invite the Special
Representative to provide updated information on the
progress of her important mandate.
