Mr. Prasad (Fiji): I thank the Security Council
for this opportunity to address the members of the
Council. I congratulate you, Mr. President, during
this joint German and French presidency, on bringing
forward the subject of women's contribution to peace
and security for open discussion in a more open setting.

Women bear the tragedies of conflicts
disproportionately. Their suffering has multiple
dimensions, from food and water deprivation to sexual
violence to outright killings. We confront today this
same tragedy across many other countries and across
several United Nations peace operations.

Resolutions 1325 (2000) and 2242 (2015), on women
and peace and security, all stress the centrality of
participation by women in peacebuilding and in helping
to achieve security. Those resolutions are powerfully
reinforced by the Secretary-General's personal drive
and commitment to gender equality across the United
Nations system.

In peace and during times of conflict, women
play a critical role in keeping communities together.
When development and political institutions fail their
communities, women bear the overwhelming pain of
failure; seeking out livelihoods for from ever-dwindling
resources, fighting to maintain access to services such
as health care and pitching in when services collapse, at
great cost to themselves.

Fiji welcomes the Secretary-General's
determination to bring peacebuilding, peacekeeping
and development closer together. We need only to look
at lessons learned from recent conflicts to understand
why that is so fundamental.

In all conflicts, long before guns and violence are
unleashed, food, water and health services become
weaponized. Women peacekeepers are intuitively
better at recognizing the slow weaponization of food,
water and essential services. It is therefore essential that
women be fully involved in peace processes and be part
of political settlements. When they are involved, peace
settlements are enduring. When they are not, peace
settlements are more likely to collapse. Women bring
empathy, practical understanding and deep insights to
such processes.

Women will always strengthen peace processes.
Failure is not an option; they know that failure will
result in immediate consequences for themselves and
their children. Therefore, by making United Nations
peacekeeping more diverse, it is far more likely that
peace operations will include women, and thereby
enhance prospects for enduring peace.

The Fijian Government seeks to empower women
to reach their full potential across all sectors of society.
The new Fiji Parliament has double the number of
women, who now represent 20 per cent. A lot more
work is required, of course.
Fiji has chosen to serve the world through
peacekeeping. Its peacekeepers have played important
roles in Kosovo, Namibia, Afghanistan, Kuwait,
Timor-Leste, Somalia, Iraq, Syria, Lebanon, Egypt,
the Sudan, Solomon Islands in a non-United Nations
arrangement, Papua New Guinea and South Sudan,
among other countries. We have lost 59 peacekeepers
during those engagements. We have learned a lot
from those experiences, including that a good peace
operation, at its core, is about broadening spaces for
politics to kick in.

Thousands of United Nations peacekeepers interact
with and protect local communities every day. The
way in which they interact matters. Peacekeeping is
about the soft skills that missions bring to deliver their
mandates under extraordinary circumstances. They
include the ability to understand cultures and values
and the ability to see how women and children become
extraordinarily deprived in conflicts early on. Fiji pays
significant attention to strengthening those softs skills
in its training and preparation.

We know that when peacekeepers strike a positive
rapport with communities, they enhance prospects
for reconciliation. Through our many peacekeeping
efforts, we know that women peacekeepers at
checkpoints are far better at diffusing tensions; and that
women peacekeepers are far better in understanding
the hidden dimensions of conflict, such as the seizure
of humanitarian food assistance. Women in medical
support units help overcome high barriers to health
care access, and women peacekeepers are far better at
identifying signs of systemic sexual violence.

Fiji is deeply committed to increasing the
participation of women in its peacekeeping. Learning
from our many experiences across many peace
operations, Fiji is committed to accelerating the
recruitment of women in its army and navy. The
United Nations gender report published in January
notes that Fiji has achieved the following standards:
21 per cent of our staff officers in United Nations peace
operations are women; approximately 10 per cent of our
military contingents are women; and 51 per cent of our
individual police officers are women. A lot more needs
to be done - we are the first to admit it.

The Police Commissioner heading the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan is a Fijian woman. We
are incredibly proud ofCommissioner Unaisi Vuniwaqa.
She serves as a great role model for us. Today we stand
in solidarity with Superintendent Vilisi Waqavesi,

based in Darfur, as difficult political circumstances
unfold in the Sudan.

As a small country, we understand our limits.
Fiji looks forward to working closely with our

partners - Australia, New Zealand, China, the
United States, the United Kingdom, Malaysia and
Indonesia - on training and developing our women

peacekeepers. We are strengthening genderperspectives
and mainstreaming gender across predeployment and
deployment and across our operations. Fiji is launching
a new regional partnership with Australia and New
Zealand to reinforce that effort. We are committed to
the United Nations quest to improve the participation
of women across peace operations. That is our quest
as well.

