Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the United Kingdom for convening this
open debate on women and peace and security and for
submitting a concept note on the topic (S/20l3/335, annex). I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative on Sexual Violence in
Conflict, as well as the Special Envoy of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the
representative of the non-governmental organization
Women's Initiatives for Gender Justice, for their
extensive statements.

Azerbaijan welcomes the adoption ofresolution 2106
(2013) on sexual violence at today's meeting and believes
that it will further advance the issue. Civilians continue
to suffer from inadequate protection in situations of
armed conflict, including discriminatory treatment,
torture, sexual violence, extrajudicial executions, mass
population displacement and ethnic cleansing. In many
situations of armed conflict, sexual violence continues
to be used as a tactic of war to terrorize and force
displacement. The increasing attention of the Security
Council and the wider international community to the
issue has led to the development of a solid normative
framework and to raising awareness about the impact
of sexual violence on its victims, their families and
societies.

It is imperative that all parties to armed conflict
strictly abide by their obligations under international
humanitarian and human rights law. Azerbaijan
reiterates its strong condemnation of all acts of sexual
violence in conflict. There can be no tolerance for
such acts, and all the necessary measures must be
taken to end impunity. Governments bear the primary
responsibility for the protection of civilians, and
national courts are the principal venues for holding
individuals accountable for crimes of sexual violence.
At the same time, inadequate national capacity and
expertise for investigating and prosecuting acts of
sexual violence remains one of the main impediments
to ensuring accountability. In that regard, we note the
efforts of the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and
Sexual Violence in Conflict, established pursuant to
resolution 1888 (2009), to strengthen the capacity of
national rule-of-law and justice actors. However, when
national authorities fail to take action, the international
community should play a more proactive role in
ensuring an appropriate response.

Unfortunately, not all grave violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law,
including acts of sexual violence, receive sufficient
attention and response at the international and regional
levels. More resolute and targeted measures are
therefore required to bring the perpetrators of such acts
to justice; such measures and appropriate protection
efforts must obviously be free of selectivity and
politically motivated approaches and preferences.

It is essential to establish the truth with respect
to gross violations of international humanitarian
and human rights law, including sexual violence
in conflict, and to provide adequate and effective
reparations. It is also important to ensure that such
reparations are established through judicial or
administrative mechanisms and made available to
victims. Furthermore, past wrongs that have been left
unpunished or unrecognized may impede progress in
achieving long-awaited peace and reconciliation, and
can also play a key role in the eruption of new conflicts
and the commission of new crimes. It is also essential
to address sexual Violence in conflict through all
available means, including by mandating international
commissions of inquiry and fact-finding missions,
as well as by supporting the implementation of their
recommendations.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our support
for more systematic and frequent discussions of this
topic and to once again commend the United Kingdom
for convening this open debate.

