Ms. Dlamini Zuma (South Africa): We commend
the United States for organizing this open thematic
debate on sexual violence in conflict situations, and we
thank Secretary Rice for presiding over the meeting
today.

Since its creation, the United Nations has
grappled with the issue of sexual violence committed
against women and girls in conflict situations. As a
result, an international framework specific to women
and girls was established and strengthened over time to
protect women and girls from all forms of violence,
including sexual violence in armed conflict. But, of
course, we recognize that violence against women,
including rape, sexual slavery, enforced prostitution,
forced pregnancy, enforced sterilization and many
other forms of sexual violence, still remains today.
Sexual violence constitutes a war crime and a crime
against humanity when committed as part of a
widespread and systematic attack on a civilian
population by State or non-State actors. It was for this
reason that, when the International Criminal Court was
created, South Africa recommended that sexual
violence be among the crimes to be referred to the
Court, which is a tool against impunity.

Yet, despite these milestones, more work still
needs to be done to support and protect women and
girls in conflict and post-conflict societies. Women and
girls continue to make up a disproportionate number of
the victims in situations of armed conflict. Those who
survive conflict are traumatized, stigmatized and
victimized yet again, just because they are women. As
a result, women and girls are afraid to speak out about
their ordeal or even to believe that there could be any
recourse for their suffering.

The silence around sexual violence in conflict
situations must be broken. During South Africa's
presidency of the Council in March 2007, we adopted a
presidential statement (S/PRST/2007/5) expressing the
need for specific measures to be taken to ensure
protection against sexual violence and to put an end to
impunity. We further recognized that, while the
situation of women and girls, particularly in conflict
areas, remains desperate and unacceptable, the silence
around sexual violence can be broken when we resist
seeing women and girls as passive victims. While

women may be the first casualties of war, they remain
active agents of change and play a meaningful role in
the recovery and reintegration of their families and
communities. Where women are policymakers , they
have been instrumental in bringing about democracy
and reconciliation in post-conflict societies.

Sexual violence in conflict situations is
inextricably linked to gender inequality, and we
therefore need to advocate more strongly for the equal
participation and full involvement of women in all
efforts for the maintenance and promotion of peace and
security. In that regard, Member States must
continually look at measures to strengthen full and
effective implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
particularly by forming partnerships with civil society,
the private sector and community-based organizations.

Equally important is the need to ensure that the
mandates of United Nations peacekeeping operations
include clear guidelines for the protection of civilians
from sexual violence. Gender-sensitive training, the
deployment of more women peacekeepers and the
appointment of more women special representatives
and envoys of the Secretary-General should be
implemented. There is practical evidence that the
deployment of women enhances the impact of
peacekeeping, especially for women and children in
conflict areas. The deployment of women facilitates
engagement with local women through the setting up
of women's desks in camps for internally displaced
persons and refugees, which assist women to talk about
their needs and traumas, including information-sharing
on sexual harassment, abuse and rape.

Furthermore, the presence of women
peacekeepers has a positive transformational impact in
terms of redefining the roles that women can play in all
aspects of peace processes and of national
reconstruction and development. South Africa is proud
of its contribution to the representation of women in
United Nations peacekeeping operations in Africa,
which is rooted in our mainstreaming of gender and
human rights in predeployment training.

The security sector of conflict and post-conflict
countries must be reformed to prevent and better
respond to sexual violence. In order to build effective,
non-discriminatory and representative security
institutions, it is essential to provide personnel with
effective and sustainable gender training and capacity-
building. Women's access to justice and their
participation in the legal system would also contribute
meaningfully to a well-functioning and gender-
sensitive security framework.

We are pleased that the United Nations system
has become more coordinated in its efforts to address
all forms of violence, including sexual violence against
women and girls in armed conflict. A better-
coordinated United Nations system would ensure that
adequate information collection and management
systems would be in place in conflict situations to
collect data on sexual violence and feed it to the
Secretary-General.

Finally, we note with satisfaction that the draft
resolution before us reaffirms the primary
responsibility of the international community to ensure
that adequate resources are made available to address
the immediate and long-term needs of women and girls
who have endured sexual violence. Perhaps even more
important, the draft resolution reaffirms the
implementation of the obligations of Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women, the Convention on the Rights of the Child and
the Optional Protocols to both conventions, aimed at
addressing discrimination against women and girls.

We must work for a non-discriminatory and non-
sexist society in which all women and girls are treated
as equal citizens. The end of discrimination against
women will go a long way towards addressing the root
causes of sexual violence. This is the least we can do
for women and girls everywhere.

