Mr. Cardi (Italy): I wish to thank the Kingdom of
Jordan for organizing this open debate, and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Bangura, for introducing
the Secretary-General's thorough report (S/2015/203),
which documents the situation on the ground and the
current state of one of the most heinous aspects of war:
conflict-related sexual violence.

Italy aligns itself with the statement delivered by
observer of the European Union; however, I would like
to make the following remarks in my national capacity.

Today, no country denies the fact that conflict-
related sexual violence is a crime against humanity, as
opposed to an inevitable spoil of war, as was maybe the
perception until quite recently. Remarkable progress
has been made in that respect. We have many Security
Council resolutions, beginning with resolution 1325
(2000), which is at the core of the women, peace and
security agenda. This debate is a further step towards
its implementation. We need to keep the international
community focused on this issue and urge greater
engagement and action.

As the report of the Secretary-General shows,
all forms of sexual Violence, especially in conflict
and post-conflict situations or in fragile contexts,
exacerbate instability and jeopardize the restoration of
peace and security, the rule of law and respect for human
rights. Conflict-related sexual violence causes physical
and psychological damage and has a tremendous
socioeconomic impact on affected societies. This is why
we believe it is critical to address its root causes, and to
explore alarming new trends such as the rise of Violent
extremism and the increasing use of sexual Violence
as a tactic not only of war, but also of terror. At the
same time, we must continue to strive to strengthen the

participation, representation and leadership of women.
We advocate, in particular, a stronger Security Council
focus on four main areas.
The first area is prevention. As past experience has
shown, a focus on healing and reparation will never
be a winning strategy. We have to invest in prevention
because prevention is the solution. Italy is deeply
committed to early warning initiatives, including the
framework of analysis, that sound the alarm when there
is the risk that a situation will degenerate. We strongly
encourage all willing Member States to make a more
decisive shift to the prevention mode.

The second area is participation. We believe that all
actions to increase the role of women in peacebuilding
and peacekeeping depend on empowerment.
Participation means increasing the number ofwomen in
political bodies, entities and processes. But it also means
empowering women and girls to seize opportunities
themselves, in order to have a greater impact on conflict
prevention and post-conflict governance. We need to
give them the means to build their self-confidence
and potentialities so as to become the drivers of their
sustainable advancement.

The third area concerns the rehabilitation of
survivors. To address the specific needs and priorities
of women and girls in relief, transitional justice and
economic recovery, we need to better complement our
efforts with development cooperation and emergency
aid activities. Multisectoral, integrated, coordinated
and synergistic approaches are to be enhanced.

The fourth area is accountability. We must not
underestimate the preventive power of justice. The
necessary social changes also require a more effective
fight against impunity at all levels, including increased
referrals, when appropriate, to the International
Criminal Court.

In conclusion, that is how we interpret the four
recommendations of the Secretary-General's report,
which we fully agree with. They highlight the need to
address the root causes of sexual violence in conflict by
promoting women's empowerment and gender equality,
transforming harmful social norms and countering
the rise of extremism, safeguarding the rights and
protection needs of survivors through the delivery of
multi-sectoral assistance and reintegration measures,
and systematically addressing all the elements of
resolution 1325 (2000) in the work of the Security
Council.

The international community should provide
critical support by scaling up integrated actions,
increasing its backing for United Nations action and
cooperating with all stakeholders, including those from
the private sector. It is time to enhance synergies in
an integrated approach in order to better the lives of
millions of women and men, girls and boys, around the
world.

