Mr. Bamrungphong (Thailand): At the outset,
Thailand wishes to commend Chile for organizing this
important debate and for the comprehensive concept
note outlining key elements for the discussion today
(S/2015/32, annex). My delegation would also like to
express its appreciation to the briefers for their useful
information and insights.

Thailand aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the representative of Austria on
behalf of the Human Security Network.

The stakes are high at today's debate because we
continue to witness civilians, particularly women and
girls, bearing the brunt of armed conflicts and of post-
conflict settings. They still fall victims to deliberate and
indiscriminate attacks, sexual exploitation and abuse,
brutal violence and systematic human-rights violations.
The protection of civilians, particularly women and
girls, is multidimensional and needs a holistic approach
in order to address the whole spectrum of issues. Please
allow me to address some key points in that respect.

A universal guiding principle states that the
protection of civilians is the primary responsibility
of the host Government. However, the effective
protection of civilians requires the collective efforts
of all parties concerned. All parties to a conflict must
honour and strictly comply with their obligations under
international laws, international humanitarian law and
human-rights law. Those who breach those laws and
violate human rights must be held accountable. The
protection of civilians is one of the core mandates of
the Council. When civilians are at risk, the Security
Council must act decisively and in a timely manner,
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations
and international law. Thailand supports the Council's
authorization of the 10 peacekeeping missions with
protection mandates.

We are also pleased to learn that the United
Nations attaches importance to the development of an
overarching strategy on the protection of civilians and
an action plan for 2015-2016 that encompasses activities
across the entire spectrum ofthe protection of civilians.
Thailand stands ready to cooperate with the United
Nations for the success of that important undertaking.
However, Thailand emphasizes the need to ensure that
the resources and capacities allocated to those missions
match their mandates and activities.

Let me turn to another important aspect of the
protection of women and girls in armed conflict and
post-conflict settings. Thailand attaches importance to
increasing the number of female peacekeepers and to the
proportion of women holding senior positions in United
Nations field missions, as reflected in the Secretary-
General report on women and peace and security
(S/2014/693). Those goals need to be achieved. We also
support the mainstreaming of a gender perspective in
peacekeeping operations and the provision of training
on gender sensitivity before deployment in order to
better address the specific needs ofwomen and girls in a
conflict environment. Thailand envisages contributing
more female peacekeepers and gender experts to the
Security Council's roster of experts in the very near
future. At the same time, we must fully enforce the
zero-tolerance policy in order to ensure that women
and girls are not sexually abused or exploited by their
protectors under their protection mandates.

Thailand is an advocate of the women and peace
and security agenda. We cannot emphasize enough the
significance of the role and participation of women
in peace processes. We strongly believe that women
and girls are not, and must not be, victims. They are,
in fact, agents of change and agents of peace. Against
that backdrop, Thailand, in partnership with the
International Peace Institute, will conduct a series of
events focusing on women's participation in peace
processes and peacekeeping operations. It is our fervent
hope that the findings, analyses and recommendations
from that project will greatly contribute to the Security
Council's high-level review on women and peace and
security.

In conclusion, we must not fail to protect civilians.
The international community has to do its utmost.
Thailand is committed in that regard: it will continue
to work closely with the United Nations and the
international community on that task, which allows no
compromise.

