Mr. Yafiez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Spain welcomes the choice of the topic of women and
peace and security for this thematic debate during the
United States presidency of the Security Council in the
month of June.

I should like to begin by saying that this morning
we heard some extremely important statements,
including those made by the Secretary-General, the
Deputy Secretary-General, the presiding officers of
important bodies of the Organization, the United States
Secretary of State and, in particular, such individuals
as the Ministers from Liberia and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, as well as Major General
Cammaert, who have very closely experienced this
problem in various places, especially Africa.

Spain of course associates itself with the
statement delivered by the representative of Slovenia
on behalf of the European Union.
Almost eight years after the Security Council's
unanimous adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), and in
spite of greater awareness of the problem we are
addressing today and improvements in prevention
mechanisms, fully and effectively protecting women in
conflict situations continues to be an unfinished task.
Violations of the rights of women and girls in those
situations continue to increase, despite the legal
framework that the international community has put in
place and the growing awareness of the severity of the
problem. That awareness was reflected in the General
Assembly's recent adoption of its resolution 62/134, on
eliminating rape and other forms of sexual violence in
conflict situations, of which Spain was a sponsor.

Responding comprehensively to the use of sexual
abuse as a weapon of war continues to pose a challenge
for the international community. Along with the ad hoc
measures adopted in extreme cases in given
peacekeeping operations, it is imperative that the
United Nations decisively address the question of how
to structure and institutionalize an efficient response by
the international community to this very serious
problem. Among other things, we need to wage a
frontal war against the impunity that, in too many
conflict situations, is enjoyed by those responsible for
committing crimes against civilians, especially women
and girls.

International law has appropriate mechanisms at
its disposal. Among them, the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court categorizes systematic
rape as a war crime and a crime against humanity and,
in certain circumstances, even an act of genocide.
Universal accession to the Rome Statute would be a
crucial step towards combating impunity; as is the
implementation of the principle of universal justice by
States that have incorporated that principle in their
legislation, as Spain has.

With regard to my country, and in the broader
framework of the policy of equality that my
Government has promoted and strongly defends, in
November 2007 Spain adopted a national action plan to
implement resolution 1325 (2000) within the context of
the objectives of Spain's organic law for effective
equality between men and women. In line with
resolution 1325 (2000), Spain's action plan reflects the
beliefs that peace is inextricably linked to equality
between men and women and that women's equal
access and full participation in power structures and
their complete involvement in efforts to prevent and
08-3908]
resolve conflicts are essential for the maintenance and
promotion of peace and security.

In that regard, allow me to briefly refer to some
of the measures that the Government of Spain has
adopted to respond to the pending challenges. Those
measures focus on six basic objectives: promoting the
presence of women in peace missions in which Spain
participates; mainstreaming the gender perspective in
all phases of those missions; specific gender training of
personnel participating in missions; full respect for the
human rights of women and girls in conflict situations;
promoting the principle of equality in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes; and
promoting greater participation by civil society groups
in this area.

Spain supports the establishment of special units
within peacekeeping missions to specifically cater for
women and girls who have been victims of sexual
violence. Such units should be composed of specialized
personnel and, moreover, should serve as coordination
centres for the activities both of the United Nations
system and of the donor community as a whole.

With regard to cases where crimes against women
and girls have been committed by personnel of United
Nations peace missions, the Organization has now
begun to provide an integrated response to the
problem. In that connection, we welcome the General
Assembly's recent adoption of its resolution 62/214,
the Comprehensive Strategy on Assistance and Support
to Victims of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse by United
Nations Staff and Related Personnel. The Government
of Spain firmly supports the zero-tolerance policy on
this matter.

Spain is determined to promote new efforts to
implement the provisions of resolution 1325 (2000).
We are also finalizing an action plan on women and
peacebuilding aimed at all actors participating in
Spain's system of cooperation for development. The
plan, which will not disregard the status of women as
specific potential Victims of violence, will highlight the
particular importance of women as contributors to the
peaceful settlement of conflicts.

In a similar vein, the third meeting of African and
Spanish women working for a better world - which
took place in Niamey last May under the sponsorship
of the Governments of Spain and Niger and which
included the participation of women leaders and
representatives from most African countries, as well as
08-39081

international bodies - adopted a final declaration that,
among other things, stated that the role of women in
peacebuilding and conflict prevention processes must
be recognized and supported, including through the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

The Niamey meeting also called for the
establishment of a multi-donor gender and
development fund that would be managed by the
United Nations Development Fund for Women. Spain
will contribute €50 million to that fund.

In conclusion, Spain fully supports the draft
resolution before the Council, of which we are a
sponsor. We hope that it will be adopted unanimously.

