Mr. Montafio (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico thanks Jordan for holding this open debate and
welcomes the statements made at the start of the debate,
in particular the briefing by Ms. Zainab Bangura,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict.

As highlighted in the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2015/203), sexual violence in conflict
situations affects millions of people, especially
women and girls, and at times is a crucial part of the
strategy through which armed groups humiliate their
opponents and intimidate the populations among which
they operate. My delegation believes that this scourge
constitutes a threat to international peace and security,
given, among other factors, its impact on the societies
of countries in conflict - before, during and after
hostilities - and the fact that it hinders peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding.

It is unacceptable that in the twenty-first century
sexual violence is still being used as a weapon of war.
Just in the last year, we witnessed new forms of such
violence. The relevant report of the Secretary-General
leaves no room for doubt. Cases of rape, sexual slavery
and forced marriage perpetrated by extremist groups,
including using them as terrorist tactics, continue to
increase.

The common thread running through all conflict-
related sexual violence can also be found in structural
gender discrimination and in the exclusion of women
from political life. In the fight against sexual violence,
it is critical that efforts for conflict prevention promote
equality and the rule of law through the creation of
institutions that take into account gender issues.

Mexico acknowledges the Organization's efforts
to advance the women-and-peace-and-security agenda
within and outside the United Nations system. In 2013,
my Government accepted an invitation from the United
Kingdom to lead the initiative to prevent sexual violence
in conflict at the regional level. We acknowledge the
support that several States have given us.

In addition, the adoption, in June 2014, of the
International Protocol on the Documentation and
Investigation of Sexual Violence in Conflict was a
step in the right direction. The core function of the
Protocol - namely, to prosecute those responsible and
provide comprehensive care to victims - also serves as
a vital tool for authorities, motivating them to undertake
more clear and expeditious investigations in cases of
sexual violence at the national level and provide care
for survivors.

The lack of rules and institutions to protect the
rights of women in most armed conflicts is a catalyst
for the commission of such crimes. Taking into account
the fact that acts of sexual violence are premeditated
and pursue specific goals, it is imperative that they
be punished through national judicial systems in all
States. Those who commit such crimes should not have
impunity as an ally. The implementation of a system of
national and international cooperation for accountability
is essential.

Mexico supports the Secretary-General's recommendation
that the Security Council continue to use all the means
at its disposal regarding conflicts so as to ensure that
international law is respected. We believe that it is
particularly relevant to refer cases to the International
Criminal Court and further to include and highlight the
issue of sexual Violence in the work of the sanctions
committees.

Fifteen years after the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), my delegation welcomes the global efforts
to increase the number of women participating in
peacekeeping operations and special political missions.
We trust that the strategic reviews on sanctions and
peacekeeping operations currently being carried out
will take into account the commitments and priorities
of the women-and-peace-and-security agenda. We also
consider it essential that revisions of peacekeeping
mandates contemplate measures to prevent sexual
violence. Strengthening the mandates of those missions
with women protection advisers is a good start in that
direction.

Mexico is aware that one of the main challenges
to ensuring effective action by the United Nations is
obtaining valid, representative, relevant and timely
information that has been collected on the ground.
Therefore, we appreciate the efforts and initiative of
the United Nations Action against Sexual Violence in
Conflict and the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law
and Sexual Violence in Conflict.

Providing comprehensive responses that promote
women's education and empowerment is key to
combating violent extremism. Women are crucial
actors in peace and ceasefire processes, and we must
encourage their decisive participation in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration measures and
in security-sector reform. The role of women is a
significant part of the message being spread by radical
extremist groups, and it is therefore Vital that efforts
to counteract that message take into account all
stakeholders.

Finally, my delegation welcomes the efforts of
countries such as Spain and Colombia to support and
give a voice to victims of Violent extremism, particularly
women, using their national experience to generate best
practices on access to justice for victims.

Through the National Women's Institute, Mexico
promotes public policies based on gender and
intercultural perspectives that are aimed at promoting
the empowerment of women and making them active
participants in efforts to ensure respect for their rights.
These policies serve as a counterweight to extremism,
as they represent significant progress in gender equality
and thus lead to stability and development for peoples.

