Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): May I
first of all thank the delegation of Ghana for convening
this meeting. I am grateful to the Secretary-General for
his significant presentation and to Ms. Mayanja,
Ms. Sandler, Ms. Torry and Mr. Guehenno for their
important briefings, which objectively describe the
successes and challenges relating to women and peace
and security and also in particular the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000).

The Security Council's adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) was an important milestone for this
Organization. It recognizes, inter alia, the valuable
contribution of women in the prevention and settlement
of conflicts, as well as in peacebuilding. Nonetheless,
in spite of the progress made in the implementation of
this resolution, a great deal remains to be done. This is
why the Security Council, the Secretary-General and
other United Nations forums must continue to support
Member States in adopting policies and establishing
national programmes and plans that are aimed at its
implementation. The Organization must do likewise
within its administration. In this context, Panama
wishes to welcome the appointment of Ambassador
Ellen Margrethe Loj as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Liberia.

As for the Republic of Panama, while we must
not disregard progress made in the implementation of
all the aspects of this resolution, it is equally true that
today we are confronting situations that directly affect
women and girls that require our immediate attention
and action. Obviously, we refer to the persistent
scourge of sexual violence in situations that are on the
Security Council's agenda. Consideration of the reports
from the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, Louise Arbour, as well as from the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
John Holmes, inter alia, oblige us to refer specifically
to these situations in this debate.

The systematic rape of women and children who
are simply going about their daily activities is only one
segment of the challenge facing women in certain
regions of the world. At the present time, the rise in the
use of sexual violence against women as a tool of war
has reached a truly alarming stage. In spite of its
recurrence, the lack of public order and the situation of
insecurity prevent State bodies from protecting women
from being victims of this violence.

In the face of this problem, the Security Council
and the entire Organization must reflect on more
effective measures to prevent sexual violence in all
cases and particularly in the aforementioned tragic
situations. As part of its consideration, the Council
could re-evaluate the effectiveness and the scope of the
mandates of some peacekeeping operations, with a
view to ensuring the presence of its components in
these areas of repeated attacks. Furthermore, care of
the victims must be part of the joint efforts of the
Security Council and the rest of the Organization.
Ensuring access to psychological, social and health
support, including free and confidential HIV/AIDS
screening and, where necessary, treatment, is a key part
of this work. At the same time, little can be achieved
without education of the people; and, therefore, States,
with the needed support, must conduct awareness-
raising campaigns on the subject of sexual violence.

Lastly, and as is universally agreed, justice is the
main guarantor of human rights. The lack of the rule of
law only results in a collapse of public order, in
insecurity and in conflict. Consequently, the detention
and prosecution of those guilty of using sexual
violence as a tool of war is something that this body
must emphasize repeatedly. In this context, we support
the efforts of the International Criminal Court to
prosecute those who are guilty of this crime against
humanity.

The Security Council's capacity to react
effectively to this challenge depends on the quality,
credibility and relevance of the information it receives.
More information on sexual violence with empirical
data, broken down by gender, must form part of the
reports considered by this Security Council. This will
help us understand how and why this phenomenon
exists. It will also help define more effective strategies
to combat it. This is why the Republic of Panama
hopes and trusts that, as of now, the Secretariat will
include in its reports to the Council more details
relating to this grave violation of the rights of women.

In conclusion, may I reiterate my own country's
well-known position that in order to put an end to the
cycle of violence against women, which exists both in
peacetime and in wartime, it is necessary to promote,
inter alia, women's active participation in all aspects of
political, socio-economic and cultural life. This must
be the ongoing commitment of our countries and of the
United Nations system.

