Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): My delegation
thanks Azerbaijan, as President for the month of
October, for convening an open debate on women,
peace and security. Lithuania welcomes the adoption of
resolution 2122 (2013) today, which aims to streamline
action within the United Nations system to implement
resolution 1325 (2000) and other related decisions. It
is important that the resolution clearly underlines the
role of regional organizations and civil society. We
appreciate the recommendations of the Secretary-
General that provide a strategic look at and guidance
on the implementation of existing commitments. We
would also like to commend the work of Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of UN Women.
and her first briefing to the Council.

Lithuania associates itself with the statement made
by the representative of the European Union. I will
limit myself to a few points relating to the agenda on
the rule of law and the participation of women.

Strengthening international and national justice
responses to conflict-related violence against women is
crucial. In the aftermath of conflict, it is vital to develop
transitional justice mechanisms and institutions and to
rebuild the rule of law to protect women's rights.

We must pay greater attention to providing better
support for victims, including by ensuring protection
for witnesses, victims and justice officials, providing
reparation mechanisms and ensuring the systematic
inclusion of women in all aspects of conflict resolution.
United Nations special representatives, peacekeeping
and political missions and United Nations agencies
have a much greater role to play.

In recent years, the United Nations has augmented its
involvement in establishing and supporting transitional
justice measures, furthering women's rights in post-
conflict societies. The United Nations-supported truth
commissions in Mali, Kenya and Cote d'Ivoire have
addressed gender-based crimes. Yet more must be done
to ensure that transitionaljustice addresses a full range
of gender-specific crimes, including human trafficking,
early or forced marriages, the links between sexual
violence and natural-resource extraction, withholding
humanitarian assistance, enforced disappearances and
forced displacement.

Transitional justice cannot be a substitute for
accountability. It should not limit the access of victims
to reparations. Blanket amnesties cannot be extended
to conflict-related sexual violence. We must pay greater
attention to delivering reparation programmes and
funding. We continue to support the wider Council
practice of including sexual violence in the designation
criteria for targeted sanctions.

It is difficult to imagine tackling impunity without
monitoring and reporting mechanisms. We welcome the
Council's decision today that United Nations entities
should do more systematic reporting to the Council,
including analysis.

Lithuania sponsored Council resolution 2117 (2013),
on small arms and light weapons, which links the illicit
transfer and misuse of small arms to a disproportionate
impact on Violence against women and girls.

In previous statements my delegation has
already spoken about the importance of ensuring the
empowerment of women. Their participation at all
levels of economic, political and social life is as crucial
to sustainable peace as it is to poverty reduction,
economic recovery and sustainable development.
We welcome the the Peacebuilding Commission's
declaration on women's economic empowerment for
peacebuilding.

The recent decrease in women's share of senior
positions in United Nations field operations should be
reversed. Efforts by the United Nations to retain, attract
and support women staff should be complemented by
efforts by Member States to consistently nominate
more female candidates.

Notably greater involvement of women - from
mediation, restoring the rule of law and governance
to participation in post-conflict electoral
processes - continues to require commitment and
attention. It also requires greater dedicated resourcing,
particularly for civil society groups working on the
ground.

