Mr. Hussein (Ethiopia): I would like to thank
you, Sir, for presiding over this very important open
debate of the Security Council on the question of
women and peace and security. It is true that issues
concerning women are dealt with in different forums,
especially in the fields of development and human
rights. We believe that this open debate of the Security
Council - the result of an initiative under your
presidency - will also enable us to exchange views on
the situation of women in armed conflict, an issue that
is within the mandate of the Security Council.

I fully endorse the thrust of Mr. Kofi Annan's
opening statement yesterday. I also take this
opportunity to welcome the statements of Ms. Angela
King and Ms. Noeleen Heyzer for reminding us how
far we have yet to go in addressing the perils faced by
women during war and also during so-called periods of
peace, when many crimes are often committed, too. It
is not just periods of conflict that we must consider.

The United Nations Development Fund for
Women (UNIFEM) and other United Nations agencies,
such as the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF)
and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), must be
commended for their direct support for women in
conflict situations and for their work in bringing
women's voices to national, regional and international
decision-making arenas. In particular, UNIFEM's role
in facilitating the All-Party Conference in Arusha and
in putting forward Burundian women's
recommendations for the final peace agreement,
highlights their innovative and unique approach.

More specifically, Ethiopia believes that a full-
scale assessment of the impact of armed conflict on
women and of women's role in peace-building is long
overdue. We hope the Council will recommend such a
follow-up to today's debate. We have full confidence in
UNIFEM's ability to support this process, drawing on
other United Nations funds and programmes and the
important work of civil society.

We are not short on knowledge of where we are
deficient in fully meeting the rights of women in all
their aspects. Therefore, I will not repeat what others
eloquently stated yesterday better than I could. Most
States, including mine, have legislated for equality
between men and women. Yet, if we look at the very
parliaments and legislatures that did that, we will see
that equality between men and women is lacking.

Recently, we held the second multi-party
elections in my country. Twenty million people voted,
of which half were women. Yet, only 10 per cent of the
540 members of parliament elected were women,
despite the fact that in some electoral districts 80 per
cent of the voters were women. In the previous
parliament, women constituted only one per cent of its
membership. In the executive branch, the situation is
relatively better, but much has yet to be done. This will
require continuous but determined efforts by both
women themselves and men who genuinely believe in
equality between men and women.

Equality will not drop from the sky - one must
strive to achieve it. Over the years, and especially
under Mr. Kofi Annan, the United Nations has made
considerable progress in this area. In a few agencies,
the number of women in senior positions surpassed
30 per cent some years ago. In two or more, 50 per cent
has been achieved. Hence, while more can and should
be done, it is time that we, the Member States,
including mine, follow the example set by our world
Organization. Perhaps the best place for the Member
States to start is in this chamber. Perhaps we can let the
countries of the Permanent Five set the example by
sending women as their representatives. Some may say
there might be too many of them, but we have had too
many men for over five decades. So it will not hurt if
we start with the next lot of Permanent
Representatives. The rest of us should not be far
behind. For my part, I will strive for my successor to
be a woman Permanent Representative as soon as
possible.

I say this because, if we do not have women
represented in sufficient and equitable number at all
levels- all levels- of society, then no amount of
wisdom-filled statements in the General Assembly
chamber or elsewhere will bring peace and security to
women in particular and humankind in general. For our
part, we in Ethiopia are committed to pursuing
diligently the small gains we have made and will build
on them. Globally, too, we can all do it.

In the spirit of the Millennium Summit, let us talk
less and act more, since we say we know what needs to
be done. In this context, I share completely what
Ambassador Penny Wensley of Australia said in her
concluding remarks late yesterday afternoon.
