Archbishop Auza: Trafficking in persons is at
the heart of the Holy See's preoccupations. People of
goodwill, whatever their religious beliefs, can never
allow women, children and men to be treated merely
as objects, or to be deceived, violated, often sold and
resold for profit, leaving them devastated in mind
and body only to be finally eliminated or abandoned.
Such treatment is shameful and barbaric. It must
be condemned unequivocally. The full force of the
law must be brought to bear upon those who commit
such crimes.

The Holy See notes that the report (S/2016/949)
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
measures to counter trafficking in persons includes
a wealth of statistics and highlights the many issues
that are involved in this villainous practice. The report
clearly shows the complexity of trafficking in persons
as an international phenomenon and illustrates the
multifaceted nature of the problem, whose resolution
will require the collaboration of all, including in
particular faith-based and faith-inspired organizations
and other civil-society groups, which are very much
present on the ground.

Pope Francis, who has made the fight against
trafficking in persons and other forms of modern
slavery a high priority, declared that modern slavery
in the form of human trafficking, forced labour,
prostitution or trafficking in organs is a crime against
humanity. Among the many causes and factors that
abet contemporary forms of slavery like trafficking
in persons are poverty, underdevelopment and
exclusion, especially when combined with a lack of
access to education or scarce, or even non-existent,
employment opportunities, as widespread corruption
and unrestrained greed rob the human person of a
dignified life.

At present, however, the biggest single factor that
facilitates trafficking in persons is war and armed
conflict. Trafficking in persons is flourishing alongside
today's refugee and migrant crisis, which has been
primarily provoked by wars and conflicts. It is therefore
pertinent that the Security Council examine the plague
of trafficking in persons in conflict situations.

If the fight against trafficking in persons is to
be effective, the international community must unite
in the common commitment to put an end to the
fighting, hatred and violence, and to pursue peace and
reconciliation. The Holy See remains firmly convinced
that the way to resolve open questions such as that of
trafficking in persons must be that of diplomacy and
dialogue, in order to resolve conflicts and end wars.

The Holy See encourages the Security Council to
continue fighting against the scourge of trafficking
in persons, primarily through preventing and ending
armed conflicts. The challenge that trafficking in
persons poses is immense, and all must assume their
respective responsibilities and collaborate with one
another. The Holy See is committed to playing its part
in meeting this challenge.

