Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): Madam President,
let me join others in thanking you for organizing this
important open debate. I also thank Ms. Zainab Hawa
Bangura, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and
Ms. Hamsatu Allamin of the NGO Working Group
on Women, Peace and Security for their respective
statements earlier today.

In recent years, the international community,
especially the Security Council, has quite rightly
directed considerable energy to the fight against sexual
and gender-based violence. Unfortunately, as we gather
here today, one year has passed since the kidnapping
of 276 girls from a school in the Nigerian town of
Chibok. Today, of the many terrifying stories emerging
from Daesh-occupied Iraq and Syria, the Violence
directed towards women is perhaps the most difficult to
contemplate. Last month, the United Nations estimated
that Daesh had forced some 1,500 women, girls and
boys into sexual slavery, which is unacceptable. In
the same vein, we also remain in solidarity with the
affected families of the Victims of the recent attacks
at Garissa University College in Kenya, a majority of
whom were women.

All these crimes, like many others, present a
particularly egregious example of the use of sexual
Violence in terrorist activities, and are testimony to the
fact that conflict-related sexual violence is one of the
most urgent challenges for affected Governments and
communities, and a serious threat to international peace
and security. While the leadership and responsibility
of the affected Governments is critical to tackling this
issue, with the support of the international community,
we believe that the focus should now be on our
collective efforts to convert the political commitments
into concrete prevention on the ground.

Rwanda once again condemns all forms of violence
against women and girls worldwide, especially in
conflict and post-conflict zones. We believe that, as
previously stated in this Council, sexual violence in
conflict should now be qualified as sexual terrorism.
Now that sexual violence has also spilled over into
countries that are not in conflict, clarifications should
be established in regard to measures deployed both
in conflict and non-conflict situations. In conflict
zones, we believe that the protection of women and
girls should be given priority by ensuring that we take
full measures, in particular to provide more effective
protection to the civilian population at risk, create the
conditions for humanitarian assistance that remains
hampered, increase female peacekeepers and gender-
protection advisers in all United Nations missions, and
conduct investigations on Violations and abuses by all
parties.

We should all send a unified message to remind
those responsible that acts of sexual violence cannot
be tolerated. Perpetrators must face justice, and the
culture of impunity enjoyed by some non-State actors
should be shattered. Some of the groups enjoying
impunity are those that committed these types of
atrocities during the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi
in Rwanda, and continue such practices today in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo under the name of
Forces democratiques de liberation du Rwanda (FDLR).

On this particular issue, it is regrettable to see that,
as Rwanda commemorates the genocide against the Tutsi
for the twenty-first time, the international community,
which was quick to neutralize other armed groups in
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, has turned
a blind eye to their heinous activities and continues to
offer them a soft landing. If this trend continues, not
only the FDLR's sexual violence campaigns, but also its
destabilizing tactics, will have long-lasting, devastating
impacts in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the region.

In a non-conflict situation, we believe that national
security and justice institutions should strengthen
their response in addressing sexual violence, including

awareness-raising and education, strengthen their
security institutions to detect acts of terror, and make
their border control measures more effective, among
other things. Furthermore, ending impunity for those
who commit sexual violence should be our collective
effort and goal. In the same line, we believe that the
Security Council should ensure that all country-specific
reports and mandate renewals evaluate the level of
protection and promotion of women's human rights, as
enumerated in several Council resolutions. We call on
the established United Nations Team of Experts on the
Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict to support
national institutions in discharging their duties.
I shall conclude by recalling that defeating sexual
violence in conflict should include addressing the root
causes of conflicts, as well as creating institutions that
fulfil their constitutional duties. Moreover, a successful
reform of the rule of law in conflict-stricken countries
will largely depend on the smooth demobilization of the
various militias run by war lords. With that being said,
let me pay tribute to the commitment of the Secretary-
General and his tireless Special Representative on
Sexual Violence in Conflict for their actions and
achievements in fighting sexual Violence in conflict.

