Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I would like to thank
Germany for convening today's debate and all the
briefers for their powerful statements. I particularly
welcome the fact that Pramila Patten, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, whose work
we strongly support, is still with us at this stage in the
day listening to the debate. I thank her for being here.

As war is fundamentally about power and the abuse
of power, so too is sexual violence. Sexual violence
is rooted in women's political, social and economic
exclusion and insecurity. It is an abuse of power rooted
in historical power imbalances, primarily between men
and women. To eliminate the scourge of sexual and
gender-based violence, our first and most fundamental
task must be achieving gender equality at every level.
Ireland recently concluded two years as Chair of the
Commission on the Status of Women (CSW), working
on precisely that task - progress towards gender
equality and the empowerment of all women and girls.
The debates at the Commission on the Status of Women
are as intense and polarized as any here in the Security
Council. No one should be under any illusion about
the fact that the efforts to balance the power relations
between men and women are deeply, deeply political,
and today's debate is clearly no less so.

I am proud that the CSW's recent conclusions
(E/CN.6/2019/L.3) contain vital language on the need
to address the effects of armed conflict and post-
conflict situations on women and girls, including
victims and survivors of sexual violence. We must keep
working, doggedly and with determination, to build the
structures, in language and in laws, that can bring an
end to sexual violence. Resolution 2467 (2019), adopted
today, is a step on the road, but it is only one step, and
we share the regret expressed by the representatives of
Belgium, France, South Africa, the Netherlands and
other countries that the text did not include references
to sexual and reproductive health-care services for the
victims and survivors of sexual violence in conflict.
As the French Ambassador said, that is not the end of
the road, and we believe that the Security Council must
assume its responsibility and recognize such needs.

We should be mindful too that gender-based
violence affects not just women and girls but also men,
boys and members of sexual and gender minorities.
Poverty, displacement and vulnerability increase the
risk of sexual violence, especially for those in flight.
We see that dynamic of power and vulnerability playing
out again and again.

Gender equality is at the heart of Ireland's foreign,
development and humanitarian policies. This year
in Ireland we have already increased our funding
to preventing gender-based violence in conflict-
affected and fragile States by more than one third.
Our determination in such work comes not only from
conviction but also from lived experience. Northern
Ireland lived that experience intensely. For instance,
we saw there that the decommissioning of weapons,
demobilization of paramilitary groups and growing
confidence in the police service greatly reduced the
threat of firearms in domestic violence situations. One
form of violence stops with the other.

In partnership with the International Rescue
Committee (IRC), in 2016 Ireland established the
world's first response mechanism dedicated solely to
gender-based violence programming. We have seen
how a survivor-based response saves the lives of women
and girls every day. Our support has helped survivors
such as Nyamal, one of millions displaced in South
Sudan as conflict swept through her village. Nyamal
was separated from her family and in the chaos that
followed she was gang-raped. She was able to access
a safe space for women and girls, where she received
psychosocial support and medical services. But for
Nyamal, like millions of other survivors, the impact and
trauma of sexual violence endured, including through
social stigma. After she discovered she was pregnant,
Nyamal was rejected by her family. When the baby was
born, the IRC worked with local women leaders, who
intervened in Nyamal's family and she was eventually
reintegrated. The example of Nyamal demonstrates not
just the complexity and deep impact of sexual Violence
but also how addressing harmful, embedded cultural
norms play an important role in recovery. Support to
Nyamal would not have been possible without working
with a local partner. We must do everything we can to
increase our support to local organizations and to work
with civil society, in particular human rights defenders.

In our peacekeeping work, Ireland is also proactive.
As seasoned peacekeepers, our defence forces regularly
conduct patrols with mixed gender teams around camps
where young women and girls are collecting firewood
or water. It is a small practical example of the kind of
gender-sensitive approach that should be integrated
at every level of our work. This year, Ireland will
conduct training for peacekeeping contingents in the
investigation of conflict-related sexual and gender-
based violence for the African Union, the United
Nations and NATO partners.

We provide support to mechanisms such as the
International Impartial and Independent Mechanism
in Syria and for the work of Justice Rapid Response
in ensuring that gender expertise be made available in
the investigation of serious human rights Violations.
We also strongly support efforts by the Security
Council to bolster the use of conflict-related sexual
violence as a criterion for imposing sanctions and for
greater alignment across thematic and country-specific
sanctions regimes.

Put simply, the horrific scale of ongoing conflict-
related sexual violence is a stain on our common
humanity. We have to close the accountability gap with
determination and with unashamed zero tolerance. For
our part, as an aspiring elected member of the Security
Council for the period 2021-2022, Ireland will continue
to work for gender equality and aim to break down the
power imbalances we see as being at the heart of such
violence. We will support bringing that agenda again
to this table.

We are listening carefully to survivors about their
needs, which naturally include sexual and reproductive
health-care services. We want to see women in all
aspects of peacekeeping and peacebuilding. It is there
that we as women belong and where we will make a
difference if we are allowed to get on with the task.

