Ms. Clooney: I would like to thank the German
Government for inviting me to address the Security
Council today on the topic of accountability for sexual
violence in conflict. It is an honour to be included
among such a distinguished panel of speakers.

In preparing to deliver these remarks alongside
Ms. Nadia Murad - my client, friend and somebody I
greatly admire - I thought back to a conversation we
had when we first met. Nadia told me of her suffering at
the hands of 12 different men ofthe Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham (ISIS) who enslaved and brutalized her.
She recounted the murder of her mother and brothers.
She showed me threatening messages that she had
received from ISIS on her phone. And as she did that,
it occurred to me that she never expressed fear for her
life or safety. Instead, that day and ever since, she has
spoken of only one fear - that when this is all over, the
ISIS men willjust shave offtheir beards and go back to
their normal lives and that there will be no justice.

I am legal counsel to Nadia and other Yazidi women
and girls who were kidnapped, bought, sold, enslaved
and raped by ISIS, and my brief is the pursuit ofjustice.
But it was clear from an early stage that this was going
to be a challenge. The world's Powers were focused on
a military solution and nobody wished to speak about
justice. So we fixed on one imperative - we could
not allow the evidence to disappear. Ms. Murad and I
therefore came here to the United Nations and we asked
the Security Council for help. We asked that it send a
team of investigators to Iraq to gather evidence of ISIS
crimes so that, one day, trials would be possible and
justice would be within reach.

After many months of advocacy, with strong
leadership from the United Kingdom and support from
Iraq and the United States, Nadia and I sat together in
this Chamber (see S/PV.8052) and watched 15 hands
go up in favour of adopting resolution 2379 (2017).
We welcomed the appointment of an eminent lawyer,
Mr. Karim Khan, to lead the Investigative Team
established pursuant to Security Council resolution 2379
(2017), and we celebrated the moment four weeks ago
when the Team, working alongside the Iraqi authorities,
began to exhume mass graves and identify the victims'
remains. That first step in any criminal inquiry was a
cathartic moment for many Yazidi families, and we are
encouraged to hear that the investigation in Iraq is now
fully under way.

We have also seen milestones in national courts
around the world. In the United States, I represent
Yazidi women and girls who were held in the house of
an ISIS member named Umm Sayyaf, along with one
of the few non-Yazidi victims of ISIS's sexual violence
that we know of, an American hostage named Kayla
Mueller, who was held in brutal conditions for over 18
months and raped repeatedly by the head of ISIS, Abu
Bakr Al-Baghdadi. Umm Sayyaf showed no solidarity
with her fellow females. She locked them in a room,
instigated their beatings and put makeup on them to
prepare them for rape. I am requesting her transfer to
the United States to face justice for those crimes.

In France, I represent Yazidi victims in a case
against Lafarge, a company that made multi-million
dollar payments to ISIS and is the first multinational to
be charged with complicity in crimes against humanity
committed by the group.

In Germany, I represent a Yazidi victim in a case
in which the German Supreme Court confirmed that
the charges against an ISIS commander responsible for
sexual slavery amount to genocide, which is the first
judicial recognition of that fact anywhere in the world.

Two weeks ago, I was in Munich, where the first
trial against an ISIS member for international crimes
committed against a Yazidi victim has now begun. In
that case, I represent the mother of a 5-year-old Yazidi
child who was enslaved, chained outdoors to a window
and left to slowly die of thirst in the scorching heat.
The ISIS member who allowed it to happen now faces
charges of murder as a war crime.

Those are important milestones, and I would like
to convey special thanks to the German prosecutors I
have worked closely with over the past few years for
their determination and professionalism in bringing
those cases to trial. But let me be very clear. That does
not come close to the level of justice the survivors
wish for or the scale of the international response that
they deserve.

Let us remember that the crimes committed by ISIS
against women and girls are unlike anything we have
witnessed in modern times. ISIS controlled territory
the size of the United Kingdom and ruled over 8 million
people. More than 40,000 foreign fighters from 110
countries are estimated to have joined ISIS's ranks in
Iraq and Syria. But the question of bringing them to
justice has barely raised a whisper, and yet, if we do not
act now, it will be too late. Thousands of perpetrators,
including some of the most high-ranking, are held by
coalition-backed Syrian Democratic Forces in Syria.
Those Forces say that they "lack logistical support to
hold them for a long time", and President Trump has
warned that if Europe does not find a way to put foreign
fighters on trial, the United States will be "forced to
release them".

Thousands more ISIS members are detained in Iraq,
but there, trials that the United Nations says are lacking
due process proceed on a single terrorism charge
without witnesses and move swiftly to executions. None
of those trials stand as a measure ofjustice for Yazidis.
They do not provide victims an opportunity to look
their abusers in the eye and tell the world what ISIS has
done. The charges do not include sexual Violence, and
crimes like genocide are not even on the books.

That has to change, and there is now a unique
opportunity for international accountability, because
thousands of ISIS militants are in custody, a United
Nations team is collecting evidence and survivors are
waiting to testify, but also because people in the region
are calling for international trials. In Syria, the Syrian
Democratic Forces has called for "a special international
tribunal to prosecute foreign fighters", and in Iraq, the
Kurdish regional Government has made a similar plea.

Meanwhile, the Council has itself made clear that
the genocide pursued by ISIS through murder and rape
represents a threat to international peace and security,
and when it reached a similar conclusion about such
crimes in Rwanda and Bosnia, it established tribunals
to put the perpetrators on trial. But if Al-Baghdadi is
arrested today, where will he go? Here are four options
for the Council to consider.

First, the Council can refer the situation to the
International Criminal Court (ICC), as many Yazidi
survivors have called for. Unfortunately, that seems
increasingly unlikely. The United States Government
has recently said, through its National Security Adviser
John Bolton and Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, that
the ICC is "dead to us" and that those who support
certain ICC investigations can be denied entry to the
United States, have their assets frozen and may even
face arrest.

A similarly devastating blow to the ICC was
delivered by another permanent member of the Council.
A senior Russian official told this Chamber last month
that Russia would never refer another situation to the
ICC, nor would it ever "help our colleagues in the
Security Council to create any more such tribunals".
He added, for good measure, that maybe the whole
experiment with international justice should never even
have been started at all. Survivors of sexual violence
can only hope that the Council will find a way through
that impasse, but there are other ways that justice can
be served.

The second option is that like-minded States that
believe in justice could set up a court by a treaty.
That could be done by States that are members of the
Global Coalition against Da'esh, many of which are
represented here today. After all, if 79 States can come
together to fight ISIS on the battlefield, why can they
not establish a court, either in The Hague or somewhere
in the region? The Global Coalition has stated that its
mission is to "ensure the enduring defeat of ISIS", but
that is not possible without justice. As members of the
Coalition have themselves acknowledged, a military
defeat is not on its own an enduring one, because until
we kill the idea behind ISIS, it will simply regroup
under a new umbrella.

Thirdly, if the Council does not act and the Global
Coalition does not act, the European Union (EU)
can. The EU recently helped to establish a special
court in The Hague to deal with international crimes
committed in Kosovo. That court has the support of
all EU countries, as well as the United States, Canada,
Norway, Turkey and Switzerland, and its cases are
handled by international prosecutors and judges. With
Iraqi support, the EU and like-minded States could do
the same for ISIS crimes, or the EU could expand the
mandate of the European Public Prosecutor's Office to
cover international crimes and set up a new EU court
with jurisdiction over them.

Fourthly, Iraq could enter into a treaty with the
United Nations to set up a hybrid court, as was done
for Sierra Leone and Cambodia, to prosecute those
responsible for international crimes.

None of those solutions comes without complication
or cost and none of them would replace the need to
have credible trials in national courts alongside any
international ones. But the draft resolution the Council
is considering today notes the prevalence of sexual
violence in wars all over the world and the Council's
profound concern about the slow progress in eliminating
sexual violence in conflict. I agree that we are facing an
epidemic of sexual violence and I believe that justice is
the antidote.

It is therefore my respectful submission to the
Council today that, although the draft resolution under
consideration would represent a welcome step forward,
especially insofar as it strengthens the sanctions regime
for those who commit sexual violence, we must go
further. If the Council cannot prevent sexual violence
in war, then it must at least punish it. As the parents of
Kayla Mueller and other American ISIL hostages have
put it, when crimes like these are made public in an
open court, victims like them can be heard and begin to
heal and we can hope thatjustice will put an end to such
crimes against humanity.

Therefore, instead of abandoning international
justice we must stand up for it, because justice is not
inevitable - it does not just happen and it does not
stand a chance if people in power, including those at
this table, do not make it a priority.

After the Second World War, the victorious nations,
namely, the United Kingdom, France, Russia and the
United States, asked themselves the same question
about the Nazis that we are asking now about ISIL-
when it comes to war, should we really care about
justice? Mr. Anthony Eden, then Secretary of State
for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the United
Kingdom, took the view that the guilt of the Nazis was
so black that they fell outside any judicial process.

Others thought that show trials or mass executions
would be a better response. But the United States,
under Presidents Roosevelt and Truman, pushed for
trials because, the United States said, it was important
to create a record of the Nazi system of terrorism. The
American prosecutor who opened the trial said that he
did so because "the wrongs which we seek to condemn
and punish have been so calculated, so malignant,
and so devastating, that civilization cannot tolerate
their being ignored, because it cannot survive their
being repeated".

This is the Council's Nuremberg moment, its chance
to stand on the right side ofhistory. The Council owes it
to Nadia and to the thousands of women and girls who
must watch ISIL members shave off their beards and
go back to their normal lives, while they, the Victims,
never can.

Nadia has been given many honours since she
decided to bravely speak out about the horrors she
and her people have suffered. She has received titles,
awards, words of thanks and promises of assistance. But
she would trade her Nobel Peace Prize in a heartbeat for
the chance to get what she really wants - the chance to
face, in a court of law, those who murdered her mother
and her brothers and those who brutally and repeatedly
raped her.

It is time for the Council to make justice its priority
so that history can record what happened, so that we
can stop it happening again and to truly honour those
who, like Nadia, have already suffered too much.
