Mr. Gunnarsson (Iceland): Allow me first to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this high-
level meeting on an issue that is of central importance
to the maintenance of peace and security, namely, the
central role of women. Allow me also to express my
Government's appreciation for the initiative launched
by the Secretary-General in the form of the global study
and for the work carried out on that study.

Resolution 1325 (2000) recognized that women and
girls are affected differently by conflict. At the same
time, they have a vital contribution to make to the
achievement of sustainable peace. The brutal conflicts
that have emerged in recent years have magnified the
already considerable challenges faced by women and
girls. Indeed, rape and sexual abuse have become
ever more common as weapons of choice in war. And
denigration or denial of women's rights is not only a
by-product of conflict but now a war aim among some
non-State actors, such as Boko Haram and the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant.

Many good proposals have emerged from the
global study. We strongly agree with the assessment
that it is necessary to move from an ad hoc approach to
implementation to establishing more structure. Useful
concrete proposals include designating sexual violence
as a criterion for sanctions and establishing an informal
expert group under the Security Council to ensure that
there is information and monitoring. Including gender
experts in all sanctions expert groups would strengthen
implementation. All United Nations Special Envoy
teams should include women in high-level positions.

Financing is of course key. We have heard
proposals that at least 15 per cent of peacekeeping
funding should be directed towards the objectives of
resolution 1325 (2000). From our point of View, 15 per
cent should be seen as an absolute floor, not the ceiling.
As to Iceland, over 20 per cent of our contributions
towards peacebuilding in 2014 had gender equality
and women's empowerment as their primary objective.
That is a level we intend to maintain over the coming
years, along with ensuring that other contributions
strengthen gender equality and women's empowerment
in a significant way. In that respect, 71 per cent of
Iceland's total contributions towards peacebuilding in
2014 had gender equality and women's empowerment
as the primary, or at least a significant, objective.

Iceland deploys civilian experts to the field through
the Icelandic Crisis Response Unit. In 2011, after several
years' effort, we achieved gender balance, where an
equal number of experts of each gender were seconded
to the field for an equal amount of time. We are on
track to maintaining that balance. Before deployment,
all seconded personnel receive education on gender
equality and the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).

In 2008, Iceland adopted its first national action
plan on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
Following a review in 2012, a second national action
plan was adopted. A third action plan will be ready
next year. That shows that implementation is indeed a
continuous work-in-progress.

Needless to say, the Security Council must be
the centre of the push for effective implementation.
It needs to be more active and to show political will
in implementing resolution 1325 (2000). I would like
to pay tribute to those delegations on the Council that
have pushed this issue forward.

Finally, having put the spotlight on the role of the
Security Council, it is vital that other organizations
involved in peacekeeping and conflict zones also
ensure implementation. Examples would be NATO, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the African Union. The full implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) will require the efforts of all.

