Mrs. Raz (Afghanistan): I would like to thank
the German presidency for holding today's meeting
on conflict-related sexual violence. It reflects the
Council's focus, and we hope that today's discussions
will reinforce the efforts of all States to enhance
progress on the protection of women.

The Government of Afghanistan is strongly
committed to protecting women's rights and to
preventing violence against women in armed conflict.
We call on all parties in conflict in Afghanistan to
prevent violence against women. That commitment
is a reflection of our international and national
responsibilities, which are enshrined in our Constitution
and national laws and are implemented through the
policies and programmes adopted by the Government.

Our national action plan on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) is a strong example of the
Government's commitment, through which we are
combating conflict-related sexual violence and working
to protect and empower women in all aspects. As part
of the protection pillar of our plan, we have improved
our legal structure through the enforcement and
amendment of legislation to safeguard women from all
types of violence and discrimination. Our revised penal
code, which entered into force in February 2018, has
been expanded by criminalizing all forms of conflict-
related sexual violence as a war crime, a crime against
humanity and an act of genocide.

Under our law on the elimination of violence
against women, various awareness-raising activities
are being carried out at all levels nationwide, including
in provincial communities and committees.

More broadly, our protection measures are based
on a zero-tolerance approach to all forms of violence
against women and children. All cases of crimes
against women are investigated and referred to judicial
institutions, based on various national laws and the
law on the elimination of violence against women.
Our security and judicial institutions have taken new
measures to ensure accountability for crimes committed
against women, including sexual violence, which have
had a notable impact on deterrence and have led to a
drop in crimes committed against women. We have also
established a mechanism for registering all alleged and
reported crimes nationwide to ensure that all cases are
identified and fully addressed.

In focusing on this type ofprotection we collaborate
closely with various actors on the ground, including the

Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission,
local and religious figures and civil society. We have
also increased our numbers of female prosecutors and
judges to enable women to speak openly about any
alleged crime. That has been an effective reform in
the judicial sector, where women are now more willing
to speak up about acts of violence committed against
them. Furthermore, in order to assist the survivors of
gender-based violence, we are making sure that family
guidance centres are providing legal advice and health
and psychosocial services in all parts of the country.

All those measures demonstrate a comprehensive
approach to ensuring women's protection using various
means, both within and outside the framework of
Government. We are pleased to report that public-
awareness initiatives have been making increasing
progress, broadening wide networks of actors and
advocates. In that regard, public lectures, workshops
and conversations on the law on the elimination of
violence against women are being held in collaboration
with Islamic figures, religious schools, teachers and
others. Our independent administrative reform and
civil service commission has developed policies to
increase the ratio of women's recruitment to public
institutions and their protection in the office. Beyond
the civil service, active steps have also been taken
in the security sector to recruit more women into the
national police and military forces.

Ensuring the physical protection of women is only
one aspect of our focus on upholding women's rights
and empowerment. For us, protection and empowerment
have a broad meaning. They also include enhancing
the role of women in the civil service, the security
sector, elections and the peace efforts that are under
way to end the conflict. As part of the Government's
commitment, we assure the Council that any potential
peace agreement would in no way compromise
women's rights or their proactive role in rebuilding a
new Afghanistan. However, we would like to ask the
Council and the participants in today's open debate to
support our efforts to protect and preserve the rights of
Afghan women in the gains that we have made over the
past 17 years during the peace talks with the Taliban.

We welcomed the Council's adoption today of
resolution 2467 (2019), and we hope and expect that it
will improve the coordination of all international actors
in their efforts to end sexual violence in conflict and,
more broadly, to ensure continued progress on women's
safety and empowerment.

