Ms. Martelli (Italy) (spoke in Italian; interpretation provided by the delegation): First of all, on behalf of
Italy, I wish to congratulate you, Mr. President, for
the Security Council's adoption today of resolution
2242 (2015), on women and peace and security, whose
contents we fully support. We thank Spain and the
United Kingdom for the work carried out to that end.

In that regard, I cannot help but point out that
even in the political crises that precede armed conflict
and where there are violations of fundamental human
rights, there is a difference between the impacts on men
and on women. Studies of the phases directly preceding
the outbreak of armed conflict show a consistent
stereotyping of the roles of men and women, with a
consequential increase in violence against women.

In the acute phase of a conflict, sexual violence
against women and girls becomes a weapon ofwar used
on a large scale, and even within the home domestic
violence increases. The phenomenon of sexual violence
tends to increase even in post-conflict situations. It is
therefore fundamental that women should participate
in peace negotiations so as to ensure appropriate
involvement in the stages following the signing of
the peace agreements. Even more important is the
consideration of gender issues in the negotiations so
that the presence ofwomen is not completely irrelevant.
Maintaining a gender perspective is crucial while
negotiating guarantees during the rebuilding phase, and
a new definition of security as the human and social
condition based on the exercise of one's fundamental
human rights, which are the main instruments for
maintaining peace, is emerging.

Heeding the call of Prime Minister Rajoy Brey of
Spain on the need to further encourage cooperation in
that field, and building upon the remarks by Chilean
Vice-Minister Gloria Maira, I wish to underscore the
key importance of dialogue with civil society. In that
regard, Italy, within its national action plan for fighting
violence against women, will be establishing, this
Friday, a space for structured partnerships devoted
to fighting violence against women. The peace that
we were referring to previously is clearly achieved
by valuing people and through the development of
informed capital as the first step in a process leading to
the gaining of substantial freedoms.

Not just for Italy but for all mature democracies, the
real challenge is investing in a new way of managing
our knowledge, driven by innovation. In that regard, a
true inversion of the trends means relaunching services
to people and providing health care that is capable of
responding to today's needs. I am referring to an ageing
population and the changing structure of the family,
which is becoming more blended and smaller owing to
lower birth rates.

The great migrations from the global South call
for cross-cutting public policies, that is, a transnational
approach, because only by considering the elimination
of vulnerabilities and poverty from a global perspective,
including in developing countries, that we can activate
our capabilities for promoting human rights on a global
scale.

The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 70/ 1), which re-launches
cooperation as an instrument for creating partnerships
for development, must serve as a constant reference
in the peacebuilding process. Its objectives seek to
eliminate extreme poverty globally by 2030, halve the
percentage of women and men and children who go
hungry, create political assets at the national, regional
and international levels so as to maintain greater
investments in the fight against poverty, eliminate
all forms of malnutrition, double the agricultural
productivity and incomes of small-scale food producers,
in particular women and family farmers, through
secure access to land and agricultural resources,
reduce the global maternal mortality rate to fewer than
70 cases per 1,000 live births, drastically reduce infant
mortality, and eliminate endemic diseases such as
AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria. Other objectives of the
Agenda are to acknowledge the need for inclusive and
equal education for all, full gender equality, universal
access to sustainable energy, support for infrastructure,
the promotion of sustainable consumption and
production models and the adoption of urgent measures
to fight climate change and desertification.

The global South is the true key to maintaining
balance in the world. Our investment in women for
the comprehensive consolidation of security is the true
measure of our ability to unite history and innovation.

