Ms. Bhoola: It is an honour for me to brief the
Council today in my capacity as the United Nations
Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of slavery,
including its causes and consequences. I thank the
Government of the United Kingdom for convening this
open debate and for the invitation to participate, as well
as for its leadership in combating modern slavery.

My predecessor in the mandate and I have conducted
numerous country visits to meet with a broad range
of Government and civil-society organizations and
survivors to assess the prevalence of slavery and related
practices in contravention of the Slavery Convention
of 1926 and the Supplementary Convention on the
Abolition of Slavery, the Slave Trade, and Institutions
and Practices Similar to Slavery of 1956. Member States
have a duty to uphold the universal protection against
slavery and the slave trade and to bring perpetrators
who violate this norm to justice. Nevertheless, as we
have heard this morning, slavery and related practices
continue to occur on an unprecedented scale, affecting
millions of men, women and children. In conflict
situations, terrorists and non-State armed groups have
reverted to the most extreme forms of slavery, in which
young girls and women are owned, exploited, sold
and traded in markets and on the Internet. Boys have
been forced to carry arms and commit acts of violence
against their own communities.

One year ago, I and the Special Rapporteur on the
right to health and Special Rapporteur on the human
rights aspects of the victims of trafficking in persons,
especially women and children, conducted a joint
country mission to Nigeria, where we met with young
men who had been forced by Boko Haram to carry
arms, engage in combat, destroy their own villages
and perform forced labour in the form of cleaning and
construction work during captivity. We met girls in
internally displaced persons camps, barely children
themselves, who have had babies as a result of forced
marriage and sexual slavery. Many of them said they
were unable to return to their communities, as they
were ostracized for being the wives of Boko Haram and
their children were despised for being of bad blood.
Despite significant Government and civil-society
efforts, they continue to be affected by gaps in physical
and psychological health care, food security, education,
livelihood support and access to justice. Those gaps
can fuel an increasing cycle of violence, in which girls
are vulnerable to being forced into transactional sex
in order to earn a living or, even worse, to conduct
suicide bombings.

What can the Security Council do? First, the
Council and member States can ensure that the multiple
ways in which slavery, forced labour and trafficking
all intersect in conflict receive a coherent global
multifaceted response, with strong leadership within
the United Nations system through continued attention
to those issues and oversight on the part of the United
Nations and through its Member States' responses.
In that regard, I would urge Member States to engage
with target 8.7 of the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGS) on a multistakeholder partnership aimed
at implementing that target and which calls for the
eradication of child labour, forced labour, modern
slavery and human trafficking. Achieving Sustainable
Development Goal target 8.7 is a precondition for
achieving many of the other SDGs, especially those on
gender equality and economic empowerment and the
right to health in peaceful, just and inclusive societies.

Secondly, the Council can strengthen the
normative framework for ending slavery, forced
labour and human trafficking by promoting increased
ratifications of international human rights norms and
standards, including the Protocol to the Forced Labour
Convention, 1930 (No.29) of the International Labour
Organization. Member States should be reminded
to ensure that dedicated legislation to ensure the
implementation of international standards is backed
up with robust national action plans. In addition, the
1956 Supplementary Convention on the Abolition of
Slavery, the Slave Trade, and Institutions and Practices
Similar to Slavery requires ratifying States to inform
the Secretary-General of laws they have adopted to
prohibit slavery and criminalize enslavement, and I
would encourage Security Council members to support
him in upholding that role.

Thirdly, the Council can ensure the strengthening
of humanitarian responses, as well as adopting the
strongest financial and economic measures, to stem the
transnational corruption and crime that fuels conflict.

Lastly, the Security Council can promote national
and international criminal justice to bring criminals
to account, including for enslavement, crimes against
humanity and war crimes.
Access to justice remains a remote prospect for
the millions subjected to trafficking, forced labour and
slavery in conflict. Prevention, protection and support
for survivors are also prerequisites for the restoration
of peace and security. In that regard, I would urge
Member States to provide funding for the United
Nations Voluntary Trust Fund on Contemporary Forms
of Slavery, which prioritizes projects that provide
specialized assistance to women and children subjected
to slavery in conflict and humanitarian crises.

