The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh,
Canada, Colombia, Croatia, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Egypt, Fiji, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein, the Netherlands, Norway,
the Philippines, the Republic of Korea, South Africa,
Timor-Leste, Ukraine and the United Republic of
Tanzania in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: On behalf of the Security
Council, I extend a warm welcome to Her Excellency
Ms. Agnes van Ardenne, Minister for Development and
Cooperation of the Netherlands.

Likewise, on behalf of the Council, I extend a
warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Kaliopate
Tavola, Minister for Foreign Affairs and External
Trade of Fiji.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Jean-Marie
Guehenno, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Guehenno to take a seat at the
Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Ms. Amy Smythe,
Senior Gender Adviser of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC).

It is so decided.

I invite Ms. Smythe to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I should like to welcome members of the Council,
our visiting speakers and our guests. I have already
acknowledged the presence of the Minister for
Development Cooperation of the Netherlands, Ms.
Agnes van Ardenne. I should like also to welcome Ms.
Angela King and Ms. Noeleen Heyzer to this debate on
conflict, peacekeeping and gender. I hope that we will
have a useful discussion on this very important topic. I
am especially pleased that in today's discussion we will
have a unique perspective, in addition to that provided
by Under-Secretary-General Guehenno, who will speak
more broadly about the progress that the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations has made towards
implementation. We will also hear directly from the
Senior Gender Adviser to MONUC, who is mandated
to work on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) in the field.

Please allow me to begin by saying a few words
about the format for the meeting. I will shortly be
inviting Mr. Guehenno and Ms. Smythe to talk to us for
a few minutes about their work in implementing
resolution 1325 (2000). I will then invite the 15
member States of the Security Council to comment and
ask questions. I then propose to invite our guest
speakers to respond to points raised thus far. We will
then give the floor to those non-Council members
inscribed on the speakers' list and conclude by once
more offering Mr. Guehenno and Ms. Smythe an
opportunity to respond to comments made and
questions raised by Member States.

In the interests of time, we would suggest that
Member States try to limit their presentations to five
minutes. At the conclusion of today's meeting, the
presidency will prepare a summary, on its own
authority, of the main points of this meeting, which
will be issued as a press statement. Of course, the
record of the Council meeting itself will also be
available for anyone to refer to after the fact.

I should like to make one additional procedural
point. The Secretary-General is having his annual
meeting of the heads of the principal organs of the
United Nations at 12.30 this afternoon, which I have
been invited to attend in my capacity as President of
the Security Council. Ambassador Cunningham will
then conduct the meeting until 1.15 pm. If it is
necessary that we meet in the afternoon, we will break
until 3 p.m., at which time we will hear the remaining
speakers on the list.

I now give the floor to the Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping, Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno.


