Ms. Jaffer (Canada) (spoke in French): I am
pleased to address the Security Council today on behalf
of Canada, which currently holds the chair of the
Human Security Network, an interregional group of
countries that includes Austria, Chile, Greece, Ireland,
Jordan, Mali, the Netherlands, Norway, Slovenia,
Switzerland and Thailand, with South Africa as an
observer. On behalf of the countries of the Human
Security Network, I would like to thank the United
Kingdom for presiding over this open debate on
women and peace and security, which is a priority issue
for the Network. I would also like to welcome the
compelling presentations made today. The
representatives around the Council table are a
reflection of the expertise at the disposal of the United
Nations system. They also serve to underscore the need
to work in cooperation with the various bodies of the
Organization.

(spoke in English)

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his invaluable report (S/2004/814), which marks the
progress we have made, and highlights the challenges
we continue to face, in implementing resolution 1325
(2000).

We welcome the work that the United Nations has
already done to increase the representation of women
in all institutions of the United Nations. But we also
draw attention to the need for more work to be done in
that area, particularly in increasing the representation
of women at all levels of decision-making, including as
military observers, civilian police, peacekeepers,
human rights and humanitarian personnel in United
Nations field operations, and as special representatives
of the Secretary-General. Countries contributing
personnel to peace support operations must, for their
part, establish a viable recruitment base that includes
the admission of women to their military and police
services and appropriate training for all personnel that
incorporates a gender perspective.

Human Security Network members welcome the
Conference on Gender Justice in Post-Conflict
Situations, whose theme was "Peace needs women and
women need justice", and which was held from 15 to
17 September 2004 in New York. The conclusions and
recommendations of the Conference, organized by the
International Legal Assistance Consortium and the
United Nations Development Fund for Women,
represent a valuable contribution towards better
understanding the importance of gender justice in the
context of the overall effective implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).

I would like to focus my remarks today on one
key aspect of follow-up to resolution 1325 (2000),
namely, the issue of gender-based violence. Gender-
based violence, including sexual abuse and
exploitation, have become alarmingly pervasive during
conflict situations. We know that hundreds of
thousands of women and girls have been raped in
situations of armed conflict, and that sexual
exploitation continues to be used as a tool of war in
many countries. We also know that there has been a
dramatic increase in domestic violence in conflict and
post-conflict zones. In his report on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict last June, the Secretary-
General argued that "we are failing in our collective
responsibility to protect women and children from the
increasing horrors of sexual and gender-based
Violence" (S/2004/43], para. 28). It is the role of the
Security Council to work together with countries and
Governments, where they exist, to address such crimes.

As we mark the fourth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) and look to other
important commitments - such as the protection of
civilians and children in armed conflict and important
milestones, including the 10-year review of the 1995
Beijing Fourth World Conference on Women - it is
now more than ever the time to take strong and
concerted action in every situation of conflict and post-
conflict reconstruction. As the international community
continues its efforts in countries outlined in the
Secretary-General's report, it cannot falter in its
commitments.

Some important progress has been made in
constructing an international framework to address
gender-based Violence in armed conflict. In the past 10
years, more systematic attention has been devoted to
the development of international standards and norms
to combat violence against women and to build on
existing international humanitarian law, including the
Geneva Conventions. The most significant result of
these efforts has been the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court, which specifically
defines rape and other forms of violence against
women as war crimes and crimes against humanity.
The International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia subsequently ruled that creating an
atmosphere of sexual violence by, for example, making
humiliating sexual threats, raping young girls, and
keeping women in captivity and "lending" them out for
the purpose of rape and sexual abuse is a crime.

We know that accountability for sexual and
gender-based violence is an important aspect of gender
justice, particularly in the context of armed conflict.
The development of jurisprudence and the prosecution
of perpetrators of violence against women and girls
through international, regional, and national legal
institutions is a crucial step in the fight against
impunity for gender-based violence.

We strongly encourage the United Nations to
strengthen all procedures and mechanisms used to
investigate, report, and prosecute Violence against
women in armed conflict.

And yet, as critical as the development of norms
and standards is, this must be matched by concerted
efforts to ensure their implementation, monitoring and
evaluation. As the Special Rapporteur on violence
against women has stated, if the past 10 years have
focused on standard-setting and raising awareness of
the issue, then the next 10 years need to focus on
implementing and developing strategies to effectively
protect women and girls from violence.

The United Nations system, including the
Security Council, has a critical role to play in this
regard, particularly in conflict and post-conflict
environments. In this respect, we must be determined,
vigilant and consistent in our efforts. And in this, the
Security Council must lead the way.

Members of the Human Security Network
welcomed the development and issuance last year of
the Secretary-General's bulletin on special measures
for protection from sexual exploitation and abuse. This
bulletin provides a much-needed accountability
framework for the United Nations system. It also
provides important guidance for States. The Network,
likewise, supports the work of the Inter-Agency
Standing Committee Task Force on Protection from
Sexual Exploitation and Abuse in Humanitarian Crises
and the efforts by individual agencies to develop
policies and measures to enhance accountability on this
issue. We applaud the efforts of the United Nations
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to develop a
strategy to prevent sexual abuse and exploitation by
United Nations peacekeepers.

Members of the Network have noted with interest
the discussions that have taken place within the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations on gender-
based Violence and conduct of peacekeepers. We call
on all troop-contributing countries to ensure that their
peacekeepers uphold the highest standard of conduct in
their deployment, and to ensure that appropriate
disciplinary measures are put in place and utilized
when peacekeepers fail to live up to those standards. A
decisive and engaged policy of zero tolerance with
regard to gender-based violence is crucial.

The international community recognizes that
gender experts and expertise need to be included in all
aspects of peace operations, including technical
surveys and the design concepts of their operation,
training, staffing, and programmes; in the absence of
such expertise and senior management support, our
efforts to effectively address gender-based violence are
significantly hindered. For strategies to be effective,
they should build on expertise held by the female
civilian population. As the Secretary-General has
noted, we need to recognize the extent of the violations
of women's and girls' human rights during armed
conflict and ensure that planning and implementation
of all peace support operations factor in the need to
respond to sexual and gender-based violence, including
through more effective physical protection, monitoring
and reporting.

In this regard, we urge the Security Council to be
vigilant and to more systematically condemn
widespread instances of sexual and gender-based
violence in specific conflicts. It must also be prepared
to respond to such violence through the design of peace
support mandates and by ensuring that a gender
perspective is incorporated across the work of United
Nations country teams. We would also encourage the
Council to ensure that its missions to the field include
an assessment of sexual and gender-based violence in
their terms of reference, where appropriate, and that
they meet with local women's groups and networks to
get their perspective. The effectiveness of camps,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
installations and related infrastructure depend, to a
large extent, on a physical design that reflects the fact
that women take part in modern-day conflicts, also in
the role of combatants.

In conclusion, members of the Network strongly
urge the Security Council to give full consideration to
the report of the Secretary-General and to the
implementation of the recommendations contained
therein. We would particularly like to highlight and
support the Secretary-General's intentions to develop
comprehensive strategies and action plans to
implement various elements of resolution 1325 (2000).

We thank you, Mr. President, for today's debate,
which affords us the opportunity to measure our
actions and those of the Council with regard to
implementing resolution 1325 (2000) in order to
eliminate gender-based violence. This is our time to re-
commit ourselves vigorously to the tenets of resolution
1325 (2000) and to produce tangible results.

