Mr. Nishida (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to express my gratitude to you, Madame President, for
representing the United States and for the strong
initiatives you have continued to take to combat sexual
violence in armed conflict - initiatives that have now
produced another action-oriented resolution, one which
Japan has gladly co-sponsored.
I thank the Secretary-General, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations and United Nations Military
Adviser for their insightful briefings.

We are encouraged by the Secretary-General's
clear commitment and leadership in that area. We also
commend Special Representative Wallstrom for her
vigorous efforts to confront sexual violence, such as
the four country visits she has made in the past eight
months, including two to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

First of all, Japan supports the recent report of the
Secretary-General (S/ 20 1 0/ 604), including its
recommendations to strengthen efforts to end impunity
with regard to sexual violence as a tactic of war and
terror. Among those recommendations, we strongly
support the establishment of monitoring, analysis and
reporting arrangements and the listing of perpetrators
in an annex to the Secretary-General's annual reports,
which are essential tools that the Security Council can
use to take action, including targeted measures, against
perpetrators.

As most here know, a number of child soldiers
have been released in the five years since the
establishment of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism on children and armed conflict under
resolution 1612 (2005). Monitoring, analysis and
reporting arrangements to be established under today's
resolution should build on that good practice. We
expect that the arrangements and the mechanism will
work synergistically with each other and will
strengthen the response of the entire United Nations
system to the challenge of how to protect women and
children from sexual violence in conflict.

Secondly, a comprehensive approach is key, and
it can be undertaken when the actors involved are
proactive and engage in greater cooperation with each
other. Under international law and the resolutions of
the Security Council, it is the responsibility of the
Government and army of a country in conflict to
protect their people. To that end, the rule of law should
be established by promoting security sector reform and
enhancing the capacity of the judicial system and law
enforcement. Japan therefore welcomes the
preparations being made by Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Wallstrorn to rapidly deploy a
team of experts to assist national authorities in
strengthening the rule of law.

It is critical to protect women from all forms of
violence and to empower them within their society. For
this reason, Japan has decided to make a contribution
of $4.5 million to UN Women for its project in
Afghanistan. It is also vital to strengthen the
comprehensive response that is the responsibility of
United Nations peacekeeping missions. We expect
more women's protection advisors to be designated in
the missions. And we welcome the Secretary-General's
efforts to provide peacekeepers with clearer guidance,
in line with good practice, regarding the response to
sexual violence. In general, the Security Council needs
to further strengthen the comprehensive response of
peacekeeping missions through its country-specific
resolutions.

Thirdly, sexual violence is never a by-product of
conflict and it can be prevented. As the Secretary-
General's report underlines, we need to focus not only
on collecting timely and reliable information, but also
on analysis of trends and patterns of sexual violence.
Engaging all stakeholders - including national
institutions, humanitarian actors and civil society - in
the process of such analysis would contribute to the
prevention of sexual violence.

One of the lessons learned from the mass rape in
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo in July
and August this year is the need for communication
between United Nations missions and the local
community. I would like to stress that such
communication could also provide early warning of
imminent problems. The set of indicators for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) will likewise
be an important tool for providing early warning of
sexual violence, and we hope that they will be
operational at the earliest possible date. We also look
forward to seeing an early warning matrix of risk
factors developed by Special Representative
Wallstrom.

Finally, in the two years that Japan has served its
present term as a non-permanent member, the Security
Council has adopted more resolutions and presidential
statements on issues relating to women and children in
conflict than it had in the past. We welcome this trend
as a clear sign of the commitment of the Council to
addressing these issues. There are, however, many
challenges that must be faced in translating this
commitment into tangible results on the ground. For its
part, Japan will continue to contribute to efforts to
promote progress on the issue of women and peace and
security from the perspective of human security.

