Ms. Mejia Velez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I congratulate your country, Sir, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council and for convening
this open debate on sexual violence in conflict - as
needed as it is, as we have heard. I also welcome Special
Representative Zainab Bangura and express my
gratitude for the valuable report (S/2016/361) of the
Secretary-General, which gives us a very good basis for
strengthening our efforts against that scourge. I am also
grateful for the briefings by the Special Rapporteur
on trafficking in human beings, Ms. Maria Grazia
Giammarinaro, and by Lisa Davis of the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security.

The interventions we have heard, along with
your concept note (S/2016/496, annex), Sir, and the
conclusions of the report presented by Ms. Bangura,
attest to the challenges we face in eradicating trafficking
in persons in armed conflict, which, as we have seen,
disproportionately affect women and children. The
increasing links between this crime and phenomena
such as violent extremism and terrorism forces us to
redouble our efforts to ensure that no more women and
children fall Victim to such crimes.

The three reports issued last year on the review
of the peacebuilding architecture (see S/2015/490), the
review of peacekeeping operations (see S/2015/446)
and the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
on women and peace and security, all emphasize the
need to place greater focus on prevention in order to
address threats to international peace and security.
Sexual violence is not the exception. In that regard, I
want to underscore that all efforts we adopt to combat
terrorism and violent extremism, along with the links
to human trafficking, must include a central element of
prevention centred on generating better conditions for
the empowerment of women and a greater commitment
to ensure their rights.

We condemn all forms of sexual violence in
conflict. We join in the calls from all the members
of the Security Council and other countries that have
spoken here about zero tolerance.

We agree with you, Mr. President, that efforts
aimed at responding effectively should include the
participation of civil society organizations, especially
women's groups working at the local level in conflict
areas. As Ms. Davis and her group have said, supporting
such organizations in their work and involving them
in efforts to provide adequate care for victims and
increase women's participation in peace negotiations
should be part of any strategy at the national, regional
and international levels.

All ofus must contribute to this fight. In Colombia's
own context of a long-standing internal conflict, to
which we hope soon to find a political solution with the
support of the Council and the international community,
I would stress that the national Government has in
place an inter-agency strategy against trafficking in
persons that, in addition to prevention, includes among
its objectives supporting investigations, trials and
sentencing with regard to groups that commit this
crime, as well as to protect and assist victims.

Allow me to turn to the paragraphs relating to
Colombia in the report of the Secretary-General and
to highlight the acknowledgements about the progress
in my country's peace process and on women's
participation in that process and the unique nature of
the gender commission established to ensure that the
views and concerns of women are reflected in the final
peace agreement and its implementation. I should also
like to point to the references to the normative measures
adopted by armed and police forces, and the process of
care and compensation to victims, particularly victims
of sexual violence. We dearly hope that recent measures,
represented by the very significant agreement reached
on May 15 for the departure of children from the camps
of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia,
will also also be a step forward in our efforts to build a
solid and lasting peace and move towards reconciliation.

We recognize the enormous challenges that lie
ahead, and thank Special Representative Bangura for
her tireless resolve to support our efforts to promote
the eradication of conflict-related sexual violence.
We thank the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law
and Sexual Violence in Conflict for its support. We
know that international cooperation is key to finding
solutions, and my country is therefore proud to have
had the opportunity to contribute to the work of the
Team, providing our contribution through the National
Institute of Legal Medicine by sharing with other
countries the experience and best practices developed
by Colombia in the use of forensic analysis to advance
the fight against impunity.

As highlighted in the concept note before us
(S/20l6/496, annex), this debate is taking place
within the framework of the first commemoration of
the International Day for the Elimination of Sexual
Violence in Conflict, to be held on 19 June. For
Colombia, we will complement that commemoration
with our own celebration of the National Day for the
Dignity of Women Victims of Sexual Violence in the
Armed Conflict next 25 May. For us, this Day will
be an opportunity for the entire country to praise the
dignity of the surviving victims and highlight the need
to strengthen actions to care and rehabilitate them.

The Security Council can count on Colombia to
ensure that the contributions and proposals arising
from this timely debate will be reflected in concrete
actions of prevention and protection.

