Mr. Fedotov: The fact that criminals exploit
situations of conflict and that transnational organized
crime erodes the rule of law and can fuel insecurity is
well known. The fact that the growing sophistication of
the links between transnational criminal networks and
terrorists in many regions of the world poses a grave
threat to peace and security has been recognized many
times over by the Council.
Now this important and timely debate can help
draw attention to, and promote action on, a particularly
appalling aspect of the crime-terrorism-conflict nexus
that has, unfortunately, received too little attention,
namely, that the most vulnerable - women, children
and men caught in the crossfire of conflict; often
impoverished and displaced; many on the move to
escape desperate circumstances - are falling victim to
the traffic in human beings.

Syria was primarily a country of destination
for trafficking before 2011. However, according to
information collected for the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) Global Report
on Trafi'icking in Persons, since that time at least
10 countries in Europe, Asia and the Middle East have
detected Syrian victims.

Trafficking victims from Iraq have been more
frequently detected in many parts of the world since
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) started
its insurgency in the north of the country. Trafficking
victims from the Horn of Africa, including Somali
citizens, are increasingly detected in Europe. While
many are trafficked to other destinations, there are
scores of victims bought, sold and exploited by groups
like ISIL and Boko Haram in the territories where they
operate.

Taking action in such a fluid environment clearly
presents great challenges. This debate is a timely
reminder to the international community that we
in fact already possess strong frameworks that can
enable joint responses against trafficking in persons.
First and foremost among these is the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
and its landmark Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and
Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children. Adopted by the General Assembly in 2000
and entering into force in 2003, the Protocol was the
first international instrument calling for all acts of
human trafficking to be criminalized.

The Protocol also laid the foundation for further
groundbreaking steps, including the General
Assembly's adoption in 2010 of a Global Plan of Action
against Trafficking in Persons (General Assembly resolution 64/293), which also mandated the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) to
conduct research on trafficking, and established the
United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for Victims
of Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children. The Convention and Protocol provide a legal
and practical framework under which countries can
cooperate to address a crime that commonly involves
multiple jurisdictions.

The good news is that most countries in the world
are States parties to the Convention and the trafficking
Protocol, and in recent years most of them have
enacted relevant laws. The bad news is that not many
countries fully use these laws - their own laws. Forty-
one per cent reported no convictions at all or fewer
than 10 convictions per year for the charge of human
trafficking. Clearly, this impunity must end. I hope
that this debate will further encourage States parties
to fulfil their commitments and obligations under the
Convention and Protocol. More can and should be
done to foster cooperation among States affected by
trafficking, whether they are countries of origin, transit
or destination.

UNODC, as the guardian of the Convention and its
Protocols, is assisting countries in these efforts. Over
the past two years, UNODC has delivered assistance to
more than 60 countries, through its global programme
against human trafficking, to enable Governments to
effectively implement the provisions of the Protocol.
Dedicated programmes have also been set up in key
regions affected by conflict.

In response to migrant smuggling through the
Mediterranean - which to a large degree is the result of
conflicts in Syria and Libya - UNODC has developed a
plan to support Member States, encompassing research
and analysis, national capacity-building, regional and
interregional cooperation and enhanced protection for
victims. By strengthening criminaljustice capacities, as
well as the regulatory frameworks for banks and other
financial institutions, we also help to disrupt the illicit
financial flows, corruption and money-laundering that
enable criminal activities.

The interests of the victims remain at the heart of
UNODC's efforts. Next year, we seek to bring together
practitioners from countries hosting large refugee
populations to share experiences in addressing the
vulnerability of refugees to trafficking and preventing
victimization. Within the United Nations system,
UNODC seeks a strong, coordinated and consistent
response through its active participation in the
Inter-Agency Coordination Group against Trafficking
in Persons (ICAT). Established by the General
Assembly, ICAT brings together 16 United Nations
and other partners engaged in the fight against human
trafficking. By harmonizing our approaches and taking
advantage of each agency's added value, we can help
to ensure that there are no gaps in the United Nations
system's response. As the incoming chair of ICAT, I
will invite UNODC's counterparts to follow-up the
discussion in this meeting of the Security Council.

With the Convention and Protocol, we have a
strong, agreed legal basis for international cooperation
and concerted action against trafficking in persons,
including in situations of conflict. Through ICAT,
we have the structures in place to coordinate United
Nations action to provide comprehensive assistance to
Member States. We need to make the best use of these
tools. UNODC stands ready to support Member States.

