Ms. King: I will return to the question of success
stories and scepticism and elephants. I would like to
mention that one of the goals on which the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and my office are
working is to produce gender perspectives in
disarmament and peacekeeping. We are working on a
series of briefing notes, using methodology from my
office but very much incorporating the on-the-ground
and headquarters experiences of various offices. This is
being done with the very strong support of the head of
the Department for Disarmament Affairs and his team.

The representative of Colombia said that in
December he is hoping to base discussions on gender
and small arms. There is already a briefing note on
gender perspectives and small arms in that kit on
which, I believe, he and the Security Council could
build. I think that many of the success stories and the
convincing aspects that we are dealing with could be
used in a kit like that, where methodologies could be
presented. Much of this work is already being done. In
fact, the representative of Denmark invited DPKO to
include a chapter on gender mainstreaming in the
standard operating procedures, and we are currently
working very closely with DPKO on exactly that, with
the help of some of the gender advisers from the field,
particularly from East Timor, one of whom is with us
today and is now part of DPKO.

The representative of Jamaica wondered just what
was being done in the area of disarmament. There are a
number of initiatives. UNICEF, for example, is doing
its best to separate girl soldiers from adults and to
involve them in retraining.

There are also - again, in the briefing note on
gender perspectives, disarmament and development -
two case studies. One is from Albania, showing that in
programmes for exchanging weapons for development,
women were extremely active. Close to 6,000 weapons
and 137 tons of ammunition were collected. Women
were particularly active in public information and
awareness campaigns in the communities, including
through rallies and training programmes.

In another example, in Cambodia, at a recent
burning-of-weapons ceremony in a disarmament for
development programme in Bakan district, around 90
per cent of the participants were women and children.
So, hidden in a lot of the available literature are some
of these very successful and convincing stories. I know
that several members of the inter-Agency group-
UNHCR, UNIFEM, UNDP and others - have put
together small compilations of such case studies. I
believe that out of this debate perhaps a call could
come for an official, comprehensive compilation that
could be printed and distributed at some point.

I know that Mr. Guehenno has already addressed
the question of senior advisors, but I wanted to assure
the Security Council that the registry or roster of
eminent persons is now in place, under the guidance of
the Deputy Secretary-General. The senior appointments
group is meeting on a regular basis on this subject. I
hope that more women will be appointed Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General.

Other issues were brought up, such as a code of
conduct for peacekeeping. That is also being updated,
as are some of the policies on sexual harassment. We
are currently working with DPKO to make it more
user-friendly.

