Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt): The Council's semi-annual
open debate to review the implementation of Council
resolution 1325 (2000)m, on women and peace and
security, is a good opportunity to review the progress
made over the past year, share good practices and identify
the persistent barriers to the full implementation of the
resolution.

Egypt has considered with interest the Secretary-
General's report on women and peace and security
(S/2013/525). We would like to express our appreciation
for the efforts made in the drafting of the report, which
highlights the progress made, including the significant
policy and operational focus on the monitoring,
prevention and prosecution of violence against women
in conflicts. In that context, I would like to make the
following remarks.
First, Egypt reaffirms the pivotal role of women
in the prevention and resolution of conflicts and in
peacebuilding, as outlined in the resolution 1325
(2000). We also stress the importance of promoting
the education and economic empowerment of women
as effective tools to achieving sustainable peace and
security.

Secondly, Egypt is deeply concerned about the
increasing rates and patterns of violence against women
and girls around the world, particularly sexual Violence
in armed conflicts and post-conflict situations. We
stress the indispensable role of transitional justice and
the rule of the law for the protection of women's rights
and for ensuring accountability and non-impunity for
perpetrators, as a key element of conflict-prevention,
peacekeeping, conflict-resolution and peacebuilding.
Transitional justice measures must address the full
range of violations and abuses of women's human
rights, including crimes committed by United Nations
peacekeeping forces and personnel.

In that context, we highlight the significance of
the initiative taken in April by the Group of Eight on
preventing sexual Violence in conflict, assisting victims
of sexual violence in war and preventing further attacks
and holding perpetrators accountable for their crimes.
Last month, Egypt joined the international declaration
of commitment to end sexual violence in conflict that
was launched during the high-level segment of the
General Assembly at its sixty-eighth session.

Thirdly, we support the inclusion of the theme of
women and peace and security as a crosscutting issue
in the post-2015 development agenda.

Fourthly, the Security Council will hold a high-
level meeting in 2015 to mark the fifteenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). It will
assess progress in implementing that resolution, renew
commitments and address obstacles and constraints.
In that regard, there is a need to address the existing
gap related to quality data collection and analysis in
conflict settings. Egypt supports conducting a global
study to highlight good practices, implementation
gaps and challenges, as well as emerging trends and
priorities for action. The outcome of that study should
be available to all Member States.

The practices of the Israeli occupation in the
Arab occupied territories are a clear manifestation
of violations of the human rights and fundamental
freedoms of Arab women and girls under foreign
occupation. Egypt stresses the responsibility of the
United Nations system, as well as all international
organizations concerned with women's issues, towards
women under foreign occupation. There is definitely
a need to pay greater attention to their suffering in
order to ensure their full rights, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of international law, international
humanitarian law and human rights law. We request all
senior officials and field-based entities responsible for
reporting to the Council, particularly UN Women and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, to systematically include
information on the situation of women and girls in
Arab-occupied territories in their reports and briefings.

Egypt reiterates its commitment to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), in line with
its international obligations, as well as its conviction of
the critical and indispensable role that could be played
by women in resolving armed conflicts and in post-
conflict situations.

