Mr. Jinga (Romania): I would like to thank you,
Sir, for organizing today's open debate on women and
peace and security, one year after the high-level review
on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

Romania aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union. I would now like to
make a few remarks in my national capacity.
Let me also thank the Secretary-General and the
Executive Director of UN-Women for their tireless
efforts in promoting the role of women in peacebuilding
and the gender dimension of conflict resolution.

Last year, resolution 2242 (2015) recognized the
need for greater integration of the agenda of resolution
1325 (2000) into the Council's work. In that regard,
Romania welcomes the creation of the Informal Expert
Group on Women and Peace and Security. Data show
that when women are included in peace processes,
there is a 20 per cent increase in the probability of an
agreement lasting at least two years and a 35 per cent
increase in the probability of an agreement lasting at
least 15 years. The building of peace is a continuous
process that requires broad popular support and the
participation of all layers of society. Every generation
has to rediscover the value of peace and build on
previous generations' achievements in preserving it.
Peace is built every day by teachers in schools, by youth
on sports fields and by employees in their workplaces.

Resolution 1325 (2000) contributed to adapting
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture to new
challenges. Consequently, at the end of an extensive
intergovernmental process, a new concept - that
of sustaining peace - was endorsed by the States
Members of the United Nations and formalized by
two identical resolutions adopted on 27 April 2016:
Security Council resolution 2282 (2016) and General
Assembly resolution 70/262. Sustaining peace is
understood both as a goal and as a process related to the
prevention, stabilization and post-conflict construction
and development. Evidence has shown the nexus
between gender mainstreaming, sustaining peace and
civic engagement. For example, seven out of 10 peace
agreements signed in 2015 included gender-specific
provisions. Women are now deployed in all areas of
peacekeeping and special political missions as part of
the missions' police, military and civilian personnel.
More security personnel have been trained to prevent
and respond to sexual and gender-based violence.

The Romanian Ministry of Defence has adopted
a national plan applicable until 2024, aimed at
implementing the women and peace and security
agenda. It promotes fair and balanced access for men
and women, whether military or civilian personnel,
to operational, executive and leadership posts at all
hierarchical levels. The selection of candidates is a
process evaluating professional skills, with no gender
specification. A focal point on gender is appointed
within all Romanian military units. As a result, we
have women who have reached the rank of General,
and there is an increased number of military female
staff participating in international missions. Gender
equality, tolerance, non-discrimination and interdiction
of sexual harassment and gender violence are reflected
in all military education programmes in Romania.
Romania continues to deploy mixed-gender teams,
especially within the civil and military cooperation
units in Afghanistan. Currently, 15 per cent of
Romanian police officers deployed in United Nations
missions are women.

Finally, as one participant in the consultations
held during the preparation of the global study said,
women and peace and security is an agenda that speaks
about preventing war, not about making war safer for
women. Therefore, we praise women's leadership and
the critical role women play in preventing conflict and
sustaining peace.

