Mr. Cox: We have circulated a longer text and
therefore, in keeping with your injunction, Sir, I will
abbreviate my statement.

I am pleased to associate myself with the
comments of those who have commented favourably
on the quality of the presentation and papers we have
received and thank you and the members of the
Security Council for organizing this debate. I am also
very pleased to have the opportunity to participate in
this debate on resolution 1325 (2000), which affirms
the role of women in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts. The 53 member States of the
Commonwealth, representing a third of the world's
population, work together to promote peace,
democracy, good governance, respect for human rights
and the reduction of poverty through economic and
social development.

Using the Secretary-General's good offices, the
Commonwealth has contributed to stability and
progress in countries such as Cameroon, Fiji, the
Gambia, Guyana, Kenya, Papua New Guinea, Sierra
Leone, Solomon Islands, Swaziland, the United
Republic of Tanzania and Zanzibar. The Secretary-
General's good offices work is supported by efforts to
mainstream a gender perspective into peace and
conflict management processes, a role that was
reaffirmed by Commonwealth heads of Government
when they met in Abuja in 2003.

Building on initiatives and taking into
consideration recent global developments, the
Commonwealth ministers responsible for women and
gender affairs adopted a ten-year plan in Fiji in May
2004, covering the period 2005-2015. That plan also
focuses on the importance of peace-building.

Women and children remain deliberate targets in
armed conflicts everywhere, yet they are not provided
with opportunities to participate in negotiating peace
agreements and in reconciliation and post-conflict
reconstruction activities. Nor are they involved in
finding solutions to lack of services such as education
and health, or in resolving issues such as food security,
gender-based violence and gender-based crimes.

Despite those challenges and exclusions, women
in the Commonwealth and beyond still play a crucial
role in maintaining and building the social fabric
during, and in the aftermath of, conflicts. Specially to
be commended in that regard are the women of Papua
New Guinea and Bougainville, Solomon Islands and
Sierra Leone.

In order to ensure that women play their fair role
in conflict resolution, the Commonwealth Secretariat
has developed an integrated approach involving men,
women and young persons in promoting a culture of
peace, resolving conflicts and increasing women's
representation and participation at all levels of the
peace-building processes - Sierra Leone being a
particularly good example of that work. In addition, we
organized a sub-Saharan ministerial conference
focusing on a programme of strategies in universal
primary education in conflict-affected countries. That
resulted in the Mombasa declaration, urging
Governments to use education as a force for peace-
building, conflict prevention, conflict resolution and
nation-building.

The Commonwealth's challenge is to strengthen
its support for, and deepen its partnership with,
member countries and other stakeholders to prevent
and resolve conflicts before they translate into loss of
lives and livelihoods. We must promote increased
women's participation and representation in peace-
building, conflict resolution and post-conflict
reconstruction processes - and, indeed, the resolution
of conflicts through dialogue.

As my Secretary-General has noted, conflict
resolution is about battles that were not fought, blood
that was not spilled and children, women and men who
did not die.

The positive contributions of women within the
Commonwealth and throughout the world can no
longer be ignored. I wish to quote the Governor of
Bougainville, speaking about the unsung heroes:

"It is time that the world and the people of
Bougainville appreciated the tremendous
potentiality that is inherent in this so-called
weaker sex. In many, many ways they are much,
much stronger."

I urge the Council today to celebrate those
unsung heroes of peace-building and conflict
resolution: women - whether from Bougainville, the
Fiji Islands, Uganda, Sierra Leone, Timor-Leste,
Northern Ireland, Kosovo, Afghanistan or wherever
there is conflict - by providing them essential spaces
at all negotiating tables and by implementing this
landmark resolution.

