Mr. Long Zhou (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, let me express my appreciation to the
delegation of Japan for taking the initiative to organize
today's briefing. I also thank Ms. Wallstrom, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, and Ms. Mayanja, Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women, for their briefings.

Resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace and
security, adopted by the Council 10 years ago, was a
landmark document that laid the foundation for
international cooperation on women, peace and
security. Since that time, the Council has followed up
with many actions for its implementation and Member
States have adopted relevant implementation measures,
as required by the resolution. The concepts of gender
equality, women's empowerment and the prevention
and suppression of sexual violence have taken hold,
and efforts on those issues have produced remarkable
results.

Much work remains to be accomplished before
the international community will be able to achieve the
various targets set by resolution 1325 (2000). To that
end, relevant agencies and organs should work
synergistically and within their respective mandates to
maximize the strength of the entire United Nations
system.

The Security Council should focus on preventing
and reducing incidents of armed conflict, thereby
decreasing the root causes of women's suffering. As
the party bearing the primary responsibility for the
protection of its women, the country concerned should
not only take account of the special needs and concerns
of women during and after an armed conflict, but also
focus on their full participation in conflict prevention,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and relevant decision-
making. The international community and donors
should provide financial and technical assistance to the
capacity-building efforts of the countries concerned.

Sexual violence is among the major problems
facing women in armed conflict in certain countries
and regions. China welcomes the Secretary-General's
appointment of Ms. Wallstrom as his Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict and
supports her in fulfilling her mandate. We hope that the
Special Representative will enhance communication
and cooperation with the countries concerned, and
provide them with constructive help in addressing the
problem of sexual violence in armed conflict. China
also expects to see greater coordination and enhanced
efficiency in United Nations efforts to combat sexual
violence and protect women in armed conflict.

China welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2010/ 173) submitted pursuant to resolution
1889 (2009), which contains a set of indicators to track
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). My country
appreciates the tremendous amount of work carried out
by the Secretariat and hopes that it will continue to
improve the indicators. Resolution 1325 (2000) covers
a broad range of areas from the protection of the rights
and interests of women to the promotion of women's
participation in the prevention and settlement of
conflicts. In some areas, it is difficult to quantify the
progress made, a factor that should be fully taken into
account when formulating and improving the
indicators.

Moreover, since countries experience differing
situations according to their level of development and
historical and cultural traditions, the indicators should
be feasible and applicable so that countries will be able
to apply them in accordance with their specific
conditions. We hope that the Secretariat will give full
consideration to the Views of all parties concerned,
especially those of Member States, and build on the
collective wisdom of all States in formulating a set of
indicators that will provide useful reference to Member
States in their implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).

