Mr. Kydyrov (Kyrgyzstan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Rwandan presidency of the Security
Council for organizing this timely and important
debate.

Kyrgyzstan welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2012/732), which contains a comprehensive
analysis of the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and the progress achieved over the past year.
My delegation also welcomes his report on sexual
violence in conflict (S/2013/149) and supports the
recommendations contained therein. However, we
believe that current situations in the Middle East and
in some countries in the African region require further
consolidated efforts by Member States and by global
and regional security structures.

Kyrgyzstan believes it is necessary to take
additional measures to effectively address impunity
for perpetrators of sexual violence in conflict and to
ensure the equal participation of women in mediation,
humanitarian assistance and post-conflict recovery
processes.

We support the recommendation of the Secretary-
General on increased attention to women's empowerment
in terms of developing policies and strategies with
regard to peacebuilding and in considering the renewal
of the mandates of United Nations peacekeeping
missions.

Kyrgyzstan welcomes the efforts of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations in preventing violence
against women in armed conflict. In that respect,
important measures aim to strengthen the operational
capacity of the United Nations, including through the
United Nations International Network of Female Police
Peacekeepers, established for those taking part in
peacekeeping operations.

Kyrgyzstan appreciates the efforts of UN-Women to
ensure gender mainstreaming within the United Nations
system. We underline the importance of the outcome
of the fifty-seventh session of the Commission on the
Status of Women, held in March, which considered in
detail the problems of preventing and eliminating all
forms of violence against women.

In the current difficult circumstances, my
delegation continues to call on UN-Women to strengthen
cooperation with other agencies in providing support to
Member States in the preparation and implementation
of national plans to implement Security Council
resolutions on preventing violence against women and
enhancing their role in ensuring peace and security.

Kyrgyzstan attaches the greatest importance to the
participation of women in political and peacebuilding
processes and takes concrete measures to maintain
peace and stability in our country and in the region as
a whole.

In order to effectively implement the provisions of
resolution 1325 (2000), on 18 February, the Government
approved its national plan of action. The plan provides for
a set of measures aimed at establishing an institutional
system on the protection of women's rights and creating
favourable conditions for increasing women's role and
participation in efforts towards peace, security and
conflict prevention.

In addition, on 10 April, the President of the
Kyrgyz Republic approved a concept on strengthening
the unity of the people and inter-ethnic relations in the
Kyrgyz Republic, which will undoubtedly contribute
to strengthening peace, stability and post-conflict
reconstruction.

The role of the Peacebuilding Fund is of great
importance. The Fund has supported Kyrgyzstan in
its implementation of national reconciliation and post-
conflict reconstruction projects. Today, projects aimed
at completing that process are being planned.

We would also like to note the activities of
the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia, in cooperation with the
United Nations Development Programme and United
Nations agencies, in promoting conflict prevention
initiatives and strengthened inter-ethnic harmony.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm Kyrgyzstan's
commitment to further contribute to United Nations
efforts in ensuring women's rights and eradicating
conflict-related violence.

