Mr. Islam (Bangladesh): Bangladesh thanks the
French presidency for convening today's open debate.

We align ourselves with the statement delivered
earlier by the representative of Canada on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security.

In open debates on women and peace and security,

Bangladesh usually focuses on a particular set of
issues. This time, however, we have to depart from
that. One of the briefers this morning referred to the
crisis in Myanmar. That description hardly captures
the grim realities of the catastrophe. In the past two
months, nearly 600,000 people, mostly Rohingya and
the majority of them women and children, have fled to
Bangladesh in sheer desperation to save their lives and
dignity. Thousands are still arriving on an almost daily
basis. In her address to the General Assembly this year,
our Prime Minister said that the

"forcibly displaced people of Myanmar are fleeing
an ethnic cleansing in their own country, where
they have been living for centuries." (A/72/PVJ4, 
p. 14)

The United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights has also termed it a textbook example of
ethnic cleansing.

As is evident from numerous eyewitness accounts,
rape and sexual violence have been systematically used
as a main tactic by Myanmar security forces in order to
drive the Rohingya out of Myanmar and prevent them
from returning to their homes. In its report released on
11 October, the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights rapid response mission to Bangladesh
says that

"[w]ell into the course ofthe mission, more and
more information began to be shared both by girls
and women who had survived rape or other forms of
sexual violence. Information was collected related
to girls as young as five to seven years of age who
had been raped, often in front of their relatives, and
sometimes by three to five men taking turns, all
dressed in army uniforms."

The rest of the report makes disturbing reading, but
to cite further,

"[t]estimonies also indicate that many women,
even ones who were pregnant, were raped. In several
cases, women and girls were reportedly raped in
their homes and at police stations, and at other
times in full view of family members, including
children; anyone trying to protect their female kin
was dealt with severely by the perpetrators."

The Special Advisers of the Secretary-General on
the Prevention of Genocide and the Responsibility to
Protect, respectively, have made a compelling case, and
in their words,

"Myanmar has failed to meet its obligations under

international law and primary responsibility to

protect the Rohingya population from atrocity
crimes. The international community has equally
failed its responsibilities in this regard."

As a country that played an instrumental role in
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), we cannot
remain silent or objective in the face of such atrocities
happening just across our border in total impunity. In
Bangladesh, our humanitarian partners are trying, to
the extent that they can, to provide support to the women
and girls who have survived rape and sexual violence.
Special priority has been given to supporting the nearly
2,000 pregnant women who have fled to Bangladesh
so far. Properly addressing the gender-sensitive issues
of protection and assistance in already overcrowded
camps, amid vulnerable host communities, is an uphill
task. The team of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
is visiting the camps this weekend, while the Special
Representative herself will be there the following week.
She had previously urged the Myanmar authorities
to issue clear orders through the military chain of
command to prohibit such crimes, conduct rigorous
investigation and accountability processes, institute
training for the security forces and implement a policy
of zero tolerance, in line with resolution 2106 (2013), on
sexual violence in conflict.

It is high time to move past words into action.
The Security Council has spoken with one voice in
condemning the violence, but it must show its resolve
by sending an unequivocal message to Myanmar
through a resolution calling for an immediate cessation
of the violence and unfettered humanitarian access
for all those affected, as well as for action to ensure
the safe, dignified and sustained return of all those
who have been forcibly displaced to Bangladesh and
accountability for the perpetrators.

The significant number of Member States that
today have reaffirmed their commitment to ending
sexual violence during armed conflict should also
demonstrate their support for the draft resolution
being steered through the General Assembly by the
Organization ofIslamic Cooperation. If Member States
unite and stand behind that draft resolution, it would
assure the people who have been violated, battered,
forcibly evicted and traumatized that they are entitled
to return to their place of residence in safety, security
and dignity, and can consider doing so. Only if, and
when, they can voluntarily return to Myanmar can the
road map outlined by the Advisory Commission on
Rakhine State make a real, meaningful difference on
the ground.

Bangladesh will continue to pursue its bilateral
efforts with Myanmar as far as it can, but the
international community must accompany us in the
process. The Rohingya women and girls have not yet
had a chance to have their voices heard in this Council,
but as the Special Advisers have said, "Once again, our
failure to stop atrocity crimes makes us complicit."

