Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting. We also appreciate the
leadership of the United States in that regard. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General for his strong
and unambiguous stance on the issue discussed today.

Ukraine is convinced of the enormous importance
of addressing the issue of sexual exploitation and abuse
in a just, effective and timely manner. It is extremely
disturbing that, despite measures taken to enforce
the zero-tolerance policy, in the past year alone 69
allegations of serious misconduct in peacekeeping
missions were reported. Even more appalling is the
fact that allegations involving the most serious forms
of sexual exploitation and abuse - sexual exploitation
of and sexual acts with minors - continue to constitute
more than 50 per cent of all those reported.

The protection of civilians is a clear, overarching
objective for United Nations peacekeeping operations.
It often involves issues directly related to the protection
of civilians, including protecting them from conflict-
related sexual violence and trafficking.

In that regard, it is even more striking that reports of
alleged sexual exploitation and abuse by peacekeepers,
often involving those who are vulnerable and whom the
United Nations has been called upon to protect, have
continued to surface for years. We believe that the
Security Council should send a strong message with
regard to that problem. Ukraine welcomes the recent
report (A/70/729) of the Secretary-General on special
measures on protection from sexual exploitation and
sexual abuse and his efforts to prevent such incidents. We
support planned activities on prevention, enforcement
and remedial action, including support to victims, as
outlined in the report of the Secretary General, and we
fully agree his recommendations.

We also appreciate the focus on that issue in
the Secretary-General's report (S/2015/682) on the
implementation of the recommendations of the High-
level Independent Panel on Peace Operations. We
welcome the appointment of Jane Holl Lute as Special
Coordinator on improving the United Nations response
to sexual exploitation and abuse.

Apart from protecting the local population from
sexual exploitation and abuse, it is also of particular
importance that the United Nations policy in that area
be focused on prioritizing the security and well-being
of victims, including by maintaining confidentiality
during investigations, helping to minimize trauma
and facilitating access to immediate care and medical
and psychological support. Among the important
components of the relevant preventive policy, special
attention must also be paid to vetting all peacekeeping
personnel, along with respective predeployment
training. In that regard, we welcome the decision
of the Secretary-General to require certificates of
compliance, and we express full support for the United
Nations human rights screening policy.

As an active troop- and police-contributing country,
Ukraine is paying a great deal of attention to the issue
that we are discussing today. In order to send well-trained
and properly prepared peacekeepers to serve in United
Nations peacekeeping operations throughout the world,
our special peacekeeping training centre at our national
police academy and our training and research centre
on international peacekeeping activity at the National
Defence Academy of Ukraine are up and running. Both

of those institutions provide the necessary training
for military and police personnel in accordance with
United Nations requirements, including on the subject
of the prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse. In
that context, Ukraine re-affirms its determination
to strictly implement a zero-tolerance policy among
its peacekeepers. We fully recognize our two-fold
responsibility, as a member elected to the Council and
as an active peacekeeping nation, to strengthen the
fight against sexual exploitation and abuse and create
a system of accountability for the perpetrators of such
acts. Concrete and effective preventive measures must
be instituted. A much more aggressive approach to
ensuring justice has to be pursued. Accountability must
be real and public.

For those reasons, we support the draft resolution
put forward by the United States.

