The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Albania,
Argentina, Bangladesh, Belgium, the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, Botswana, Brazil, Cambodia,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cote d'Ivoire,
Croatia, the Czech Republic, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Djibouti, Estonia, Germany, Ghana,
Guatemala, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Ireland,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Malaysia, Maldives, Morocco, Mexico,
the Netherlands, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Panama,
Peru, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of
Korea, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Spain, the
Sudan, Switzerland, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia
and Turkey to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Adama
Dieng, Under-Secretary-General and Acting Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide,
and Ms. Mina Jaf, Founder and Executive Director of
Women's Refugee Route.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Ms. Mara Marinaki, Principal Adviser on Gender and
on the Implementation of Security Council Resolution
1325 (2000) on Women and Peace and Security of the
European External Action Service of the European
Union; and Mr. Te'te Antonio, Permanent Observer of
the African Union to the United Nations.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/402, which contains the text ofa letter
dated 5 May 2017 from the Charge' d'affaires a.i. of the
Permanent Mission of Uruguay to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept note on the item under consideration.

I wish to warmly welcome Her Excellency the
Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Amina Mohammed, to
whom I now give the floor.

