Ms. Yade (France) (spoke in French): The history
of men has long been the history of their violence. In
that intermarriage of blood and history, the war of men
has all too often also been the story of violence against
women.

This year, we are celebrating the sixtieth
anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, which drew its inspiration from one man and

one woman, one Frenchman and one American woman,
Rene Cassin and Eleanor Roosevelt. Before man's
baffling and barbaric violence, before such inhuman
acts, the Declaration affirms the inviolable dignity of
human beings, of men and women. That is the principle
that we are reaffirming today in this public debate on
sexual violence in armed conflict, and I thank you,
Madam Secretary of State, for taking the initiative of
holding this meeting.

Doubts have at times been raised: should a debate
on the issue of sexual violence in armed conflict be
included on the agenda of the Security Council, which
debates issues of peace and war? For France, that
debate has been decided. One cannot establish peace
while remaining silent on the subject of rape and the
violence done to women.

While such violence has, in the recent past and
even today, reached shocking levels - in the former
Yugoslavia, Rwanda, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Liberia, Sierra Leone and the Sudan - and
while entire populations are being hunted down and
massacred, we continue to witness the unbearable
procession of mutilated and sexually tortured women
and hear the endless and appalling litany of eyewitness
testimonies, which sear our conscience. When sexual
violence becomes a weapon of war, when rape is
carried out in a planned and systematic campaign of
terror and subjection, our Council is right to intervene.
Not to do so would be a crime against conscience. We
must act urgently.

The figures alone do not give the complete
picture of the terror and horror that each violated and
battered woman experiences in her innermost being,
but they do, in their grim tally, show the extent of the
tragedy.

I have just returned from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, where I travelled to the Kivus.
In 2007, over a period of six months, nearly 30,000
women were raped in eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo. I met several of them in Bukavu and Goma.
I listened to their raw, tragic stories, from which any
trace of humanity seemed to have been erased. The
testimonies are unbearable. One's spirit is
overwhelmed with pain.

One of the women I spoke with was a 15-year-old
girl from a village near Bukavu. She had been in Panzi
hospital for several months. She had gone out to buy
bread when several armed attackers fell upon her. She
was raped by several of them in front of her family.
They then took her with them into the woods, where
for several months she was gang-raped, until she
became pregnant and was infected with AIDS. After
being kidnapped and brutalized a second time, she
returned with a second child. Her life has been
destroyed, especially since her family and community
have ostracized her. That young girl is afraid to go
home because she is afraid that the army could capture
her again and the same thing would happen again.

When I saw those women and their distress, I
wanted to let them know what we, the international
community, are doing about this. In terms of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC), for example, which
is the largest United Nations presence in the world,
those women are asking: what good is that presence to
us, when we continue to be kidnapped and raped? I
spoke about the establishment of the International
Criminal Court, which has brought about the arrest of
Jean-Pierre Bemba. These women who had been raped
welcomed that news, but asked: why are the armed
groups still at large? You see, the 200,000 women who
have been raped in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo are expecting more concrete and timely results.
They are asking me to present their petition to you. We
must therefore take action. What can we do? For the
Congolese women, the answers are simple.

First of all, we must disarm the armed groups and
put an end to the illegal trafficking that provides them
with weapons. Secondly, we must ensure that those
armed groups are kept away from the Kivus, so that
they do not cross paths with their victims again.
Thirdly, we must make sure that they are punished, so
that impunity does not encourage other men to rape,
knowing that they will never be punished. We must
also find work for those who have not yet become
criminals. That is what Congolese women are
proposing. It sounds simple, but it is crucial. Let us
therefore heed their cry.

What have we done so far? As there is no peace
without justice, we welcome the progress achieved in
the field of international justice, which has made
sexual violence a crime against humanity and, in some
cases, an act of genocide. France also welcomes in that
regard the investigation that has just been opened by
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court into
the atrocities committed in the Central African
Republic, including sexual violence on a massive scale.

By charging Jean-Pierre Bemba with acts of rape that
constitute, by their magnitude, war crimes and crimes
against humanity, the International Criminal Court sent
a strong signal to perpetrators of such crimes. Any
perpetrator of such crimes, regardless of rank, will
have to answer for his actions.

At the political level, the post of Special
Rapporteur on violence against women, its causes and
consequences was established in 1994. That
mechanism has played a significant role in sounding
the alarm and increasing awareness. That is why I wish
to pay tribute to the work of the current Special
Rapporteur, Ms. Erturk. We also welcome the work of
the United Nations to increase awareness on the issue
and the remarkable work of non-governmental
organizations on the ground.

All of that, however, is not enough, and we must
scale up international mobilization efforts. First of all,
as I said, we must intensify the fight against impunity
more than ever before. That is how we will be able to
bring peace and redress to the victims. Without real
punishment, there will be no prevention or deterrence.

Of equal importance is the need to include a
detailed examination of the issue of sexual violence in
reports by peacekeeping operations and in a
comprehensive report of the Secretary-General. We
need detailed information on this scourge in order to
methodically attack the issue, particularly by
integrating the consideration of this question in
peacekeeping mandates, based on the example set by
MONUC. Of course, we must make sure that
peacekeeping forces themselves set the example

Finally, we must strengthen the practical
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). There will
be no effective fight against sexual violence if women
are not represented in sufficient numbers in
peacekeeping operations, in security forces such as the
army and police, and among the ranks of judges in
States directly affected by those crimes.

Forty per cent of women raped in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo are minors. With
that knowledge, we believe that we should take
advantage of the opportunities offered by the Working
Group of the Security Council on Children and Armed
Conflicts, expanding its mandate to include sexual
violence perpetrated against children, regardless of
whether or not there are child soldiers in the country in
question. We must also continue to develop victim
treatment programmes and strengthen rehabilitation
services, while working with local communities so as
to avoid stigmatization of the victims.

Lastly, the European Union will continue to make
this issue a priority. That is why France will seek the
adoption of guidelines on violence against women,
including sexual violence, during its European Union
presidency, which begins on 1 July. Such guidelines
will enable our embassies to take action and to directly
finance rehabilitation programmes.

I am hoping that a robust resolution,
incorporating as many of our suggestions as possible,
will be adopted after this debate. Sexual violence, in
particular rape, is unacceptable, whether it takes place
today or tomorrow, no matter who commits it or what
continent it is committed. That is my profound
conviction, and I have no doubt that everyone in this
Chamber shares it.

