Mr. Mukerji (India): At the outset, I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this important
open debate on sexual violence in conflict in the
broader context of the discourse on women and peace
and security. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and the other
briefers who made remarks this morning.

The resolution of conflict situations requires the
adoption of a sustainable and holistic approach to
conflict resolution and the overall reconstruction of
impacted societies. In our view, gender equality and
women's empowerment are integral to the pursuit of
this objective. The participation of women in peace
processes and post-conflict reconstruction efforts is
imperative for laying the foundation for durable peace.
Economic recovery, social cohesion and political
legitimacy cannot be achieved without the active
engagement of women.

Thirteen years ago, resolution 1325 (2000)
highlighted the disproportionate impact of armed
conflict on women and children, and the need for
effective institutional arrangements to guarantee
their protection and the full participation of women in
peace processes. That resolution also contained several
detailed recommendations on how to deal with various
aspects of this issue.

As reports made to the Security Council since
resolution 1325 (2000) was adopted show, we have
not made enough progress on implementing its
recommendations. Take, for example, the peacekeeping
operations mandated by the Security Council. As
one of the major contributors to United Nations
peacekeeping operations for over six decades, India
and its peacekeepers serving under the blue flag have
also had to deal with this pernicious problem under
challenging circumstances. Based on our experience
on the ground, we are of the view that the Security
Council must make available the resources required
to implement the expanded scope of peacekeeping
mandates. Specifically, we require greater commitment
to the deployment of women's protection advisers in
peacekeeping operations.

In resolution 1325 (2000), the Security Council
called for greater participation by women in the field-
based operations of the United Nations in terms of
the deployment of police personnel. We are proud of
the fact that India was the first State Member of the
United Nations to successfully deploy an all-woman
police force as part of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations in Liberia, where sexual violence had been
one of the hallmarks of the conflict. Apart from the
effectiveness of the force, which has been acknowledged
by many, we believe that the functioning of such an all-
woman force has also sent a strong deterrent message
to those who indulge in the egregious crime of sexual
violence in conflict. By deploying women to deal with
conflict situations, we have demonstrated that we can
push forward the goal of empowering women to deal
with the crime of sexual violence in conflict and play
a major role in the post-conflict reconstruction of
traumatized societies. We hope that this example will
encourage others to follow suit.

In earlier debates, India drew the attention of the
Security Council to the impact of so-called militia
groups on the mandates of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. As the reports made to the Council since the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) show, that impact
has been felt especially in crimes of sexual violence in
conflict situations where peacekeeping mandates are in
force.

It is in that context that we take the View that
national Governments have the primary responsibility
for prosecuting and deterring such crimes in conflict
situations on their territories, even if these are alleged
to have been committed by so-called militia groups. We
believe that national Governments should be assisted
by the United Nations in augmenting their capacities
to deal with this issue. That would play a vital role in
ensuring better governance and the stabilization of
post-conflict situations. The United Nations should
focus its efforts in this area.

We would like to reiterate our principled position
that debates such as that of today in the Security Council
should focus on issues related to mandates specifically
given by the Council. We would urge caution in going

beyond such mandates in reports submitted to the
Council, which can only serve to blur the focus of
the Council and which contain the potential to divert
much-needed resources away from the task at hand. It is
critical, therefore, that such reports remain focused on
the situations of armed conflict that are on the agenda
of the Council, and not stray into so-called "situations
of concern" on the basis of sweeping generalizations.

In conclusion, I would like once again to reaffirm
India's commitment to positively contribute to our
collective efforts to tackle the crime of sexual violence
in situations of armed conflict, in the overall framework
of the work of the United Nations on peacebuilding and
the prevention and resolution of conflicts.
