Mr. Mawe (Ireland): Human trafficking is not
always the first thing that comes to mind when we
think about violent conflicts. Often our news stories
and our attention spans are consumed with images
of bombings, tanks and refugee camps. But the link
between trafficking and conflict is a major issue in
need of our attention.

Last December's presidential statement
S/PRST/2015/25,on trafficking in persons in situations
of conflict, was an important achievement. First, it
reaffirmed that human trafficking must be considered
in the context of threats to international peace and
security. Secondly, it asserted a role for the Security
Council in consolidating the international response to
this challenge.

We thank Spain for organizing today's important
debate and align ourselves with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union. We also join with
all delegations in expressing solidarity with the victims
of yesterday's terrorist attacks. In my national capacity,
I will outline four areas of opportunity for a stronger
international response to trafficking in conflict.

The first area is the pursuit of accountability for
conflict-related sexual violence. The link between
human trafficking and conflict-related sexual violence
is irrefutable. We have seen it in horrific cases
involving the trafficking and sexual abuse of women by
the so-called Islamic State and Boko Haram. There are
also less reported cases, including many on the sexual
exploitation by illegal traffickers of those who are
fleeing war zones. In addition to being linked through
causes, or points of origin, there are more invidious
links, ones that we can do something about. One link is
accountability, or the lack thereof. A clear thread exists
between conflict-related sexual violence and human
trafficking because impunity for one allows the other
to flourish.

The Security Council can act as an important
accountability mechanism in this respect. At its most
simple, let us have incidents of trafficking called out in
this Chamber where we see them occurring. In addition,
the Council can serve to bolster other accountability
measures, for example, by supporting Special
Representative Bangura, by active deployment of
women-protection advisers in peacekeeping missions,
by referring cases to the International Criminal Court,
and by supporting regional and national systems
of accountability.

The second area is preventing the conditions
conducive to human trafficking. We have seen clearly
that war acts as a potent catalyst to human trafficking.
It breaks down institutional and social protections, and
it leaves masses of people vulnerable to traffickers. It
is startlingly obvious, therefore, that greater focus by
the international community on preventing conflicts
and stopping their reoccurrence would have a direct
impact on human trafficking. Prevent the conflict and
you prevent the trafficking.

Wecallforincreasedmomentuminputtingourwords
about conflict prevention and peacebuilding - which
are often heard in this Chamber - into practice.
We welcome a stronger role for the Peacebuilding
Commission and regional institutions in informing
the Security Council about human trafficking in
conflict situations, and we look to the Secretary-
General-designate to maximize his good offices in
advancing conflict prevention.

The third area involves partnerships that extend
beyond the Security Council. Trafficking has mobility
at its core. It transcends borders and jurisdictions. It
presents far too big a challenge for any one entity to
confront. Although the issue of human trafficking in
conflict should indeed be addressed by the Security
Council, we will also need to look beyond the Chamber
to find a comprehensive solution. The implementation
ofthe Sustainable Development Goals will be crucial in
this regard. It will mean a focus not only on target 8.7,
which addresses modern slavery and human trafficking
directly, but also on Goal 5, to ensure women's
empowerment, and Goal 16 to prioritize the building of
strong and inclusive institutions.

To achieve this, partnerships must be fostered
between the United Nations and regional systems, many
of which have developed comprehensive strategies
on this issue. For example, as Member States work to
implement the Palermo Protocols and the New York
Declaration for Refugees and Migrants, they will play
a crucial role in comprehensively addressing human
trafficking. Trafficking is an egregious violation
of people's human rights and we are encouraged
that the United Nations human rights bodies are
taking an increasingly comprehensive approach to
human trafficking.

Finally, a stronger response needs to place the
needs of the most vulnerable at its core. Through our
support to Justice Rapid Response and UN-Women, we
heard last year harrowing accounts of investigations
into sexual violence and human trafficking by Boko
Haram. Many victims were too traumatized to speak
to interviewers about their ordeals. In some cases,
they were more concerned about shelter, food or their
own personal safety than about the investigation. For
them, justice meant more than a prison sentence for
their abusers.

Uncomfortable though it may be, we need to hear
these accounts. We need the participation of those who
have survived or who are most vulnerable to human
trafficking in conflict, and in crafting our response we
need to put them at the centre. This applies in particular
to women, but also to young people, including former
child combatants. The participation of civil society,
academia and the private sector will also be crucial to
stemming flows of human traffic.

We are grateful to Spain for working to ensure that
the Council remains focused on this issue. However, as
we have noted, our response must include and extend
beyond the Security Council if we are to finally end
human trafficking in conflict.

