Ms. Heyzer: Thank you, Sir, for the honour of
addressing the Security Council.

The consolidation of peace is an uncertain
enterprise. It is one thing to agree to a ceasefire, and
quite another to move from there to a point at which
societies can resolve conflicts through inclusive
governance without reverting to armed combat. From
our work in over 20 conflict-affected countries, the
United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM) has learned what is needed to implement
resolution 1325 (2000) effectively in the consolidation
of peace. Let me mention three points.

First, peacebuilding efforts must ensure women's
physical and economic security. In peacemaking and
peacebuilding, the urgent often drives out the
important. The urgent is the need to stop the fighting,
but parties to the conflict are not the same as parties to
the peace. Peacebuilding requires that all parties with
an interest in peace be engaged in negotiating a new
social contract, building the institutions of a new
society, and re-establishing livelihoods.

Women are a crucial resource in this process.
Peace agreements, early recovery and post-conflict
governance do better when women are involved.
Women make a difference in part because they adopt a
more inclusive approach to peace and security and
address key social and economic issues that provide
the foundations of sustainable peace and would
otherwise be ignored. The question before us today is
not only what women can bring to peace consolidation
but also what peacebuilding can do to promote
women's human rights and gender equality -
transforming social structures so that they do not
reproduce the exclusion and marginalization that
underlie conflict.

Women know the costs of war: what it means to
be subject to sexual violence designed to destroy their
communities, what it means to be displaced, to flee
their homes and property, to be excluded from public
life and regarded as less than full citizens. The
consolidation of peace must include putting an end to
impunity for sexual violence and raising the political
and economic costs for those who engage in it,
ensuring that they are not given the rewards of power
and high-profile jobs as part of negotiated peace.

Two of women's most urgent needs are physical
safety and economic security. Efforts to engage women
in the public sphere will not succeed if women risk
continued violence for taking on public roles, and they
cannot be expected to be effective public actors if they
have no source of livelihood. What we at UNIFEM. are
seeing on the ground - in Iraq, Afghanistan and
Somalia - is that the public space for women in those
countries is, in fact, shrinking. Women are becoming
assassination targets when they dare defend women's
rights, and everywhere there is evidence that violence
is brought into homes and communities after conflicts
have ended, as young men return with guns, and the
social norms that protect women remain broken.

In all of the conflict areas where we have worked,
we have witnessed women's willingness to take
risks - reaching across borders, organizing to support
the kind of dialogue that leads to peacemaking and
defying threats to their security. But we cannot rely on
the bravery of women; systems must be put in place. In
the consolidation of peace, the international
community must invest in reforming the security sector
so as to ensure the safety of women, particularly where
armies or police have been a source of the violence
they experience.

In Rwanda, after the police said that they could
not protect women because they lacked the vehicles for
rapid response, we at UNIFEM. organized an inter-
agency response to set up specialized gender desks in
police stations and to provide them with training and
hotlines, as well as motorcycles to reach women in
remote districts.

Secondly, sustainable peace requires real justice
for women. To consolidate peace, there must be justice
for women in accordance with international human
rights standards. That means striking down all laws
that continue to discriminate against women,
strengthening rule of law organizations to implement
them, and empowering women to access those
organizations.

Too often, in conflict-affected countries, we see
that laws on compensation for victims do not include
compensation for rape, which is still regarded as a
minor crime. I have just returned from Kosovo with
our goodwill ambassador, Ms. Nicole Kidman, where
we met with women who had been raped during the
conflict. They feel that they have undergone a double
violation as they seek justice, both locally and from the
international system, which have promised to help
them but have never delivered. If we are serious about
ensuring justice, we must do more to provide training
for judges and lawyers and provide support for
witnesses, medical support, and compensation.

Family matters and personal status issues are
typically left to customary and traditional legal
systems, partly because they are seen as an inexpensive
system of resolving conflict, and partly to buy the
cooperation of traditional or tribal leaders by giving
them control over personal and family matters. The
result is honour crimes, the exchange of women to
resolve inter-clan fights, the denial of women's
inheritance rights. Justice for women cannot be done
on the cheap, and women's rights cannot be bargained
away for other political gains. Justice for women has to
be featured as an integral and achievable part of any
United Nations plan of assistance.

Thirdly, peace requires institutional change and
stronger accountability systems. Women's engagement
in the consolidation of peace requires that the
institutions engaged in the rebuilding of the
governance, justice, security and economic systems
have the will and the capacity to respond to women's
needs, and that women take leadership roles in
influencing these processes.

We have learned that, the earlier women are
recognized as peace agents and engaged in the process
of peace, the more they are seen as legitimate actors.
That is why today in Uganda, UNIFEM. is supporting
the launch of a peace caravan, with women from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Kenya and
Uganda, to demand that the international community
respect resolution 1325 (2000) and include women in
the Juba peace talks.

Some progress has been made in ensuring the
inclusion of women in the political realm. A variety of
quota systems have been put in place in Iraq, Burundi,
Rwanda and elsewhere and have resulted in record
numbers of women in the political sphere. But quotas
alone will not ensure effective participation.

This is not just a problem of the capacities of
women. It is about obstacles to gender equality in the
institutions that shape the ways choices are made,
resources allocated, and policies implemented. Three

changes are critical to bringing about greater
accountability. These include top-level guidelines that
ensure that women's rights are a key element of
institutional work; incentive systems to reward efforts
to address women's needs; and measures to include the
issue of gender equality in individual work plans as
well as in performance reviews.

Although more women have been brought into
the military and police forces, this is still a token
effort. Appointments of women to the top levels of
facilitation teams and peacekeeping missions are still
rare. UNIF EM. and other rights activists must negotiate
anew each time to bring women to peace talks or
include women's priorities in needs assessments. Even
when we have succeeded, we find that resources have
not been allocated to meet these priorities.

In conclusion, if we want to consolidate peace,
we must stop trying to reward those who are most
destructive and engage those who advocate peaceful
solutions. A famous French philosopher said:

"Women are not wrong when they decline to
accept the rules laid down for them, since the
men make those rules without consulting them".

One way of understanding the consolidation of
peace is as a massive national effort to remake the
rules of governance, justice, security and economic
activity so as to eliminate the causes of conflict and
distrust. For women of all social groups, this
opportunity to participate in the rebuilding of the rules
cannot be missed. Only then will we have peace under
the laws ofjustice.

