Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): Mr. President, at the
outset I would like to express my appreciation to you
for organizing this important meeting. I also thank
Ms. Margot Wallstrom, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, for
her comprehensive presentation of the report on sexual
violence in armed conflict (S/2012/33).

In the landmark resolution 1325 (2000), the
Security Council recognized the important role of
women in maintaining peace and security. It also
highlighted specific needs and concerns of women
during and in the aftermath of armed conflicts. We feel
proud that Bangladesh, as a member of the Council at
the time of the resolution's adoption and one of its
main sponsors, was closely associated with the
adoption of that historic document. Periodic meetings
of this sort offer us an opportunity to take stock of the
progress achieved and the challenges remaining in
fulfilling the objectives of the resolution, as well as
subsequent resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and
1960 (2000).

Some initiatives of the global community in the
first decade of its adoption have been praiseworthy.
The establishment of a new body, UN-Women, and the
appointment of a Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict have
been two significant developments that have placed
women at the top of the global agenda. The Department
of Peacekeeping Operations has also undertaken
commendable steps for the better protection and
enhanced participation of women.

The situation is far from satisfactory, however.
We are disappointed to note that violence against
women and girls is still prevalent in many parts of the
world suffering from armed conflict. Women and girls,
we all know, suffer most as victims of such conflicts.
Their suffering is compounded when they are ignored
or marginalized in peace processes. Women are too
often excluded from both the negotiations that make
peace and the institutions that maintain it. We
underscore the need to do more to ensure the safety and
security of women and girls, particularly during
conflict situations and in their aftermath.
The participation of women should be ensured at
all stages of peace processes, including conflict
prevention, peace negotiations and post-conflict
reconstruction. We also believe that poverty and socio-
economic deprivation are the breeding grounds for
conflict, including sexual violence against women and
girls. We therefore emphasize the importance of
fulfilling the economic needs of women and of
engaging women at all levels and in all forms of
decision-making processes. Women's economic needs
may be served by ensuring their access to and
participation in income-generating and entrepreneurial
activities in such areas as microcredit, vocational
training and public health. Women's engagement at all
levels of decision-making may be promoted through
the recruitment of women to senior-level positions.

In Bangladesh, based on our experience with
nation-building and women's empowerment, we have
embraced this view and developed a model that our
Prime Minister, Her Excellency Sheikh Hasina calls a
"peace model". She believes that if peace is attained
and maintained, development and prosperity will
follow. The central message conveyed in the model
emphasizes the empowerment of people, including
women and other vulnerable groups. I am happy to
note here that the General Assembly recently adopted
resolution 66/224, entitled "People's empowerment and
development".

Women occupy many top leadership positions in
my country. The Constitution of Bangladesh guarantees
the equality of men and women within the broad
framework of non-discrimination on grounds of
religion, race or gender. The 345-member National
Parliament of Bangladesh has 45 seats reserved for
women. We also have a significant number of elected
women representatives in local bodies.

The Government has adopted a national policy
for women's advancement and a national plan of
action. A women's development implementation
committee, headed by the Minister for Women and
Children Affairs, monitors the implementation of
policies for women's empowerment. It has also created
a gender-based budget. We are benefiting greatly from
all of those initiatives. To cite just one example, the
enrolment of girls at primary and secondary level
schools exceeds that of boys, and girls in secondary
level schools are helped by tuition waivers and the
provision of stipends.
We are pleased to make our modest contribution
to the maintenance of international peace and security.
Our troops and police are doing excellent work in

various United Nations peacekeeping missions. In line
with our pro-women policy, we have been recruiting
women in our regular forces, including police and the
military. While they contribute to our national security,
they are also sent to respond to international calls. For
example, we deployed an all-female contingent serving
as a female formed police unit in Haiti following the
devastating earthquake there.

Finally, let me emphasis that we have a solemn
responsibility to protect women and girls against all
forms of violence and to ensure their rightful place in
line with the letter and spirit of resolution 1325 (2000).
On its part, my country stands ready to make its
humble contribution to global efforts in promoting the
status and role of women both nationally and
internationally.

