Mr. De Alba (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to begin by commending you, Mr. President, on
your sterling leadership of the presidency of the Council
for this month, and your clear sense of responsibility,
including your presence here at this hour. Allow me to
also commend you for the initiative to hold this debate
on women and peace and security and to provide follow-
up to the efforts of the delegation of Guatemala.

Mexico welcomes the presentation of the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2012/732) and the subsequent
statements by Ms. Bachelet, Ms. Diop and Mr. Eliasson
this morning. We would also like to join other
delegations in underscoring the importance of today's
debate.
Twelve years after the historic adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), Mexico recognizes the
progress that has been made in creating favourable
conditions for the participation of women in all phases
of peace processes. The deployment of women gender
advisers in all peacekeeping operations is a very
positive development that we hope to see replicated in
peacebuilding processes. We also recognize that the
inclusion of early warning and response mechanisms
in the mandates ofpeacekeeping operations and special
political missions play a very important role.

As a member of the Group of Friends of Mediation,
my delegation welcomes in particular the inclusion of
the gender dimension in the most recent report of the
Secretary-General (A/66/811) on the strengthening
of mediation in the peaceful settlement of disputes,
conflict prevention and resolution as well as in
guidelines for effective mediation.

While recognizing the progress that has been
achieved, it is also important to recognize the challenges
and the work that remain, in particular with respect to
the implementation of the resolution. We must identify
additional actions that promote the participation of
women's organizations in the peace processes and peace
accords, an issue that has quite rightly been identified
as central to the debate.

Unfortunately, peace processes and accords rarely
include concrete provisions for promoting access to
justice and women's representation in government
bodies to enable inclusive access to power or prevent
and punish sexual violence. This perpetuates the
exclusion and vulnerable conditions in which half of the
population lives and is an obstacle to peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. The inclusion of women's organizations
in peace processes and agreements is therefore
necessary in order to overcome the injustices that
often predate conflict situations, and offers a valuable
opportunity to avoid structural problems of exclusion
in the design of national institutions.

It is evident, in reading the concept paper circulated
by Guatemala (S/2012/774, annex), that the work of
women's organizations is truly admirable, especially
since they are often intentionally excluded from official
processes and political dialogue and yet are able to move
forward. We recognize the importance of the work of
such non-governmental organizations from the very
onset of these processes. We echo the recommendation
of the Secretary-General that his envoys, representatives
and mediators consult with women's organizations and
with those affected by crisis - the victims.
Mexico also believes it essential that we include
the gender dimension in all phases of building our new
societies, in particular in the electoral processes. This is
important not just when votes are cast, but also during
the process of electoral observation and in subsequent
political representation.

Regarding the transition of United Nations
presences, including the drawdown of peacekeeping
operations, we must ensure that these transition
processes do not entail a reduction in the attention given
to this topic, or put at risk the protection and security
of women.

We have immense challenges ahead when it comes
to fully including women in processes to promote
peace and security. The inclusion of women in conflict
resolution and in post-conflict situations is without a
doubt essential. It is the only way that we will achieve
the full inclusion of women on an equal footing for
the building of societies that have better prospects for
development and peace.

