Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): As we
deliberate the issue of women and peace and security
today, it is my pleasure to see 11 women at the head of
their countries' delegations in the Security Council.
This in itself is proof that the role of women in the
world has been strengthened.

I should like to reiterate my congratulations to
you, Madam, as you crown your presidency of the
Security Council by devoting this open debate to the
issue of women and peace and security 11 years after
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), on the basis of
which the United Nations has adopted a strategic
framework and standard indicators to assess the
implementation of the resolution and its time frame at
the regional and international levels, as reflected in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2011/598*) before
us.

On this occasion, we evoke the need to push
forward in implementing resolution 1325 (2000) in the
coming decade by adopting comprehensive and
cohesive regional action plans. In that respect, we note
the importance of strengthening the capacities of
countries emerging from conflict, especially given the
fact that the issue of women and peace and security has
become one of the most prominent items on the
Council's agenda over the past decade.

With respect to women's issues, I can state with
pride that the Sudan has long-standing, pioneering
initiatives in this respect. Sudanese women have been
real partners in political life and in decision-making.
They participated in the election of the first Sudanese
Parliament in 1954, prior to the declaration of
independence; that success was followed by the
election of a woman to Parliament in 1964, after
independence.

My country has applied the principle of equal pay
for equal work since 1967. Legislation and laws
concerning women have been developed, especially in
2003, when a law was passed equalizing the age of
retirement for men and women.

With respect to the promotion of the rights of
Sudanese women in the area of political participation,
there has been a qualitative development in the form of
the electoral law of 2008, which increased the
percentage of participation by women to 25 per cent in
the federal and State Parliaments and was fully
implemented during the elections held in the country
last year. Thus women constitute one quarter of the
membership of the Sudanese Parliament, while the
report before the Council (S/2011/598*) states in
paragraph 23 that women make up 19 per cent of
parliamentarians globally.

Regarding the level of participation of Sudanese
women in the civil service, which has reached 66 per
cent, I wish to note by way of example that in the
judiciary alone, there are 79 women judges. Many such
judges eventually become Supreme Court judges.
Sudanese women have held high diplomatic posts, and
many of them serve as ambassadors to various
countries. A large number of women are doctors and
specialize in various fields of medicine. In addition,
they have assumed leading posts in the armed forces,
the police and the security forces.

Concerning the issue of violence against women,
the Government of the Sudan in 2007 adopted a
national strategy elaborated at both the official and the
popular levels. The strategy includes six principles on
strengthening and revitalizing the participation of
women in the maintenance of peace, and on their right
to participate in terms of decision-making, economic
development, education, health, the environment and
the settlement of disputes. The strategy has been
implemented at both the federal and the state level. In
that respect, the priorities included in paragraph 3 of
the report of the Security Council are almost identical
to the criteria included in our national strategy.

The Government of the Sudan has also
established several specialized centres at the federal
and state levels for the coordination of women's efforts
in the areas of peace and development, and for
providing guidelines and advice on the principle of
equality between men and women and on the gender
perspective.
Our national programmes on resettlement,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration have
given priority to the situation of women, in close
coordination with the relevant United Nations
agencies, including the United Nations Development
Fund for Women (UNIFEM). In that respect, we
commend the relationship of cooperation with
UNIFEM. in connection with women's issues and its
role in the implementation of the aforementioned plan
of action. We hope that the Fund, through the United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), will take on a
more important and active role in enhancing national
capacities and efforts aimed at advancing the situation
of women in the country.

We would like to highlight the sections of the
report of the Secretary-General that relate to the role of
women in the implementation of the Millennium
Development Goals. Supporting the capacities of
developing countries so as to enable them to attain
those objectives is the best way to ensure the
advancement of women. The provisions of the Beijing
Platform for Action must be taken into consideration,
especially given the strong interlinkage between the
Platform for Action and the realization of the MDGs,
as well as the impact of such realization on the
empowerment and advancement of women.

Last year, the Government of the Sudan
celebrated the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace and security.
In our capital, Khartoum, a broad-based workshop was
organized and a special day held to celebrate that
anniversary, in coordination with the United Nations
Mission in the Sudan and the country offices of the
United Nations agencies in the country, notably
UNIFEM. That celebration was an excellent
opportunity to disseminate the policies of the
Government of the Sudan aimed at enhancing the
status of women and putting an end to all forms of
violence against women, within the context of the
national plan to combat gender-based violence. The
implementation of that plan began in 2005 through
specialized entities in the context of the Human Rights
Consultative Council, the Sudan Police Administration,
the Ministry of the Interior, and the department for the
combat of violence against women, within the Ministry
of Justice.

The situation of women in armed conflict is
closely linked to the integrated efforts to deal with the

root causes of conflicts. We therefore agree with what
is stated in the report as regards the plan of action,
which is based on the principle of dealing with the root
causes of conflict, including poverty, lack of
development, climate change, and given the fact that in
the end, war is war. Wherever war occurs, its negative
consequences affect vulnerable sectors of society,
including women and children. My country therefore
once again stresses the fact that a comprehensive and
sustainable political settlement to conflict is central to
addressing the issue of women in conflict situations.

My delegation also reaffirms the need to base the
Council's measures on country reports submitted by
States and on accurate information contained in the
Secretary-General's periodic reports on the issue, not
on information contained in reports by
non-governmental organizations and media sources.

My country also encourages the United Nations
and its bodies to directly organize workshops and
seminars with countries that are affected by conflict, in
order to share expertise on the situation of women
affected by armed conflict.

In conclusion, my country looks forward to
today's deliberations leading to the development of an
integrated approach to deal with the important issue of
women, peace and security. Women make up half of
society - indeed, women are the foundation of
society.

