Mrs. Pucarinho (Portugal): 1 would like to thank
the French presidency for convening today's open
debate, and the briefers for their very comprehensive
presentations this morning.

I fully align my statement with the statement
delivered earlier by the observer of the European Union.

Portugal is encouraged by several very positive
developments with regard to the women and peace
and security agenda. This subject matter has become a
consistent feature in Security Council resolutions and
peacekeeping mandates, and gender-sensitive reporting
is now a fundamental element in any comprehensive
understanding of a given situation. We are also pleased
to note that nowadays more women are taking part in
peace talks, more peace agreements contain provisions
in support of women's human rights, and more security-
sector personnel are trained to prevent and properly
respond to sexual and gender-based violence.

Portugal also welcomes other important kinds of
progress at the multilateral, regional and national levels,
including the African Union and NATO's appointment
of special envoys for women and peace and security and
the increasing number of countries that have adopted
national action plans for implementing resolution 1325
(2000) and the related resolutions that have followed.
However, since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
the context of peace and security and the nature of
conflict have evolved, sometimes very dramatically.
We are currently confronted with entrenched cycles
of conflict and fragility, daily violations of human
rights and humanitarian law, growing humanitarian
crises and the mass-scale displacement of people and
refugees, along with new threats, including the increase
in violent extremism and terrorism, that affect women
and girls in particular.

We understand that the women and peace and
security agenda is a critical yet still underutilized tool
for preventing conflict and shaping more effective
responses to complex crises. That is why it is so
essential to consistently build on the progress already
achieved and scale up the commitment to this agenda.

Portugal has been a firm and consistent supporter
of the women and peace and security agenda, as we
consider it to be critical to ensuring the active and
meaningful participation of women and girls in all
aspects and stages of conflict prevention, conflict
resolution and post-conflict processes. It is an agenda
of fairness and inclusivity that has been shown to
contribute positively to the achievement of sustainable
peace, besides offering multiple cross-cutting benefits,
including strengthening United Nations peacekeepers'
protection efforts.

In 2009, Portugal adopted its first national action
plan on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
A second plan, adopted in 2014, will be in force until
next year. We have remained consistently committed to
promoting the women and peace and security agenda and
raising awareness of the importance of establishing and
fully implementing national action plans for resolution
1325 (2000) in all relevant international forums,
including the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, and NATO. We reiterate our
pledge to continue conducting training programmes on
gender equality and violence against women and girls,
including sexual violence, gender-based violence and
trafficking in human beings, for national personnel and
members of the armed and security forces assigned to
international peacekeeping missions.

Portugal fully supports the Secretary-General's
policy of zero tolerance for sexual exploitation and
abuse, and highly welcomed his initiative to organize
the high-level meeting on that topic in September.
Portugal took part in the high-level event, has signed
the voluntary compact to end impunity and strengthen
measures to prevent sexual exploitation and abuse,
joined the Circle of Leadership and contributed to
the United Nations Trust Fund for victims of sexual
exploitation and abuse.

To conclude, 17 years after the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), we realize that much has been
achieved, but also that we have a long way ahead,
with no end in sight, to definitively ensure the gender
perspective and women and girl's participation in all
stages of peace processes, including in prevention
and disarmament, protection in displacement settings,
peacekeeping, policymaking and reconstruction. No
concrete effort should be spared to move forward and
advance this meaningful agenda. Portugal is complying
at the national level and stands ready to extend his
cooperation at the bilateral and international levels to
promote the women and peace and security agenda.

