Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina aligns itself with the statement made by the
delegation of Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends
of Women, Peace and Security.

At the outset, I would like to thank the Government
of Uruguay for taking the initiative to organize this
debate and for circulating the concept note (S/2017/402, annex) to guide our discussions. We are also grateful for
the statements of the Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed; the Acting Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Mr. Adama Dieng; and Ms. Mina Jaf from Women's
Refugee Route, on behalf of the NGO Working Group
on Women, Peace and Security.

Argentina strongly supports the efforts of the
Secretary-General and of the Office of the Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict. It
welcomes the most recent report of the Secretary-
General (S/2017/249) and fully endorses its
recommendations aimed at preventing, combating
and eliminating all forms of sexual violence in armed
conflict and post-conflict situations and in the actions
of terrorist groups and violent extremists and aimed at
seeking justice and reparation for victims.

In that context, allow me to express the Argentine
Government's gratitude for the work done by the outgoing
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Zainab Bangura, for her arduous and dedicated
efforts over the past five years, during which time she
achieved a great deal, including the establishment in
2015, through General Assembly resolution 69/293, of
19 June as the International Day for the Elimination of
Sexual Violence in Conflict. In this context, I recall
that, on 20 June, Argentina will organize, together
with the Offices of the Special Representative of the
Secretary General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and
the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict and an interregional group of Member States
the second formal observance of that International Day.
We also welcome the appointment of the new Special
Representative, Ms. Pramila Patten, and we wish her
every success in the complex task that lies ahead and
assure her of Argentina's unwavering support during
her mandate.

The increasing use and threat of crimes of sexual
violence against women, girls, men and boys by
non-State armed groups, terrorist groups and violent
extremists and other State actors as a strategy of
recruitment and financing, with the aim of terrorizing,
intimidating and stigmatizing specific groups, namely,
women, children, religious minorities, LGBT people,
displaced persons and so forth, constitute the most
serious international crimes. Various international
tribunals have established sexual violence as an act
of torture, a war crime, a crime against humanity and
an act of genocide. Such crimes must be prevented
and punished in accordance with the law and we must
make use of available tools and mechanisms, including
sanctions, and referring cases to the International
Criminal Court.
We must continue to join and redouble the efforts
of all actors involved in order to find effective and
immediate solutions on the ground aimed at ensuring
respect for international law and to prevent, combat
and eradicate crimes of sexual violence in conflict and
post-conflict situations and the trafficking in persons.
We must bring the perpetrators of such war crimes
and crimes against humanity to justice; and we must
protect, contain, assist and reintegrate victims of such
violations through the provision of multisectoral and
multidisciplinary assistance services with a gender
perspective and reparation measures and protect their
dignity and human rights.

A key element in preventing sexual violence in
conflict is addressing the risk factors and underlying
conditions that leave some groups more vulnerable
to sexual violence, compounding their victimization,
trauma, marginalization and stigma. It is also essential
to ensure that the perpetrators of such crimes be
held accountable, while improving capacities for
documenting and investigating cases of sexual violence
and improving cooperation and the exchange of
information and best practices in the areas of research,
documentation, identifying and assisting victims,
extradition and legal aid. In that regard, we would like
to highlight the work of the United Nations Team of
Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict and the roster of experts on sexual and gender-
based violence overseen by UN-Women and Justice
Rapid Response.

Such goals should continue to be our priority and
be taken into consideration by the Security Council
when defining the mandates of it peacekeeping
operations and special political missions, as well as in
its peacebuilding efforts, by incorporating specialists
on gender and sexual and gender-based violence into
its missions and mediation team,s as well as including
specific related provisions and commitments in peace
and ceasefire agreements and increasing the percentage
of women in peacekeeping forces and military and
police contingents.

We should nonetheless not omit to mention the
cases of sexual exploitation and abuse that continue to
occur in peacekeeping missions. This is a very serious
situation that poses a major challenge to the legitimacy
and future of such missions and the to image of the
United Nations. In that regard, Argentina continues to
strongly support the Secretary-General's policy of zero
tolerance, as well as the various measures proposed in
his reports and included in resolution 2272 (2016) and
General Assembly resolution 71/278, among others,
as well as the work on coordination and prevention of
Ms. Jane Holl-Lute, Special Coordinator on Improving
the United Nations Response to Sexual Exploitation
and Abuse, and the Trust Fund in Support of Victims of
Sexual Exploitation and Abuse.

In conclusion, we reiterate that sexual violence
in conflict represents one of the most atrocious and
terrible violations of human dignity and an undeniable
and persistent threat to international peace and security.
That is why we must continue to work together to ensure
the protection, promotion and full enjoyment of their
human rights by all men and women, boys and girls, on
an equal footing, and to redouble our commitment to
preventing and eradicating such crimes, while holding
their perpetrators to account and making their victims
the focus of our efforts.

