Ms. Ekomo (spoke in French): On behalf of the
Central African women leaders for peace, I would
like first of all to extend my sincere congratulations
to the Government of South Africa on assuming the
presidency of this organ and to thank, in particular,
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of South Africa, who
kindly gave us the opportunity to make the voice of
Central African women and girls heard in the Chamber.

The Central African Republic has a national plan
for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
However, women have been excluded from the Central
African peace initiative from the outset, despite the
many pleas made by leaders of women's organizations
to national authorities, guarantors and facilitators.
Those who were invited to finalize the talks between the
Government and the armed groups did not have access
to the negotiating table. Nevertheless, women have
persisted in their advocacy, resulting in United Nations
and African Union support for efforts to disseminate
in the prefecture capitals the peace initiative and the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic, and to integrate women into
implementation and monitoring mechanisms.

However, the women who are involved in the
monitoring of the peace agreement were not involved in
the negotiations. Their involvement in implementation
monitoring mechanisms does not yet give them the
right to participate in assessments or decision-making
on policy and strategy. The peace agreement signed by
the Government and the 14 armed groups is a political
document that includes concessions on the part of the
leadership to assuage the armed groups.

Its implementation is not living up to the
expectations of the population. In particular, women and
other victims of armed groups find it hard to understand
how their tormenters are officially promoted within
the country's ruling class without any legal vetting as
to their eligibility under the principle of impunity, as
recommended by the National Forum of Bangui. The
justice that the population yearns for is therefore being
sorely tested. The Special Criminal Court has clearly
been weakened in carrying out its mandate, and the
same concern applies to the Commission on Truth,
Justice, Reparation and Reconciliation, were it to
become operational.

In the name of the implementation of the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic, the social dimension seems to have
been relegated to the background, because in prioritizing
the interests of armed groups, all the policymakers
forget that there are people who are suffering; that fires
in villages have led to the deaths of hundreds of people
and the displacement of thousands of families and left
many others without roofs over their heads, living in
inhumane conditions; that women and girl victims of
rape and sexual violence have been abandoned without
assistance; that hundreds of young people have been
tortured and are living with disabilities; that women
can no longer farm their fields; that heads of households
can no longer carry out their daily tasks, as they are
all afraid of being abducted, tortured, raped and even
killed; and that young women, who are living in hiding
for fear of being abducted and raped, can no longer go
to school.

Seven months after the signing of the Political
Agreement for Peace, we are seeing 60 to 70 violations
committed every week by armed groups, according to
the report of United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in the Central African Republic. The armed
groups remain very active on the ground. They
are preventing the deployment of State authorities,
imposing hardship on the population and continuing to
procure heavy weapons. In general, the fulfilment of
their obligations as set out in the Political Agreement
for Peace is showing extremely weak progress.

The worrisome situation that I just described
requires overhauling strategies for implementing the
Political Agreement. To that end, the Government
must be encouraged to create the necessary conditions
to foster positive inclusive dialogue that will promote
genuine ownership of the Agreement and diffuse the
already discernible social and political tensions in
the country.

In terms of perspective, I would respectfully call
the Council's attention to the following challenges. The
holding of peaceful elections in 2020 and 2021 will be
a significant challenge for lasting peace in the country
and will not be possible without the support of women.
Within the framework of civil society organizations,
we have begun to train women to be both voters and
candidates, but the majority of women live in remote
areas of the country that are the strongholds of armed
groups and therefore difficult to access. Re-establishing
security in remote areas of the country is urgently
needed so that the elections can be effective.

There is a constant need to strengthen cooperation
with civil society to take into account the real
aspirations of women and girls, rather than prioritizing
institutional partnership, which does not always ensure
that the assistance delivered to populations is efficient.
Indeed, there is a genuine gap between the commitments
made by partners and the Government with regard to
the universal vision for the participation of women in
the peace process. The absence ofa comprehensive and
coherent support programme for women's civil society
organizations in a country in conflict where everything
must be done to restore women's dignity and hope is a
relevant indicator.

Moreover, the challenges faced are many and can
be clearly seen across the pillars set of resolution 1325
(2000) - conflict prevention and the protection of
civilians. In this regard, cooperation between women
and young people was created through the contribution
of those groups to the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) and 2250 (2015). This momentum forjoint
actions needs to be underpinned not by sporadic support,
but as part of a long-term programme framework to
change mindsets and thereby achieve a lasting impact.

With respect to gender-based violence, the
situation is well known and documented with alarming
indicators, but there remains an absence of an expanded
programme for providing psychosocial support for
either victims or communities that continue to live
with their traumas. Furthermore, support for victims
and prevention initiatives need to be bolstered in the
provinces. To this end, it is necessary to increase the
number of women Blue Helmets deployed on the ground
in the communities.

With regard to providing assistance to conflict-
affected populations, the Central African Republic
has more than 4.5 million inhabitants, and a half of
the country's population is in need of emergency
assistance, according to reports from the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in the Central
African Republic. The majority of displaced persons
say that they feel abandoned to their tragic fate without
the necessary assistance to enable them to restore their
human dignity. Frustration is increasing on a daily
basis and could generate social tensions.

As one displaced woman in the town of Bria
in the north-western part of the Central African
Republic asked,

"How can I go and speak of peace when I am not

even living in peace - after the murder of my

son, the burning down of my house that made

me lose everything I owned, and the rape of my

daughter - and I am receiving no assistance to

rebuild my livelihood after those tragedies?"
Indeed, thousands of families simply want to receive
a minimum amount of assistance to return home and
begin a new life.

The establishment of the national chapter of the
African Women Leaders Network (AWLN) allowed
for the establishment of a coordination framework for
all the leaders of women's organizations in the Central
African Republic. These women leaders organized
joint missions to all of the provinces of the country
and saw first-hand the suffering facing populations in
conflict areas. The women leaders who are members of
AWLN must work in their civil society role as partners
for the implementation of urgently needed assistance
programmes for women in remote areas.

With regard to the implementation of the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic, the participation of women remains
limited to raising awareness of the Agreement itself,
but there are substantial difficulties in terms of
implementation owing to the active presence on the
ground of the signatory armed groups. In such an
environment, it is important to rapidly come up with
a strategy allowing for women's leadership to play
a substantial role in calming tensions, promoting a
cessation of hostilities and initiating dialogue among
the parties to the conflict.

As part of cooperation with civil society, it is
important to develop a more strategic approach to be able
to capitalize on the investments by partners in the area
of training by involving civil society in negotiations,
mediation and lobbying. Such collaboration should also
allow for balance and consistency to be established
between the national tools and the operational agendas
ofpartners in the country and also take into account the
level of financing needed for civil society actors.

Lastly, I remain convinced that such collaboration,
if it is indeed to be effective, will make it easier to
monitor performance indicators, promote the ownership
of initiatives by the population and consolidate the
effectiveness of assistance to the Central African
Republic in terms of peace and security.

In conclusion, we women leaders of civil society
working on questions of peace and security in the
Central African Republic need to work more closely
with partners to alleviate the suffering of the population,
including women and young girls.

