Ms. Heyzer (United Nations Development Fund for Women): I am honoured to participate in the
Council's first debate on women and peace and
security, chaired by the Foreign Minister of Namibia.
The United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM) and women worldwide congratulate the
presidency for its vision in convening this historic
event.

I want to begin by paying the kind of tribute that
is necessary to the Secretary-General for his strong
message and commitment, and for his presence here
today. UNIFEM. shares the views of Ms. King and fully
supports her work to mainstream gender in peace
support operations.

It is significant that this debate should be taking
place on the first United Nations Day of this
millennium, as many of the issues involved go to the
heart of our Charter.

The Council's actions on the themes of conflict in
Africa, the protection of civilians, and children and
armed conflict set the stage for this debate, but the
discussion today on women and peace and security has
a very specific focus. We are here today because the
intertwining forces of conflict and gender inequality
threaten international peace and security. We are here
because women continue to be targeted in wars,
because rape and sexual violence continue to be used
as weapons of war, because the vast majority of all
refugees and displaced people are women and children.
We are here because women have played a leadership
role in the cause of peace, but their efforts have not
been recognized, supported or given the kind of reward
that is necessary.

The subject of today's debate is close to all of our
hearts. Members heard the voice of Agnes from
Uganda, who spoke out because nearly all girls
abducted into armed groups are forced into sexual
slavery. The vast majority become infected with
sexually transmitted diseases and, increasingly, HIV/
AIDS. In addition, women and girls are forced into sex
for safe passage, food and other kinds of protection.
Women are seldom protected from these threats. Their
aggressors are not punished. What kind of message
does this send to the people who continue to rape,
exploit, torture and mutilate?

We are here today to support collective action
against the most chilling consequences of this
destruction of women. That is the focus of today's
debate: women's protection in armed conflict and their
participation in peace processes.

The focus on human security and national
security makes up the two sides of the same global
coin. I would like to put it to the Council that, without
international action, women caught in conflicts will
have no security of any kind, whatever the definition,
and that, without their participation, the peace process
itself suffers, for there will be neither justice nor
development. In your own words, Mr. President,
women are half of every group and community. Are
they therefore not half of every form of solution? How
can we, in all good conscience, bring warlords to the
peace table and not women?

For almost 10 years, UNIFEM. has worked to
provide assistance to women in crisis and supported
their participation in the building of peace. I will not
overstate our reach. We are a small Fund and our
impact is based on synergetic partnership with sister
funds, such as the United Nations Population Fund, the
United Nations Development Programme and the
United Nations Children's Fund, as well as with the
women's movement.

We have shaped our activities for women in
conflict situations around five points. These form the
core of our agenda for peace and security and relate to
specific actions the Council could take to improve the
protection of women and support their peace-building
efforts. If we are to deal fairly with women and girls in
conflict, these must be acted upon with urgency.

First, as to understanding the impact of armed
conflict on women and girls, no full-scale assessment
has yet been undertaken. This must happen. We need to
examine every aspect of the consequences of conflict
for women in order to guide future action. Ironically,
this has happened for children, but not yet for women,
their primary caretakers and among those most affected
by conflict.

But understanding the impact is simply not
enough. We must also act with greater sensitivity. We
know without question that unless there is such
sensitivity, there will be severe consequences. This was
the case in Kosovo last year. Thousands of displaced
men, women and children had gathered together in a
stadium. With a megaphone, an official made a
broadcast announcement for all women who had been
raped to report to a particular area. Not a single woman
came forward. Not a single woman was prepared to
risk the stigma or the potential effect of having
identified herself publicly in this way. As a result,
every single survivor lost the chance of holding her
aggressors accountable and of receiving life-saving
support. Understanding the way conflict affects women
and girls is crucial to ensuring their protection and to
designing the policies and programmes that are
necessary.

Secondly, with respect to improving protection
and assistance for women and girls, in my visits to
war-torn countries, I have seen these gaps with painful
clarity. I have heard about the unanswered fate of
mothers and the thousands of children born of rape. In
camps, I discovered that items as basic as sanitary
towels were not considered essential humanitarian
relief. In conflict after conflict, I have met the mothers
of the disappeared. I have walked through valleys of
widows - huge communities of women left alone to
fend for themselves and their families. These women
live each day choked with painful memories of their
own torture and of that of their loved ones. They bleed
and live with physical and emotional scars and, as if
this were not enough, they are also struggling to
reclaim their property, their inheritance and their land.
In fact, some have also to struggle to retain their
children.

Protection of and humanitarian assistance for
women are glaringly inadequate in the kind of
examples that we have seen. We have seen the failure
of political settlements to protect women's rights. This
is at the very core of this debate.

Thirdly, as to supporting women's leadership in
peace-building, women caught up in conflicts are
activists, caretakers, providers and survivors. We know
that some women participate actively in conflicts, but
the vast majority have held their families and
communities together.

From the grass roots to the peace table, we have
supported the participation of women in peace-
building. We try to leverage political, financial and
technical support so that women can have an impact on
peace efforts nationally. Guatemalan women, South
African women and others have set inspiring examples
of peace-building across class, clans, political
affiliation and ethnicity. As you have seen on video, up
until four months ago the situation of women and girls
had been ignored in the Burundi process. A precedent
was set in that country, and the entire peace agreement
has benefited. Now, support for implementation
remains a challenge.

Fourthly, with respect to bringing a gender
perspective to intergovernmental peace and security
efforts, peace support operations establish the
framework for international and regional action. Much
attention has been given to increasing the number of
women in these operations, at the helm and among the
ranks. Although a few women have served at the
highest levels, I think it is sobering today to point out
that of the 61 current Special and Personal
Representatives and Envoys of the Secretary-General
serving in peace support functions, not a single one is a
woman.

The placement of gender advisers in Kosovo, East
Timor and other countries has presented a new model if
they can be adequately supported. But all such
arrangements must involve women and provide gender
experts in their design and implementation. There is no
acceptable reason for protecting women in some
countries and not others. I believe that women's
concerns will only be addressed only when women, in
significant numbers, are there to represent them. But
having a woman commander will not alone ensure that
the mandate of the operation deals with gender. Having
a woman judge will not ensure that war crimes against
women are prosecuted. There is more that we have to
do.

Gender expertise must inform the planning of
these operations from the very beginning. For example,
in disarmament, reintegration must be designed to meet
the special needs of women combatants, of the girls
and women who have been abducted into armed groups
or of the families of former soldiers who are trying to
return to civilian life. Electoral systems must take
women into account, as voters or as candidates.
Civilian police must address the issues of trafficking
and sexual violence which are associated with conflict.
I name these few examples to show how the Security
Council can help ensure that international and regional
initiatives not only benefit women but are also
strengthened by them.

Fifthly, with regard to supporting gender justice
in the post-conflict case, resources are depleted after
conflicts, infrastructure is destroyed and social,
economic and political relationships are strained. The
success of development depends on the use of every
available resource, including people. Women who have
held social and economic fragments together represent
the most precious and under-used of these resources.
Unless a country's legal and electoral frameworks deal
with gender equality, then no matter what happens after
conflict, no matter how peaceful a transition, the entire
country will never have a fair chance at development.

During the transition to peace, a unique
opportunity exists to put in place a gender-responsive
framework for a country's development. Nowhere is
this more possible than in East Timor. Last week
during my visit there, I saw a country struggling to
rebuild. I was inspired by the women of East Timor,
together with the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor, working to improve the
form of legislation and to strengthen local capacity to
advocate for gender-sensitive laws and policies.

Barely four months ago I had the privilege of

leading an international group to Jerusalem to support a
common women's agenda for peace in the Middle East.
Far away from the limelight of formal negotiations,
Palestinian and Israeli women have been struggling and
engaging in dialogue ever since the 1980s, when such
contact was illegal. Back in June, they were determined
to tackle the thorniest issues. Their ability to make
headway on almost all the moot points, including
Jerusalem, was fuelled by the sense of urgency they
shared about the delays in implementing signed
agreements. This was leading, in their View, to a
dangerous erosion of public trust in the leadership of
both sides and to the potential outbreak of violence. If
only their concerns had been heard.
Today, I urge the leadership on both sides not to
ignore women's roles and contributions in this process.
I urge them to build on partnerships where they exist
and which women have been able to shape.

The outcome of today's debate can go a long way
towards sustaining peace. If I may, with the kind of
humility that is needed, I will suggest a number of
ways in which the Council could improve women's
protection in conflict and support their role in peace-
building.

First, the Council could ensure that human rights
observation and verification and peacekeeping
operations focus on gender-based violations and
women's human rights. The security of women is the
best indicator of the security of a nation. Any early
warning system must take women's voices into
account.

Secondly, the Council could call for all
peacekeeping personnel to be trained in their
responsibilities to women and children. The in-service
training should be provided as soon as a mission is
assembled. This is not meant to be a substitute for what
needs to be done at the national level.

Thirdly, the Council could call for the elaboration
of a code of conduct for peacekeeping personnel and
the establishment of clear reporting on sexual violence
in a peacekeeping environment. This should include
enforcement and monitoring mechanisms for
peacekeeping personnel, through the creation of an
ombudsperson, an inspector general or an office
created especially for that purpose.

Fourthly, the Council could ensure that field
operations protect and support humanitarian assistance
for women and girls, especially those who are refugees
and displaced. Special measures should be taken to
protect women and girls from rape and other forms of
sexual violence.

Fifthly, the Council could ensure that the peace-
building elements of an operation are gender-sensitive,
particularly in designing the kind of disarmament
programmes, in strengthening governance and public
security institutions and in defining the role of civilian
police. These are the first steps for ensuring that
women are central to post-conflict development.

Sixthly, the Council could ensure that any support
it offers to a peace process, any investigation of
disputes or any attempts at settlement make explicit the
need to involve women and address the substantive
concerns they bring to the table.
Finally, the Council could deepen its commitment
to women by supporting the study called for by Ms.
Graca Machel for a full-scale assessment of the impact
of armed conflict on women and of women's role in
peace-building. This is long overdue. For our part, as
UNIFEM. we stand ready to support this call and any
other that the Council deems necessary. We may be
small but we are effective, and we can find the
resources and the necessary support.

Women in conflict situations have special needs
and have made important contributions to peace and
security. Recognizing and supporting both of these
aspects with equal vigour can prevent many lifetimes
of untold sorrow and pain.

