Ms. Konieczny (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
thank the Secretary-General for his very comprehensive
annual report (S/2019/800). I also wish to express our
gratitude to South Africa for having convened this
debate as part of its presidency of the Security Council.
Luxembourg fully aligns itself with the statement
that will be made by the representative of the
European Union.

The briefers who have enriched our debate today
have described the reality well. It is clear that we must
redouble our efforts in order to bridge the remaining
gaps in the implementation ofresolution 1325 (2000) and
subsequent resolutions. The aim is not only to overcome
a series of obstacles to the effective participation of
women in peace and security processes, but also to
stem the deterioration of human rights worldwide. It
is unacceptable that, in 2019, the rights of women and
girls are still not sufficiently guaranteed, particularly
when it comes to accessing justice, socioeconomic
opportunities, adequate health care and protection of
sexual and reproductive health and rights.

To date, 81 States Members of the United Nations
have adopted national action plans on women and peace
and security to implement resolution 1325 (2000). Let
us build on the positive momentum engendered by
the twentieth anniversary of the resolution in 2020 to
remove obstacles and aim for more ambitious results.
We urge all countries that have not yet done so to
establish national action plans to implement resolution
1325 (2000) by next year. Only by joining forces can
we achieve the objectives of the women and peace and
security agenda.

Luxembourg is among those States that have
recently adopted a national action plan. Our plan
follows a comprehensive, government-wide approach.
It sets out measures not only in the areas of diplomacy,
defence, national security and justice, but also in the
areas of health, education and development cooperation,
with the aim of ensuring the full empowerment and
emancipation of women and girls in the long term.

That comprehensive perspective is necessary in
order to address the many cross-cutting obstacles faced
by women and girls. In this regard, we welcome the
fact that the report of the Secretary-General refers to
the mandate of the Special Rapporteur on the situation
of human rights defenders, the Arms Trade Treaty
and the gender strategy adopted by the Peacebuilding
Commission in 2016.

We are convinced of the need to consider and
implement the women and peace and security agenda
in a broader context. All the rights of women and girls
must be strengthened. From that perspective, the results
of the review of the implementation of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action on the occasion of
its twenty-fifth anniversary - Beijing+25 - should
also be taken into account.

