Ms. Bassols Delgado (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank the Bolivian presidency of the Security Council
for having organized this open debate. The women
and peace and security agenda was, as many members
know, a priority during our recent term on the Council
and continues to be so today.

We have all made progress since the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000). However, the data continue
to show a very low participation of women in peace
processes. We strongly agree with the Secretary-
General's call for the adoption of concrete measures
to address the practical and institutional barriers that
continue to prevent the full and meaningful participation
of women in all peace processes.

We welcome in particular the Secretary-General's
urgent and extraordinary steps towards parity in the
United Nations system and his personal commitment to
improving parity in peace operations by encouraging
a substantial increase in the number of women in
security forces. In that context, the Foreign Ministers
of Spain and Finland jointly presented an initiative
called Commitment 2025 at the high-level event of
the Women, Peace and Security Focal Points Network,
held in New York on 26 September. Today, on behalf of
Spain and Finland, I have the honour to share a broad
outline of our Initiative.

Through the Initiative, we will undertake a series
of commitments to strengthening the full and effective
participation of women in peace processes between now
and 2025. We will make those commitments available
to all Members and to the Organization in the near
future. Those commitments will include additional
measures to increase the institutional representation of
women at all levels in sectors relevant to the women
and peace and security agenda, and especially in
peace processes. They will include the appointment
of women to decision-making positions in peace and
security institutions.

We will commit to funding incentives for women's
participation. We will work firmly and hand-in-hand
with civil society to ensure that women and their
organizations are included in all peace processes and
negotiations, now and in the future, which could even
result in the setting of numerical targets. We require
international and regional organizations systematic to
progress towards the full participation of women in
peace processes and negotiations, including the sharing
of lessons and best practices, as well as the appointment
by the United Nations of gender advisers for women and
peace and security. We will commit to supporting the
work of the Women Mediators Networks and the Group
of Friends of Mediation to ensure that their efforts are
taken into account in peace processes and negotiations.
We will also commit ourselves to promoting the rights
of girls and women as a key element in identifying
responses to extremism and terrorism. We will consider
providing multi-year funding to support women's
organizations in conflict-affected countries in order to
strengthen institutional capacity.

Next spring, Spain will organize the third
International Conference on Safe Schools within
the framework of the 2015 Safe Schools Declaration
initiated by Argentina and Norway. The Conference
will have a special focus on the gender approach in
access to education in armed conflicts. That will
require an analysis on specific attacks on the access to
education of women of all ages, including sexual and
gender-based violence. We are convinced that women's
access to all levels of education - primary, secondary
and university - is a key enabler of women's full
participation in peace processes; political, economic
and social empowerment; and full enjoyment of
human rights.

Those are the concrete and fundamental ideas
and measures of Spain and Finland's Commitment
2025, which, as I have mentioned, we will present to
and share with the rest of the Members in the coming
weeks. That commitment will enable us to return
to the fundamentals of resolution 1325 (2000) and
commemorate its twentieth anniversary. At the same
time, it will also enable us to move forward with
definite, determined and concrete steps in the work of
ensuring the real and effective participation of women
in all peace processes.

