Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): I wish to congratulate you,
Madame President, on organizing this open debate of
the Security Council, as well as to commend your
commitment to an issue of the utmost importance to the
international community. I also wish to thank the
Secretary-General, Special Representative Margot
Wallstrom, Under-Secretary-General Alain Le Roy and
Lieutenant General Babacar Gaye, the Military Adviser,
for their briefings, which have given us a clear picture
of the serious challenges involved in protecting women
from the scourge of sexual violence in conflict.

While Italy aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union later on, I
wish to make some remarks in my national capacity.

Let me start by expressing our deep appreciation
for resolution 1960 (2010), which has been adopted
today and which Italy was proud to have co-sponsored.
By requesting the establishment of monitoring and
reporting arrangements for conflict-related sexual
violence, the Security Council has taken an important
step forward. Timely and accurate information will
enhance the Council's ability to track and deter this
heinous crime. It will still be up to the Council to take
the necessary measures to translate these elements into
concrete action; which brings me to an issue that is
often invoked in cases of human rights violations,
namely, the impunity of perpetrators. We must reverse
the social dynamics that allow sexual violence to
perpetuate itself, moving from stigmatizing the victims
to criminalizing the authors.

That goal can be achieved by various means:
adopting sanctions or targeted measures, referring
matters to the International Criminal Court when
necessary and naming and shaming perpetrators at
every opportunity. We therefore welcome the Council's
decision to encourage the Secretary-General to list in
his reports the parties who have engaged in patterns of
sexual violence in situations of armed conflict. That
decision is a step in the right direction.

Conflict-related sexual violence is a threat to
security and an impediment to peacebuilding in many
parts of the world, not only in the crisis areas on the
Council's agenda. In today's conflicts, sexual violence
is not just collateral damage but an actual front-line
strategy. There are two areas that we deem particularly
important.

The first is the need to address sexual violence in
peace and mediation processes. If women do not have a
say in peace processes and sexual violence is not
addressed in the agreements aimed at ending a conflict,
gender-based discrimination and violence will remain
embedded in society.
The second is the importance of giving
systematic consideration to sexual violence in
authorizations and renewals of peacekeeping and
special political missions. Moreover, when missions
are mandated, technical assessments of country
situations should include gender expertise.

In 2008, Italy, in its capacity as a member of the
Security Council, was one of the strongest advocates of
resolution 1820 (2008), on sexual violence in conflict.
We also supported the appointment of a Special

Representative of the Secretary-General. At the
national level, we are finalizing a plan of action to
implement resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security. The draft plan includes the
protection of women and girls from sexual violence.
The specific focus is on the assistance, recovery and
psycho-physical rehabilitation of victims, as well as on
special training for our staff deployed in peacekeeping
and peacebuilding missions.

In conclusion, Italy remains fully committed to
implementing the resolutions of the Security Council in
the area of women and peace and security, including
the important resolution adopted today.

