Mr. Jinga (Romania): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this high-level open
debate of the Security Council, celebrating the fifteenth
anniversary of the adoption of the landmark resolution
1325 (2000). I would like to commend the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2015/716) and the members
of the high-level advisory group for their work on the
comprehensive global study on preventing conflict,
transforming justice and securing peace, to which
Romania contributed. We also greatly appreciate the
briefers' insightful presentations earlier today.

Romania aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union. I would
now like to make a few comments from our national
perspective.

Resolution 1325 (2000) put a greatly needed
emphasis on the importance of the role of women
in peace processes. Today we have heard about the
progress that has been made in the past 15 years and
about the remaining challenges and priorities for
action. Romania believes that all actors - Member
States, regional organizations, civil society and the
media - should continue to work to implement the
agenda on women and peace and security. The active
participation of women in peace processes has proved
vital to making conflict resolution and peacebuilding
more effective.

The first female officer in Romania's armed
forces was Lieutenant Ecaterina Teodoroiu, who died
heroically in the First World War. In 1973, Romanian
women began entering the military as a profession. More
recently, our Ministry of Defence adopted an action plan
aimed at implementing the Security Council's seven
resolutions on women, peace and security. Based on our
Constitution's provisions, it promotes fair and balanced
access for men and women, military and civilians, to
senior-level and executive positions. As a result, we
have women who have reached the rank of general and,
beginning in 2009, we have seen an increasing number
of female military staff participating in international
missions. Furthermore, women from our Ministry of
Internal Affairs have been deployed in peacekeeping
and peacebuilding missions of the United Nations, the
European Union and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe.

Today I am privileged to be able to acknowledge the
contribution to our support for peace and stabilization
in Haiti of a Romanian officer, Chief Superintendent
Raluca Domuta, currently Commander for the southern
region of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti, who was proclaimed International Female Police
Peacekeeper for 2015. Throughout her deployment in
Haiti, she has used her national expertise to combat
trafficking in human beings and organized crime, and
she is an excellent example of the value added by the
gender component in United Nations peacekeeping and
special political missions.

The issues of gender equality, tolerance,
non-discrimination and the prohibition of sexual
harassment and gender-based violence are reflected in
all of Romania's military educational programmes. We
have deployed mixed-gender teams, especially within
the civil and military cooperation units that have been
mainly responsible for engaging with the population
in Afghanistan, while female engagement teams have
been assigned to engage with Afghan women and girls
in order to help empower them in their own societies,
for example in Zabul province. There, through a
multitude of projects and programmes, Romania's
military staff have acted to support disadvantaged
women and vulnerable groups within their area of
operations. The activities were performed in full
cooperation with representatives of the host country
and the local population, and with regional and civil
society organizations.

Today, military operations are conducted in
a complex security environment that requires the
complementary skills and expertise of both women and
men, since war and conflict have different impacts on
both of them. However, whether in peace or war, we
cannot change perspectives on women's issues without
the proactive participation of men. The UN-Women
"He For She" campaign encourages men to actively
support women and girls. President Klaus Iohannis of
Romania has participated personally in this movement,
and his concrete commitments show how men in power
can also empower the women of their countries.

Romania is a sponsor of resolution 2242 (2015) on
women and peace and security, adopted by consensus
this morning, and we therefore join the call for more
determined action on the part of all stakeholders in
advancing the agenda on women and peace and security.

