Mr. Zehnder (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland wishes to thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2014/693) and shares his concerns
regarding the situation of displaced populations, the
majority of whom are women and girls. In Iraq, Syria,
Lebanon and Jordan, women and girls have limited
access to the assistance and protection they need, which
contributes to making them all the more vulnerable to
sexual exploitation and sexual violence.

In that connection, Switzerland would like to make
three points.

First, it is important to develop sound, context-
specific policies to prevent the exploitation and
abuse of refugees and displaced women and girls.
Restrictive migration policies that limit opportunities
for women and girls fleeing conflict zones augment
their vulnerability. Through strengthened dialogue and
cooperation, we must find ways to adapt those policies
to ensure that women and girls from conflict-affected
areas are not subjected to human trafficking or sexual
exploitation and abuse. National troops, peacekeeping
forces, border police, immigration service officials
and humanitarian actors - all have a role to play in
fighting and preventing those crimes. Ultimately, we
must ensure that those responsible for such crimes are
prosecuted and brought to justice.

Secondly, Switzerland believes that more must
be done to prevent sexual violence committed
against displaced persons. We need to respond with
a coordinated and integrated approach and strive for
gender sensitivity throughout the system. That is
why Switzerland will host in Geneva the next donor
conference for United Nations Action against Sexual
Violence in Conflict on 12 November 2014.

In addition, Switzerland is committed to
contributing to the fight against impunity. To that
end, Switzerland supports a mechanism for the rapid
administration of justice, an intergovernmental
structure that can be rapidly mobilized and provide
expertise to the international community. The rapid
deployment of specialists in sexual and gender-
based violence helps support international or national
inquiries and contributes to the development of national
capacities.

Thirdly, we must do more to ensure access
by refugees and displaced women to political
decision-making, including peace processes. Their
concerns must be taken into account in all transitional
arrangements. In that regard, we should like to highlight
the recommendations made by the Special Rapporteur
on the human rights of internally displaced persons
on 18 March 2013 (A/HRC/23/44) and encourage all
Member States to put them into practice. Furthermore,
women's participation in decision-making in refugee
camps must be enhanced. Those are the findings of a
study conducted by the Women's Refugee Commission
in refugee camps in Jordan. That study, funded by
Switzerland, analyses the existing links between
women's participation in decision-making and their
enjoyment of human rights. Finally, allow me to remind
the Council that equal participation in political life and
access to services and justice as well as the protection
of rights are ways of adding to women's emancipation
and avoiding sexist practices.

