Ms. Elman: Just days ago, in Mogadishu, the
mother of a 14-year-old girl called me. Her daughter
was raped two years ago by a Ugandan soldier in
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).
The soldier returned to Uganda, where he remains in
detention awaiting trial. The mother often calls me, not
seeking an update on the case, but to help her daughter.
Her daughter has now been labelled the "girl who was
raped by the infidel" and ostracized by her community.

The nature of my work, providing emergency,
life-saving services to survivors of sexual and gender-
based violence, is to respond to such calls and provide
any support I can. I am here today, with a heavy heart;

as a representative of the NGO Working Group on
Women, Peace and Security; as one of the Directors of
the Elman Peace and Human Rights Centre in Somalia,
an organization founded by my late father, who was
killed advocating for human rights; and in my capacity
as the Youth Ambassador for Somalia on Youth to End
Sexual Violence in Conflict.

I returned from the comforts and safety of Canada to
Somalia five years ago because I believe that we all have
a role to play in the peaceful transition out of conflict.
I have seen first-hand the catastrophic consequences of
violence against civilians and of protection strategies
that are gender-blind and have failed to meaningfully
include women. In many contexts, as in the case of South
Sudan and the Democratic Republic of Congo, women
continuously report feeling unsafe. Food-distribution
sites are set up in areas not easily accessible. Women
and girls must collect food, firewood and water for their
families, often risking rape and abduction when doing
so. Latrines continue to be built without locks and
without regard for the need for sex-segregated facilities
to ensure safety and privacy. Sanitary napkins and
other basic hygiene supplies are still deemed luxuries
and not necessities.

There is a need for more responsive channels for
women to communicate with humanitarian officers
and peacekeepers about their immediate protection
concerns. This communication is often dramatically
enhanced when women themselves are serving in roles
such as peacekeepers and police.

In 2014, however, we witnessed the deliberate
exclusion of women from these processes in Somalia,
when more than 700 women were dismissed
simultaneously from their posts within the Somali
National Security Forces. In addition, women-led civil
society groups who are able to speak to the underlying
drivers ofviolence and the protection rights and needs of
women, are often undermined, harassed and threatened.
I speak from personal experience, and I have lost too
many friends, colleagues and family members.

In order to advance women's inclusion in addressing
these challenges, I urge the Security Council to mandate
inclusive, gendered decision-making in the design,
implementation and monitoring of protection-of-
civilian strategies, including those responding to acts of
gender-based violence. This means consulting women
from the beginning, including those displaced and with
disabilities.

The Council must take the necessary steps to
increase the number of female staff in peacekeeping
operations, including in their military and police
components alike; ensure that all missions with
protection-of-civilian mandates have adequate logistical
support and resources, including the full deployment
of human rights officers, gender experts and women
protection advisors; and address the protection needs
of all of us humanitarian workers and women human-
rights defenders, who are increasingly being targeted,
abducted or disappeared.
The Security Council must also simultaneously and
urgently act to prevent the blatant misuse of power and
the sexual exploitation and abuse we are witnessing in
Somalia and in other countries. I speak on behalf of the
14 year-old girl, her mother and the thousands of other
survivors in urging the Security Council to reinforce
the United Nations zero tolerance policy and prevent
those deployed to protect communities from themselves
becoming the violent perpetrators, too often with
impunity.

Mechanisms for reporting human rights abuses,
including sexual and gender-based violence, must be
gender-sensitive, confidential and non-discriminatory,
as the fear of stigma, discrimination and possible
retribution often deters survivors from coming forward
and seeking judicial or other forms of assistance. This
requires engagement with affected women in a safe and
respectful manner as well ongoing consultation.

To protect women from these human rights abuses
and to ensure accountability, I urge the Security Council
as a matter of priority to insist on accountability for
atrocities committed by all armed groups and security
forces, including addressing sexual and gender-
based violence and civilian casualties; reinforce
efforts to ensure justice systems are re-established,
with investigations and prosecutions conducted in
accordance to international standards; ensure that
troops are adequately vetted, prepared and trained,
and that they engage in confidence-building measures
with the local populations, including those displaced;
hold troop-contributing countries accountable for these
crimes and call for the investigation and monitoring of
human rights abuses by AMISOM. and by peacekeeping
personnel across other missions to be included in all
public reporting on the human rights situations in any
given country; mandate that sex-disaggregated data
be included in peacekeeping mission reporting; and
see to it that United Nations protection focal points
provide clear, accessible and confidential complaint
mechanisms to survivors of sexual exploitation and
abuse.

Protecting civilians is also about ensuring that
people can live without fear. In Somalia, as in places
such as Syria, Gaza, Nigeria and Ukraine, we have
witnessed civilians in populated areas being targeted,
injured and killed by explosive weapons. The impact
of explosive weapons in populated areas must be
addressed, and international cooperation is needed
to set stronger standards to protect civilians. The
experience of the African Union Mission in Somalia
has shown that policies to limit the use of mortars or
other indirect-fire explosive weapons can help save
civilian lives.

The implementation of international humanitarian
law in a gender-responsive manner is key to enhancing
the protection of civilians. Women must have equal
access to accountability mechanisms, reparations
and non-discriminatory medical care, including safe
abortion and post-abortion care for survivors of sexual
and gender-based violence. Women must also be
granted equal nationality rights.

Women in Somalia remain largely underrepresented
as political leaders, candidates, civil servants and
elected officials. Ahead of next year's elections, it is
imperative that the United Nations supports a process
that leverages the political inclusion and participation
of women, strengthens Somalia's security sector and
promotes respect for human rights. During the past
year's State formation process in western Somalia,
not a single woman was elected at any level of the new
Administration, despite the overwhelming numbers of
female candidates. I am confident that transformative
and fundamental change with relation to women's
leadership and participation can happen in Somalia.

This year marks the fifteenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), which calls for
women's inclusion in all efforts to mitigate and respond
to conflict. Women's meaningful participation, whether
in high-level political positions or in peace processes,
must be a core component of all peace and security
efforts, including those aimed at addressing protection,
implementation and protection challenges for women
and girls. I call on the Security Council to make the
full and systematic implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda a central priority in all areas
of its work.

