Mr. Aisi (Papua New Guinea): Sir, I wish you
and your delegation well during your presidency of the
Council for this month. We also commend the
delegation of the United States of America for its
leadership during the month of September. I should
also like to make two acknowledgements. We align
ourselves with the statement to be delivered later on
behalf of the Pacific small island developing States. I
also acknowledge my colleague from Australia for
having mentioned my country in his statement and for
all the assistance that his country is giving us.

Mr. President, as we approach the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) next year, we commend your
delegation for this timely debate and, specifically, for
focusing our collective attention on the theme
"Responding to the needs of women and girls in post-
conflict situations for sustainable peace and security",
under the umbrella of the larger topic of women and
peace and security. Your delegation rightly notes in the
concept paper for this meeting (S/2009/490, annex)
that significant gains have been achieved in the
implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008), "particularly in enhancing the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, including women and girls,
and promoting the participation of women in peace and
security processes" (para. 2).

While we note the foregoing, we also agree with
the important observation that your delegation makes,
that the situation is far from satisfactory, with gaps and
challenges remaining, particularly in the post-conflict
period, when women's potential contribution to
peacebuilding is constrained owing to their exclusion
from the decision-making process and to inadequate
recognition of and financing for their needs.

There is no doubt that the international
community has fully accepted the fact that the
participation of women in conflict resolution and in the
post-conflict and peacebuilding process is an integral -
if not critical - part of the way forward in conflict
resolution and peacebuilding. We will continue to
support the mainstreaming of the participation of
women in the process.

We also make the observation that, even in the
pre-conflict stage - especially when the international
community becomes aware that a conflict is brewing -
the voices of women should be sought to determine the
nature and degree of the impending conflict situation.
As we alluded to in our statement in the debate on the
responsibility to protect held this year in the General
Assembly, too often, the voices of women are not
heard in the first instance, with this neglect having a
detrimental effect on many societies which eventually
fall into conflict.

Papua New Guinea's own relevant but
unfortunate experience is borne out by the 10-year
conflict on the island of Bougainville, providing us
with an opportunity to reflect on the provisions of
resolution 1325 (2000). In April 1998, the Security
Council mandated a United Nations observer mission
to assist in and oversee the resolution of the conflict
and the peacebuilding process. The mission was
successfully completed in 2005.

As we approach next year's fifth anniversary of
the withdrawal of the observer mission, we are mindful
of the observation made by Secretary-General in his
2009 report on peacebuilding in the immediate
aftermath of conflict (S/2009/304), in which he noted
that threats to peace are often most imminent in the
earliest post-conflict stage. This period offers a crucial
window of opportunity to ensure the full and effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

While the restoration of peace continues on
Bougainville, we would respectfully submit that the
fragility alluded to by the Secretary-General cannot be
underestimated. As we continue to consolidate the
peacebuilding phase through the efforts of the
Government of Papua New Guinea, the autonomous
government of Bougainville, the United Nations, non-
governmental organizations (NGOs) and other
development partners, high demand will continue to be
placed on all parties to ensure that the hard-won peace
is never lost.

We commend the current United Nations project
entitled UN Project Bougainville, which aims to
provide

"support to continue to find ways to address
the long-term psychological impact that the
recent conflict has had on people through loss of
education, disruption to social services,
livelihood and income; successful completion of
the weapons disposal plan; implementation of a
number of peacebuilding initiatives and restoring
social services".

However, in the context of today's debate, I wish
to make the observation that perhaps there is a need for
more specific references to the provisions and the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). There
should be more clarity as to where and in which
specific areas women and girls should contribute in
this project.

On a regional basis, and in the wider application
of Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter -
especially in relation to the provisions of Article 52 ~
the Pacific has made and continues to make every
effort to implement the provisions of resolution 1325
(2000). Recently, the leaders of the Pacific Islands
Forum, at their fortieth Forum, adopted a
comprehensively packaged provision to address sexual
and gender-based violence, noting in paragraph 63 of
their communique that that phenomenon is

"now widely recognized as a risk to human
security and a potential destabilizing factor for
communities and societies alike. It remains
pervasive across the Pacific, and as it is still
considered a sensitive issue in most Pacific
cultures, its prevalence often goes underreported.
There is an urgent need to acknowledge the
prevalence of sexual and gender-based violence
in the Pacific at all levels of the community,
whether occurring in the domestic context or
during conflict and post-conflict situations".

I would also mention that it is commendable that in our
region, many NGOs and civil society groups play
effective facilitation roles in enhancing the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008) and, we would argue, should be continuously
engaged in that role.

All too often, women and children, including
girls, have been at the forefront of too many conflicts.
As innocent bystanders, they have been traumatized,
injured or killed and are often passed off as "collateral
damage". The United Nations and its agencies - the
United Nations Development Programme, UNICEF
and, especially, the United Nations Development Fund
for Women - continue to do good work in the area of
conflict. While much has been achieved, much more,
obviously, needs to be done.

Lastly, there is a need, we argue, to tie into this
debate the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)
and their achievement. Specifically, we note the need
to leverage the great opportunity offered by MDG 8:
that of partnerships. It is good, strong and strategic
partnerships that will help to strengthen the
implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820
(2008) and 1888 (2009).

