Mrs. Bogyay (Hungary): It is great to see you,
Honourable Minister, here in the Security Council. I
would first of all like to thank the presidency of South
Africa for convening this very important open debate.
I also thank the briefers for the insightful remarks they
delivered this morning.

Hungary aligns itself with the statements to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union (EU), the
Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security and
the African Women Leaders Network.

Hungary is committed to implementing the women
and peace and security agenda. I wish to inform the
Council that we are currently in the process of drafting
our own national action plan on women and peace and
security, which we aim to adopt before the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).
In order to implement the women and peace and security
agenda at the national level, the Hungarian defence
forces have incorporated training and education about
resolution 1325 (2000), gender awareness, sexual
exploitation and abuse, and conflict-related sexual
violence into national predeployment training courses
and international courses such as the international
military observer course. In addition, we regularly carry
out intensive training courses related to the women
and peace and security agenda for non-commissioned
officers and other officers. Mainstreaming the gender
perspective in peace operations and military processes
increases operational efficiency. Moreover, increasing
the participation of women in peacekeeping missions
as well as implementing gender-sensitive strategies
for protecting civilians and providing humanitarian
assistance are of key importance to provide the best
assistance possible for women and girls who are
affected by conflict.

With regard to increasing our efforts to promote
the deployment of female personnel, we are working
on projects that support, for instance, creating better
work-life balances and making available atypical types
of employment to women, which indirectly contribute
to recruiting a higher percentage of female soldiers
for deployment. Our female personnel can participate
in United Nations, NATO and EU missions under the
same conditions as male soldiers.

We are of course appalled by the ongoing systematic
and widespread conflict-related sexual and gender-
based violence, which can constitute war crimes, crimes
against humanity and even genocide. Accountability
must be accordingly provided. Survivors of sexual
Violence require not only immediate medical care but
also comprehensive psychosocial support and human
rights-based and gender-responsive services.

We call for the international community to better
address the needs of those women and girls belonging
to religious and ethnic minorities who have been
persecuted and displaced by conflict or terrorism.
In order to successfully implement the women and
peace and security agenda, actions need to be taken
in advance during peacetime, on the one hand by
addressing the root causes of conflict and preventing
militarization and arms proliferation and, on the other
hand, by protecting and promoting the human rights of
all women and girls.

Only inclusive peace can be sustainable. We
hope to see heightened attention accorded to the
needs of women and their meaningful participation
in the planning and carrying out of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration activities. We play
a Vital role in preventing violent conflict. As we look
forward to the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), we reaffirm our commitment
and call for reinforced cooperation to fully implement
the women and peace and security agenda.

