Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by expressing my thanks for the
important briefings and presentations to the Council by
Ms. Margot Wallstrom, Mr. Herve Ladsous and
Ms. Amina Megheirbi. I wish, in particular, to express
Colombia's appreciation for the dedication and work of
Ms. Wallstrom and for the progress in implementing
the provisions of resolution 1960 (2010), which seek to
ensure prompt, precise, reliable and objective data
collection on sexual violence in conflicts.

With regard to the body of the report of the
Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual violence
that we are considering today (S/2012/33), I would like
to draw attention to the definition of the task used
throughout it. On the one hand, throughout the report,
the expression "conflict-related sexual violence" is
used. That is different from that used by the Council in
all its previous resolutions and statements, namely,
"sexual violence in armed conflict". On the other hand,
in resolution 1960 (2010), when the Council requested
the Secretary-General to deal with conflict-related
situations, such as post-conflict situations or other
situations relevant to the implementation of resolution
1888 (2009), it did so solely and exclusively to enable
data collection by means of the monitoring and
reporting arrangements.

The report therefore reflects the fact that not only
is the precise concept of sexual violence in armed
conflict being abandoned, but it would also seem that
the arrangement can now be applied to the broader
concept of incidents or standards of behaviour
occurring in other situations that are cause for concern.
In our view, that is not covered by resolution 1960
(2010).

Regarding the recommendations contained in the
report, Colombia understands that by urging the

12-2393]

Council to increase pressure on perpetrators of
conflict-related sexual violence, including the
individuals and parties named in the report, the
Secretary-General is referring to those named in the
report's annex, that is to say, the situations being
considered by the Council and the sanctions
committees set up with regard to such situations, which
have adopted clear and precise criteria and procedures.
We must not lose sight of the fact that each situation is
specific, as are the elements of each mandate issued by
the Council.

My delegation reiterates its position with regard
to the possible establishment of dialogue with parties
to conflict for commitments to prevent sexual violence
and hold perpetrators accountable in that the
establishment of such dialogue must observe national
laws and policies. If a State, as in the case of
Colombia, has a policy whereby any dialogue between
the United Nations and illegal armed groups operating
in the country must take place with the prior explicit
authorization of the Government, that decision must be
respected.

Colombia attaches the greatest importance to the
prevention, investigation and prosecution of sexual
violence in armed conflicts. As a result, we are
resolutely determined to address this complex series of
problems. Our national authorities as a whole are
taking action to foster a culture of zero tolerance for
violations of human rights, zero tolerance for violence
against women and, in particular, zero tolerance for
sexual violence. Colombia has legislation ensuring
women a life free of any sort of violence in both the
public and private spheres and an institutional structure
capable of implementing such measures.

Colombia's Law No. 1448 of 2011, on care,
assistance and full reparation to the victims of internal
armed conflict - as highlighted by the Secretary-
General in his report - sets out different measures and
guarantees of non-recurrence for women and girls who
are Victims of sexual violence. This is a decisive step
forward by the State to deal with these problems in a
coordinated and consistent fashion.

With regard to the defence sector, many
administrative provisions have been adopted aimed at
preventing and punishing abuse, such as Ministry of
Defence Directive No. 11 of 2010, which is aimed at
reasserting compliance by armed forces with regard to
their obligation to prevent all forms of violence against

12-2393]

women and children, specifically violent sexual acts, as
well as Directive No. 7 of March 2011, on combating
impunity.

In order to strengthen the measures adopted in
those instruments, coordinated work is being done with
the United Nations, the High Adviser for Women's
Equality and other State bodies in order to define
additional measures of prevention in accordance with
experience gained on the ground and international
standards.

The establishment of monitoring, analysis and
reporting arrangements for conflict-related sexual
violence must ensure that on the basis of accurate,
objective and verifiable information, measures may be
adopted to prevent conflict-related sexual violence and
provide effective responses to help its victims.
Similarly, recognizing the primary responsibility of the
State to protect its people, the information obtained
must contribute to the adoption of broad national
policies and strategies against sexual violence,
including prevention and care and recognition of
victims.

In that regard, it is imperative to help States with
the development and implementation of early-warning
mechanisms and procedures that facilitate the
reporting, registering and verification of information.
To the same end, the various United Nations bodies
must continue to strengthen coordination, reducing the
duplication of effort and ensuring a consistent
approach in the field in order to help the Council in its
consideration of all appropriate measures.

