Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): Let
me begin, Sir, by saying how pleased my delegation is
to see you presiding over this open debate. Your vast
experience and ability were amply demonstrated
throughout the fifty-fourth session of the General
Assembly and during the preparation and unfolding of
the Millennium Summit. Argentina acknowledges and
appreciates the traditional concern of the Government
of Namibia with respect to the struggle for gender
equality and for the promotion and protection of the
rights of women- a concern shared by all other
members of the Southern African Development
Community and throughout the continent of Africa.

It is therefore no surprise that it is at the initiative
of the Government of Namibia that the Council is
today holding an open debate with a view to
contributing to a better understanding of the
relationship between women and international peace
and security. We warmly welcome today's discussion
of that topic.

Our thanks go also to Ms. Angela King, Special
Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of
Women, and Ms. Noeleen Heyzer, Executive Director
of the United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM), for their statements.

On the many occasions when the Security
Council has considered the link between women and
peace and security, it has generally been to condemn
the appalling consequences of armed conflict for
women, as victims of violence, trafficking, slavery,
anti-personnel landmines and forcible displacement.
Here, the Argentine delegation will continue, as it has
done in the past, tirelessly to uphold the imperative
need for full respect for international humanitarian and
human-rights norms.

War crimes against women and girls, as
recognized by the International Criminal Court in its
Rome statute, must not go unpunished. We take this
opportunity to urge parties to armed conflicts to take
special measures to protect women and girls from
gender-based violence, especially rape and other forms
of sexual abuse.

Similarly, the Argentine Government voices its
support for the creation of some kind of system to
prevent sexual violence, exploitation and trafficking in
women and girls among both civilian and military
populations, including suitable procedures for the
lodging of complaints that would protect the identify of
informants, as well as mechanisms to supervise
peacekeeping personnel. It seems to us that realities
increasingly demand that a gender dimension must be
present in all field operations.

My delegation believes that conflicts with an
impact on women pose a grave threat to the future of
generations to come, undermine the foundations of the
safety and security of families and social protection
systems and create the worst of climates for the moral,
political and socio-economic survival of the
communities in question. We vigorously condemn the
manipulation of any conflict situation by the victors to
deny women and girls their fundamental human rights,
in particular the right to physical integrity, food, proper
housing, education, employment and health services.
We therefore continue to support all Council initiatives
with a particular focus on the special needs of women
affected by armed conflict.

We will also support measures that the Secretary-
General may decide to take to ensure that peacekeeping
personnel receive proper training on gender issues,
especially during post-conflict repatriation,
resettlement, rehabilitation, reintegration and
reconstruction. Similarly, we welcome any proposal
aimed at greater gender awareness on the part of
Member States, so that this will be reflected in national
training programmes for military personnel and civilian
police serving in the field.

My delegation wishes now to refer not to the
international community's unquestionable moral
imperative to provide special protection for women and
children during armed conflict, but rather to the need to
understand that there is an important role that women
can and must play in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts and in peace-building. It is worth recalling
that on 8 March 2000, on International Women's Day
and in the context of negotiations in the Preparatory
Committee for the twenty-third special session of the
General Assembly, on Beijing + 5, the then President
of the Security Council, Ambassador Chowdhury of
Bangladesh, issued a press statement on behalf of the
Council (Press release SC/6816), which observed that

"peace is inextricably linked with equality
between women and men".

Now, more than seven months later, today's historic
debate is lending new power to that avowal.

Armed conflict has a special and disproportionate
impact on women, and it is thus right to conclude that
women have their own views which must be heeded in
discussions of the best ways to avoid or settle conflicts
and of how to organize the future of communities that
have been affected by such conflicts. But,
unfortunately, that is not how matters stand. Women
are not sufficiently well represented at the decision-
making level in national, regional and international
institutions and mechanisms for the prevention and
resolution of conflicts. Argentina stresses the need for
women to play a meaningful role in formulating
policies and programmes to that end.

Here, we take note with satisfaction of the
Windhoek Declaration and the Namibia Plan of Action
on Mainstreaming a Gender Perspective in
Multidimensional Peace Support Operations. As we
have been doing elsewhere within the Organization, we
urge the Secretary-General to appoint more women as
Special Representatives and Special Envoys, and as his
spokeswomen during missions of good offices related
to peace and preventive diplomacy. We also appeal to
Member States to take due account of the gender
perspective when making national, regional and
international appointments.

We encourage the participation of women in the
negotiation of peace agreements, in all mechanisms for
the implementation of such agreements and in the
process of post-conflict reconstruction. Here, we urge
that outmoded stereotypes of women's roles be
abandoned.

In conclusion, Argentina hails the work towards
greater awareness of gender issues in the context of
armed conflict that has been taking place through the
activities of the Special Adviser on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women, of the various funds and
programmes of the United Nations, such as UNIFEM,
the United Nations Children's Fund and the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
and of local and international women's organizations.
We encourage them to continue their efforts.

