Ms. Sfider (Sweden): I am honoured to address the
Security Council at this yearly open debate. In fact, this
is a debate on peace and security, conflict resolution
and conflict prevention. It is about the core business of
the Council, not an add-on or an ad hoc discussion on
women and girls. The full and effective participation
of women and girls in peace processes is a necessary
condition for sustaining peace and for durable and
equitable peace for all. We strongly support the call of
Secretary-General-designate Antonio Guterres for a
surge in peace diplomacy and his manifest dedication
to achieving gender equality. They go hand in hand. We
are convinced that to succeed such a surge must put the
participation of women and girls at centre stage. That
will guide us as we prepare to assume our seat in the
Council in January.

Both the world and the Council have made
progress, but we are still falling short. The task facing
the Council is to close the gap between ambition and
reality. After the global study and the adoption of the
corresponding resolution 2242 (2015) last year, our full
attention should be directed to carrying out our tasks to
effectively integrate and operationalize the women and
peace and security agenda in the daily business of the
Council. I would like to highlight some areas where we
see a need for improvement.

First, we must adopt a gender equality perspective
from the very outset, with a focus on the objective
of strengthening the situation of women and girls
in conflict situations. Their needs, challenges and
opportunities must be brought to the attention of the
Council - by the Secretariat, the Department of
Political Affairs, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, UN-Women and others - and acted upon.
A continued dialogue with women's organizations
and the relevant stakeholders in the field, through the
various parts of the United Nations system, is therefore
paramount. The Council should be actively engaging
with them.

Secondly, there is a need to improve data collection,
including sex-disaggregated statistics. Too often, we
make decisions based on incomplete data and analysis.
We cannot afford to fail to grasp the root causes of
conflict or to identify peace dividends and agents. For
instance, mothers, sisters, wives and daughters often
know where small arms are, and they are more likely to
see to it that they are handed in in under disarmament
programmes. They need to be part of such programmes
from their design to their implementation. For that to
happen, we need proper data. The Security Council and
the Secretariat should jointly endeavour to ensure that
the basis for every decision has a solid and actionable
gender perspective.

Thirdly, there is a need to ensure the full and
effective participation of women and girls in peace
processes. That requires the Security Council to
adopt strong mandates on participation, but also that
we strengthen our follow-up on such mandates. We
need to make sure that guidance is implemented and
that national efforts are recognized and supported, or
encouraged and requested if missing. We should hold
United Nations mediators, peacekeeping missions
and political missions accountable to their women-
and-peace-and-security mandates. That is how we
can assist Colombian women in following through on
their remarkable peace work; or help Afghan girls to
receive an education; or Somali women to be properly
represented in the next legislative assembly.

Fourthly, we must incentivize through financing and
other means. We must make sure that enough resources
are dedicated to realizing this agenda. The 15 per cent
target in the three peace and security reviews is a step
in the right direction, but only as a first step. I am glad
that the Peacebuilding Fund is leading by example.

Conversely, we should critically review peace and
security missions, operations, projects and programmes
that do not meaningfully address gender equality or
provide for the participation of women and girls. We
should consider discontinuing funding to those that do
not. Indeed, there is an acute need to gender-mainstream
the United Nations regular and peacekeeping budgets.
Sweden believes that the Secretary-General should
be asked, in the outline draft resolution for the next
biennium, to present proposals on how to address
that shortcoming.

I am pleased to represent a feminist Government
with a feminist foreign policy. In that context, Sweden
naturally follows the work on women and peace and
security. For us this is about our three R's: rights,
representation and resources. We will pursue this
agenda intensely during our term in the Security
Council, not only because it is right but also because
it is smart. We count on the partnership of all members
of the Council. More women simply means more peace.

