Mr. Hannesson (Iceland): Iceland, as a member
of the European Economic Area, but not a member of
the European Union, aligns itself with the statement
made earlier by Minister Elisabeth Rehn of Finland on
behalf of the European Union. I would like, in
addition, to make a few remarks.

I wish first to thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this open debate and giving us the
opportunity to discuss Security Council resolution
1325 (2000) concerning women, peace and security.
Our thanks also go to the four briefers.

At the outset, my Government would like to
express its gratitude to the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report on women, peace and security,
contained in document S/2006/770.

Resolution 1325 (2000) has put gender issues on
the agenda of the Council. The resolution has proved to
be an important tool in promoting the direct
involvement of women in conflict prevention,

peacekeeping and peacebuilding. It is now finally
recognized that women have a crucial role to play in
peace processes and in achieving sustainable peace in
conflict regions.

Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
considerable attention has been paid to its
implementation at the United Nations level. Last year
we welcomed the United Nations System-wide Action
Plan for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
as an instrument for mainstreaming a gender
perspective throughout the work of this Organization
dealing with peace and security. In order to achieve the
Millennium Development Goals, a gender perspective
must be integrated into all strategies and programmes.

The report of the Secretary-General indicates that
some progress has been made in the implementation of
the System-wide Action Plan, in particular in areas
such as peacekeeping and peacemaking. Nonetheless,
much more must be done at the United Nations level,
both at Headquarters and in the field. We would like to
underline the important role of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Peacebuilding Support Office in
the promotion of the full implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). We fully share the opinion of the
Secretary-General that gender equality should be
recognized as a core issue in the maintenance of peace
and security.

We must ensure that the provisions of resolution
1325 (2000) are realized and that women can fully and
equally participate in all levels of decision-making
with regard to conflict prevention and peacebuilding.
Women must be full agents in the shaping and
rebuilding of their communities in the aftermath of
war. It is our duty to continue our work towards the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) at the
national, regional and international levels.

Iceland is fully committed to implementing
resolution 1325 (2000). That includes promoting the
rights of women and girls and mainstreaming gender
concerns in the United Nations system and in our
foreign policy. In Iceland's Policy on Development
Cooperation 2005-2009, special emphasis is placed on
the importance of issues related to women in conflict
areas. Much of Iceland's development cooperation is
directed towards facilitating a smooth transition from
conflict situations, with special emphasis on women
and their role in peacebuilding.

Mrs. Valgerdur Sverrisdottir, Iceland's Minister
for Foreign Affairs, has recently reinforced Iceland's
commitment to gender mainstreaming by focusing the
work of the Iceland Crisis Response Unit on certain
main themes for the selection of projects and
peacekeeping operations in the civil spectrum. The aim
is to ensure that the overall selection of projects and
assignments gives opportunities to women as well as to
men.

In that context, Iceland attaches much importance
to the valuable work of the United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) in
advancing gender equality and women's rights. Iceland
has increased its support for the work of UNIFEM
more than tenfold in the past two years, and we will
increase our support even further. The Icelandic Crisis
Response Unit has in recent years seconded a gender
expert to UNIFEM. in Kosovo. The main objective of
the programme is to increase the awareness and
obligations of the public administration in the area of
women's rights and other women's issues on the basis
of United Nations resolutions. The project has now
been expanded to six other countries in the Balkan
peninsula.

Once again, let me thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this important meeting, and we look
forward to further discussions on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000).

