Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
would first like to thank the presidency of the Security
Council for convening today's meeting and the
Secretary-General for his substantive briefing.

Uruguay, as both a member of the Security Council
and a troop-contributing country with a long history
of involvement in various peacekeeping operations,
attaches great importance to combating cases of sexual
exploitation and abuse and, as such, is highly committed
to the United Nations zero-tolerance policy in such
cases. Whoever commits sexual exploitation and abuse
is acting in a way that it is to be condemned in every
sense. But from a penal perspective, it is an aggravating
factor because the perpetrator is exploiting the trust of
those who require protection and is in clear violation of
the mandate under which he is deployed. I emphasize
that in these cases, Uruguay is a troop-contributing
country has been moving tirelessly forward in this
field by increasing prevention through predeployment
training, adequate control on the ground and the right
leadership at all levels.

There is not a single case of sexual exploitation
and abuse that has not been duly and speedily resolved
when a Uruguayan has been involved, complying
thereby with due process with maximum guarantees
for accused and accuser alike, applying appropriate
measures to those found guilty of committing such
acts. The accountability of the perpetrators and support
for the victims are ensured in legal provisions adopted
by the Uruguayan Government, thereby confirming
its commitment to human rights and the dignity of
the victims. Without claiming to be exhaustive, let
me mention certain measures designed by Uruguay to
advance the fight against sexual exploitation and abuse.

All members of national contingents must pass
a predeployment course, designed by professionals
outside the armed forces and with the participation
of the United Nations country office with respect
to human rights, international humanitarian law,
sexual exploitation and abuse policy, gender policy
and child protection policy. All members must sign a
predeployment affidavit in which they acknowledge
that they have been instructed in the aforementioned
topics and accepti responsibilities arising from the
breach thereof, authorizing the payroll deduction of
disciplinary repatriation and associated costs.

Uruguay has communicated to the United Nations
and the authorities of peacekeeping missions in which
Uruguayan contingents contact details of a focal point
in the Ministry for Foreign Affairs, where people
implicated in possible cases of exploitation sexual abuse
committed by Uruguayan troops - including paternity
cases - or their legal representatives can seek advice
concerning procedures avilable to them for exercising
their rights under Uruguayan law. Uruguay's Ministry
of National Defence has put in place a protocol to provide
the broadest possible guarantees in the procedures to
be followed from the identification of a possible case
of sexual exploitation and abuse to its resolution. It
includes the requisite measures to be taken with regard to
perpetrators and the support to be offered to the victims.
We are in the process of developing a mechanism to
facilitate victims' access to the justice system, with a
view to ensuring their rights and substantiating their
allegations. Many of the complementary measures we
have adopted in connection with the responsibility of
each troop deployed to a peacekeeping operation have
also contributed to ensuring that we were able to collect
DNA samples from the accused.

As I mentioned earlier, the commitment of Uruguay
with regard to cases of sexual exploitation and abuse is
based on respect for human rights and the dignity of
victims. That is the main reason that we should continue
work until there is never another case. However, I do not
want to fail to mention the systemic damage that such
cases cause for United Nations peacekeeping efforts,
whether to peacekeeping operations or other operations
authorized by the Security Council operations. Uruguay
is seriously concerned about the negative impact of
such cases on the credibility and image ofpeacekeeping
operations, as well as the negative impact in terms of
the ability to fulfil mission mandates.
Above all, however, we are especially concerned
that, while there is a wide range of behaviours that
comprise a case of sexual exploitation and abuse
involving military, police or civilian personnel, the
fact is that those responsible cross an unacceptable
line, which in many instances may involve violations
of human rights but in all cases involve an assault on
the dignity of victims. Unfortunately, such cases end
up tarnishing and affecting the heroic and responsible
work of the more than 100,000 peacekeeping personnel
deployed in the various missions, some of whom lose
their lives in the field in pursuit of their the mandates.

Let me conclude by saying that, notwithstanding
the fact that the Security Council is addressing
this issue today - and rightly and in a timely
manner - Uruguay stresses the importance of other
bodies of the General Assembly, such as the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and the Fifth
Committee, holding similar discussions. Given the
seriousness and sensitivity of the issuse before us, there
is nothing incompatible about having more than one
body addreess the matter, and there should be no fear
of duplicating effort. In that regard, Uruguay hopes
that the negotiations that are taking place in the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations will come to
a successful conclusion, in particular in relation to the
issue of sexual exploitation and abuse.

