Mr. Rattray (Jamaica): Let me first thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2017/861) and
acknowledge the efforts of the Secretariat, UN-Women
and you, Madam President, in keeping the women
and peace and security agenda alive. My delegation is
pleased to be associated with the statement delivered
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women and Peace
and Security.
I am honoured to be able to participate in the
Security Council's open debate on resolution 1325
(2000). Jamaica has had a long history of association
with that resolution and fondly recalls the deliberations
that culminated with its adoption in 2000 during our
tenure on the Security Council. We continue to regard
it as seminal to our efforts to advance international
peace and security. Jamaica believes that women must
be recognized for the invaluable role that they can play
in restoring broken communities and sustaining peace.

It is against that background that we share the
views of the Secretary-General that more needs to be
done to ensure women's meaningful participation in
peace processes and the actual implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda. However, we
note with concern that we continue to fall short on
implementation and are particularly worried about
that fact, given the increasing challenges to peace and
security around the world. We therefore concur with the
view that preventative measures need to move beyond
addressing the imminence of crisis to tackle structural
and root causes, including gender inequality.

For its part, the Government of Jamaica has
developed a national policy for gender equality to
ensure that the principle of equality between men and
women is advanced in both the public and the private
spheres in Jamaica. The policy is aligned with our
national development policy and the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. Indeed, in keeping with
Sustainable Development Goal 5, Jamaica launched the
HeForShe campaign in July 2016 as part of the wider
global solidarity campaign created by UN-Women. The
campaign was launched as a platform with which both
men and boys can engage and become change agents
towards the achievement of gender equality, as well as
to end violence against women and girls. Additionally,
as recent as July of this year, a national strategic action
plan to eliminate gender-based violence (2017-2026)
was approved by our Cabinet.

We agree with the Secretary-General's assessment
that effective mechanisms should be established to
ensure the meaningful measurement of results with
respect to women and peace and security. My delegation
would go even further to suggest that such mechanisms
should take account of the cooperation and support
that needs to be provided to ensure the attainment of
the requisite results. Financing will be central to that
endeavour. Jamaica therefore welcomes the fact that
the Secretary-General has addressed this issue in his
report. We fully concur with his assertion that we need
"to reprioritize spending patterns, effectively
coordinate funding instruments and explore
innovative forms of flexible financing" (S/201 7/861, para. 97).

Such efforts must supplement long-standing commitments
that would guarantee adequate, predictable and
sustainable financing.

We share the view that the focus on women and
peace and security should, of necessity, take account
of the role that young people and young women, in
particular, can play as peacebuilders. We therefore
value the work being done pursuant to resolution
2250 (2015) on youth, peace and security to bring this
objective to fruition.

Ensuring the equal and effective participation of
women and men is fundamental to building inclusive
and peaceful societies. My delegation endorses efforts
aimed at ensuring women's economic empowerment,
promoting their participation in governance structures
at all levels and enabling access to justice and
security. Furthermore, women's roles in disarmament,
non-proliferation and arms control can also not be
overstated. In that regard, Jamaica commends our
sister Caribbean Community partner, Trinidad and
Tobago, for spearheading the consideration by the First
Committee of the biennial resolution on that issue. We
are especially interested in ensuring continued progress
towards addressing the gender specific effects of armed
violence and ensuring women's full participation
in gender-responsive disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration.

A critical feature of that endeavour will be the
engagement ofcivil society, which has been an invaluable
partner throughout this entire process. Indeed, there
can be no progress without the involvement of diverse
stakeholders who are central to building confidence
among local communities. It is in that regard that we
commend the Georgetown Institute for Women, Peace
and Security and the Peace Research Institute Oslo
for developing the Women, Peace and Security Index,
which was launched just yesterday.

In conclusion, my delegation is encouraged by the
Secretary-General's personal commitment to ensuring
that the United Nations fulfils its obligations in support
of the women and peace and security agenda. We

welcome intensified efforts that would result in more
inclusive participation by and engagement of women in
United Nations peace and security initiatives. It is our
firm belief that it augurs well for the Organization as a
whole and would provide the catalytic impact necessary
to ensure the effectiveness of peace processes, secure
economic development and realize social prosperity
across the globe.

