Major General Cammaert: First of all, I would
like to thank Ambassador Khalilzad and the Security
Council for inviting us here today and for taking the
time to reflect on sexual violence in conflict and post-
conflict situations.

My name is Patrick Cammaert. I retired last year
as a major general after 39 years of service. My last job
was general officer in command of the eastern division
of the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC). I spent
a large part of my military career operating in conflict
zones, including the years I served with the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO),

I have witnessed that violence directed at women
and girls can be a particularly potent tool of war.
Armed groups persecute communities by dehumanizing
women and girls, which is considered to be an attack
against the values or honour of a society. Even when a
war is formally over and a United Nations
peacekeeping force is deployed, women and girls
remain targets for violence.

The current climate of impunity in most of the
post-conflict contexts allows the many forms of
gender-based violence, including sexual violence, to
flourish. Often the political will to end the vicious
cycle of impunity does not exist. Impunity thus
remains an important impediment to the prevention of
sexual violence.

It has probably become more dangerous to be a
woman than a soldier in an armed conflict. Testimonies
of survivors of sexual violence reveal shocking
brutality. Many of them suffer from grave long-term
psychological and physical health consequences,
including traumatic fistula and HIV. They remain
disabled for life.

Survivors of sexual violence face enormous
barriers in securing justice through the courts or
through more informal, community-based mechanisms.
Given the lack of adequate and responsive law
enforcement, women in particular are reluctant to seek
justice and to file complaints against attackers.
Survivors usually prefer to suffer in silence, fearing
stigma or ostracism. Today, several armed groups
continue to use sexual violence as a weapon of war in
Africa in various forms, including sexual slavery,
kidnapping, forced prostitution and rape. The scale and
brutality of the sexual violence faced by women and
girls in armed conflicts amounts to war crimes and
crimes against humanity.

Sexual violence must be perceived as a threat to
peace and security in the entire world, and in Africa in
particular.

The Security Council has an important role to
play in fighting sexual violence against women and
girls. The United Nations and the international
community need to continue their campaigns to
intensify actions to end violence against women and
girls. Peacekeepers can play an important role in

preventing and addressing sexual violence in conflict
and post-conflict zones.

It is important that the Council continue to
provide modern and multidimensional United Nations
peacekeeping missions with a mandate to protect
civilians under imminent threat of physical violence.
Visible United Nations military presence on the ground
proved to be effective in preventing sexual violence in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Darfur.

To be effective in the protection of civilians, a
United Nations peacekeeping force must have a clear
mandate, strong rules of engagement, sufficient robust
armament and well-trained and well-equipped troops.
However, equally important is the willingness of
United Nations commanders to take swift decisions
when the presence of armed groups is reported.

The deployment of female military and police
personnel has proven to be effective. A critical mass of
women in peacekeeping missions can enhance
confidence-building with the host community by
presenting an organization that looks more like a
civilian society than a military occupation force. Local
women who already live in fear of men due to repeated
sexual violence, often perpetrated by men in uniform,
may feel more confident talking to other women.

You seated around this table are the United
Nations, and you play an important role in ensuring
that the United Nations and the international
community continue to intensify actions to end
violence against women and girls. We understand how
many issues are before you at this moment, each
needing great care and attention. However, woman and
girls around the world are suffering. You have the
responsibility to protect them and to take real and
effective measures to put an end to this.

