Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): Mr. President, few
leaders have had the honour and distinction of
presiding over both the General Assembly and the
Security Council in the same year. You belong to a
small, distinguished league. I am confident that your
unique experiences with both the key organs of the
United Nations will result in an unusually productive
month in the Council.

The decision of Namibia to place the issue of the
role of women in peace and security on the Council's
agenda reflects Namibia's keen awareness of the
impact of peace and security issues upon women. We
are equally pleased that the discussion will not be one-
dimensional. It will not reflect just women's traditional
role as victims of war but also, more recently, as key
victors in several peace processes. The role of women
has changed significantly in the twentieth century, and
the Council should recognize this.

Clearly, over the course of human history, more
men than women have died in armed conflict. But
women have also suffered in countless ways. Mothers
grieve when they lose sons in battle; so do wives when
they lose husbands. We saw this most recently in
Bosnia when men were separated from women and
brutally slaughtered.

Women have also suffered more directly. Over the
ages, in armed conflicts women have been victims of
direct and immediate physical injury that involve rape,
forced prostitution, sexual slavery, forced pregnancy,
abduction and even slaughter. Women also make up the
majority of refugee and internally displaced
populations that result from the outbreak of conflicts.
Downstream consequences of sexual violations, loss of
male family members and eviction from their homes
impose incalculable burdens on women, and these may
last several years after the end of conflict.

Clearly, these barbaric practices must come to an
end. One of the greatest contributions of the twentieth
century the clear spelling out of the norms that should
govern armed conflict. But as the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) recently observed,

"If women are subject to so many of the
tragic repercussions of armed conflict, it is not
from any shortcoming in the rules protecting
them, but rather because the laws are not
observed. International humanitarian law grants
wide-ranging protection to women. There are
more than 560 articles in the Geneva Conventions
of 1949 and their Additional Protocols of 1977,
which protect both women and men, as civilians,
and also as combatants who have fallen into
enemy hands. Among these, more than 40 are of
specific concern to women."

The tragedy we face today is that these norms
were written on the assumption that armed conflict
would take place between well-trained and well-
disciplined armies which could be schooled in the rules
of war. Unfortunately many combatants today are
young and lack the basic rudiments of education. In a
speech to the Council in April this year, we quoted
from a booklet published by the ICRC entitled,
"International humanitarian law: Answers to your
questions":

"The lack of discipline among belligerents, the
arming of the civilian population as weapons
flood the territory and the increasingly blurred
distinction between combatants and non-
combatants often cause confrontations to take an
extremely brutal turn, in which there is little
place for the rules of law."

Realistically, we could do little at this stage to try
to educate such combatants on the civilized rules of
war. The only solution is for the international
community to deliver robust responses when major
infractions take place. This is too large a subject to be
covered in this debate. But we are pleased that the
Summit meeting of the Council endorsed in general the
Brahimi report. If the Council can now follow through
with deeds that match its words, all victims of armed
conflict, women as well as men and children, will
benefit enormously.

The resolve of the international community to
tackle the issue of impunity should be demonstrated by
meting out swift and effective justice to those who
violate universally accepted norms. Indeed, the death
penalty would be both an appropriate judicial response
and a key deterrent to prevent a recurrence. The
International Criminal Tribunals for the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda, which the Council established
in response to the widespread violations of
international humanitarian law, have done much good
work. Unfortunately, many key perpetrators remain
unapprehended. Many have not even had charges filed
against them. The wheels ofjustice have to be seen to
be moving more swiftly if they are to provide any
deterrence at all.
One major change between the second half of the
twentieth century and earlier times was the growing
recognition that women can play an effective role in
ending or resolving conflict. You expressed this well,
Mr. President, when you addressed the gathering on the
occasion of International Women's Day on 8 March
this year:

"Women know intimately the horrific warfare and
bloodshed that they face daily in conflict zones,
but they also know the conditions that need to be
met to ensure that the peace in their countries is
sustainable, equitable and just. Women and
children are the first Victims of conflicts. Is it any
wonder, then, that women are uniting to end the
conflicts that destroy the lives of their loved ones,
as well as of their communities? Women are half
of every community. Are they, therefore, not also
half of every solution?" (GA/SM/157)

The United Nations Development Fund for
Women (UNIFEM) should be commended for
highlighting the significant contributions women have
made towards both achieving and consolidating peace.
In this regard, we also commend both Ms. Noeleen
Heyzer and Ms. Angela King for the excellent
statements they made earlier today. I would also
recommend that we read carefully UNIFEM's
publication entitled "Women at the Peace Table:
Making a Difference". It has captured well many
examples of the achievements of women all over the
world in fostering the conditions for peace and
stability. I will cite a few examples.

In South Africa, women formed a strong
Women's National Coalition that cut across racial,
social and political lines, contributing in no small
measure to South Africa's success in establishing a
democratic Government today. In Northern Ireland,
another women's coalition, the Northern Ireland
Women's Coalition, which drew its membership from
both the Catholic and Protestant communities, also
succeeded in galvanizing the grassroots and securing a
seat at the peace table. In Guatemala, women's voices
and visibility in the peace process were achieved again
through the existence of a cross-party and cross-
sectoral women's coalition. The exertions of their
sisters in Georgia, Palestine and Cambodia, often in
difficult and even hostile environments, have also led
to positive outcomes. This morning we saw a video
presentation of the determination of the women of
Burundi and elsewhere in their efforts to contribute to
the peace process. Their courage should set an example
for us all.
Having praised the contributions of women
towards peace, I hope that I will be forgiven for
introducing a slightly politically incorrect note. It is
true that women have often sought peace. But it is also
true that women have on occasion displayed equal
propensity to encourage human rights violations. When
they were not in positions of leadership, women have
sometimes, as wives, supported and participated in the
evil deeds of their husbands. As some of those present
may be mystified by these comments, let me explain
that we in South-East Asia have had direct experience
of this, as some of the wives of the Khmer Rouge
leaders were as brutal as their husbands during the
genocide in Cambodia. Lady Macbeth was certainly no
solitary exception. As we reflect on this issue, we may
have to acknowledge that neither vice nor virtue is
gender based, nor is it confined to young or old.

In considering how we can better harness the
potential of women playing a role in enhancing peace
and security, we should therefore be honest and
realistic. In not all situations have women marched for
peace. Some have marched for war. We see this on our
CNN screens occasionally. To achieve real peace and
security, we must gain the commitment of both men
and women to enhance peace.

To our mind, the surest way of developing and
sustaining peace is to make all citizens of the society
stakeholders in peace. For this reason, development
issues cannot be divorced from peace. Those who live
in abject poverty, as many do, have no vested interest
in pursuing peace if peace fails to uplift them. The
temptation to loot, pillage, rape and murder grows
more acute when there is little to lose. But a population
that believes that tomorrow will be better than today
will be more inclined to pursue peace. Peace and
development should therefore be seen as two sides of
the same coin. Both women and men can and should
play an equally important role.

