Mr. Mlynar (Slovakia): I would first like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this open debate on
the increased participation of women in peacekeeping
operations. We really appreciate your leadership in
promoting the women and peace and security agenda
and also want to recognize the substantial contribution
of Germany to United Nations peacekeeping in terms
of providing personnel, training and funding. We were
very pleased to hear the announcement of the global
female peacekeepers network, which was made at the
beginning of this meeting.

As has been reported, since 2015 the overall
proportion of United Nations peace operations
personnel who are women has increased only modestly,
from 4.2 per cent to 5 per cent. At the current pace
of change, it would take decades to reach the levels
outlined in resolution 2242 (2015). We certainly believe
that there is a great deal more we must do collectively
in order to maximize our efforts and achieve further
progress. We also encourage the Security Council to
prioritize its efforts in this regard, consistent with the
need to bring women's participation and leadership to
the core of peace and security, in line with its mandate.

Slovakia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union. I
would like make a few additional observations.

First, we strongly support the equal and full
participation of women in all efforts to establish and
maintain international peace and security, and call for the
full implementation of all the relevant Security Council
resolutions that address this issue. I would furthermore
like to reaffirm our support for the Secretary-General's
reforms aimed at rendering United Nations peace
operations a more effective tool in the promotion of
peace and security and at enhancing support to political
processes in host countries. We highly commend his
leadership in this domain, including the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative, which has garnered a strong
sense of ownership among Member States, as well
as the recently adopted United Nations uniformed
gender-parity Strategy for the period 2018-2028, which
represents an important development in meeting the
goals set at the London 2016 Peacekeeping Ministerial.

Slovakia has been an active troop- and
police-contributing country since its admission to
the United Nations, 26 years ago, having served in
19 missions to date. Currently, our peacekeepers are
deployed in Cyprus, the Golan Heights and Haiti.
Slovakia has also participated in military and civilian
missions of the European Union, NATO and the
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe
(OSCE), where we also attach great importance to the
women and peace and security agenda; indeed, as the
current Chair of the OSCE, we are undertaking a number
of initiatives and practical steps in the same context.

Increasing the number of women in our armed
forces has been a long-term policy of Slovakia.
Currently, servicewomen make up nearly 12 per cent
of our armed forces. That increasing trend is set to
continue in future. The current gender equality action
plan ofthe Slovak Ministry of Defence aims to integrate
the gender perspective into areas including operational
planning, education, training and evaluation.

I would like to highlight the case of Cyprus,
where we make our largest contribution to United
Nations peacekeeping missions. The United Nations
Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP) has
already been mentioned by several speakers today,
including by the Ambassador of Greece, recently
cited as an excellent example of a mission where all
senior leadership is provided by women. As such, it
is a truly important example that should be followed.
In Cyprus, we have exceeded the targets set in the
uniformed gender-parity strategy, whereby almost
10 per cent of our military contingents and 80 per cent
ofpolice personnel are uniformed female peacekeepers.
Overall, more than 44 per cent - 22 out of 50 - of all
UNFICYP contingents' uniformed female personnel is
from Slovakia.

Resolution 2151 (2014), on security sector reform,
underscores the importance of women's equal and
effective participation and full involvement in all stages
of the security sector-reform process. Gender-sensitive
security sector reform is therefore key to developing
security-sector institutions that are non-discriminatory,
representative of the population and capable of
responding effectively to the specific security needs of
diverse groups.

I would like to highlight that recently, on 13 March,
the Group of Friends of Security Sector Reform,
co-chaired by Slovakia and our close partner South
Africa, together with the Group of Friends of Gender
Parity, co-chaired by Ghana and Qatar, jointly organized
a high-level round table on gender parity and security
sector reform. That was our practical contribution to
this ongoing debate, and an important example of how
two Groups of Friends can be brought together and take
a broader, more comprehensive look at issues, going
beyond silos. That meeting highlighted that security
sector reform must be gender-sensitive throughout
its planning, design, implementation, monitoring and
evaluation phases. Reforming the security sector must
focus on recruitment processes and improving the
delivery of security services to address and prevent
sexual and gender-based violence. The discussions also
underscored that women must be promoted as equal
and strategic leaders, barriers must be broken down and
stereotypes eliminated about women's role in societies,
including their participation in peace processes.

In conclusion, United Nations peace operations,
which are the most visible face of United Nations
engagement in the world, must be representative
of, and responsive to, the needs of men and women
alike. The complementary skills of male and female
personnel have long been recognized as essential for
the effectiveness of United Nations missions. We must
therefore strengthen our cooperation to accelerate
progress towards achieving United Nations targets
to increase the meaningful participation of women
serving in uniformed military and police roles in United
Nations peace operations.

