Ms. Alberdi: I thank the Government of Viet
Nam and Mr. Pham Gia Khiem, Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs, for the honour to
address the Security Council. I congratulate Viet Nam
on its initiative of introducing resolution 1889 (2009). I
note with thanks the Secretary-General's report
(S/2009/465) on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), and I thank Ms. Mayanja for her dedication to
this issue.

The resolution adopted today asserts that
women's leadership is an integral part of early
recovery and peacebuilding. Failure to address
women's needs in transitional governance, livelihood
support, public services and judicial systems can slow
recovery and undermine peace.

In other words, women are a powerful positive
force for long-term peacebuilding. There is no more
important time to act on this insight than now, as we
look forward to the tenth anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000). I would like to highlight four priorities
for action on early recovery and peacebuilding.

The first is women's leadership in peacemaking.
Last year, I shared with the Council research by the
United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM) showing that women average under 10 per
cent of the members in official negotiating teams at
peace talks. The striking absence of women at that
stage means that they lack a voice in everything that
follows. The institutions that implement peace deals
may fail to address women's needs for justice, for
removal of perpetrators of sexual violence from security
forces or for properly designed and targeted public
services. Increasing women's participation in formal
and informal institutions involved in peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding is a major priority.

We need to invest in strengthening the capacity of
women's groups even before a conflict ends. UNIFEM
does that by supporting women's peace coalitions
across the lines of conflict. We are facilitating dialogue
between Israeli and Palestinian women through the
International Women's Commission. We are building
regional women's peace advocacy in the Balkans and
the Caucasus and are supporting women in Somalia,
Uganda and Darfur, to help them engage in peace
processes.

The second priority is funding for women's
empowerment in recovery and peacebuilding. Post-
conflict planners should always investigate women's
specific needs and allocate sufficient resources to meet
them. UNIFEM. has developed an analytical tool for
determining women's specific needs and has worked
with the United Nations Development Group Working
Group on Crisis Prevention and Recovery and with the
World Bank to develop guidance on gender as a cross-
cutting issue in post-conflict needs assessments. This
guidance will be tested in the current needs-assessment
process in Pakistan.

A priority for donors, the United Nations and the
World Bank is to track funding targeted to women's
needs. In post-conflict planning, women must
participate in needs assessments, setting priorities and
monitoring public expenditure. Civil society groups
representing women's interests must be invited to
donor conferences.

The third priority for action is women's safety. The
risk of sexual violence after a conflict keeps women from
resuming market activities and girls from going to
school, and it discourages women from engaging in
politics. The trauma, stigma and social ostracism
endured by survivors of sexual violence lead to family
and community breakdown, eroding the social fabric
and creating long-term obstacles to peacebuilding.

Above all, failure to prosecute crimes of sexual
violence sends the message that perpetrators can act
with impunity. This makes a mockery of efforts to
reassert the rule of law. I also note with great concern
that increased numbers of women defenders of human
rights were threatened or murdered in the last year,
particularly in Afghanistan and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. UNIFEM. welcomes resolutions 1820
(2008) and 1888 (2009) and, as a founder member of the
United Nations Action against Sexual Violence in
Conflict, is committed to supporting their
implementation. Women's safety must be made a priority
in the reform of national security and justice sectors.

The fourth priority is women's livelihood
recovery. A central part of peacebuilding is economic
recovery. That usually translates into job creation for
young men, often at the expense of adequate
investment in women's employment and livelihood
needs. In particular, women need land rights and
control of productive assets. Women's agricultural and
market activities sustain food security, as well as large
numbers of family members. Providing women with
credit and protecting their property rights would have a
significant multiplier effect on peacebuilding. Securing
women's land and property rights must be a major
focus of recovery efforts and should be addressed in
peace negotiations.

UNIFEM. notes with appreciation the recent
Security Council resolutions 1820 (2008), 1882 (2009),
1888 (2009) and, today, 1889 (2009). They represent
building blocks of a potentially powerful system for
equalizing women's participation in conflict resolution
and peacebuilding, strengthening the protection of
women during and after conflict and ensuring long-
term prevention of conflict. Resolutions 1820 (2008)
and 1888 (2009) address key elements of the protection
pillar. The other two pillars require a response that is
just as creative and determined. The tenth anniversary
of resolution 1325 (2000) gives us the opportunity to
build this determined response together.

I conclude with two priorities needed to make the
tenth anniversary a time for strengthening accountability
in the agenda of women and peace and security.

First, we need consistent reporting mechanisms
and indicators against which to report. The new
resolution today calls for the development of indicators
on resolution 1325 (2000) - a call that UNIFEM. is
committed to answering. The difficulty of obtaining
data must not be a reason for not trying to get it. It is
time for us all to count the numbers of women at the
peace table, the numbers of women raped in war, the
numbers of internally displaced women who never
recover their property, the numbers of women
defenders of human rights killed for speaking out. All
of this counts, and we are counting.

We should also set targets to report against next
year. For one, we can aim for at least a 50 per cent
increase in the number of female uniformed
peacekeeping personnel. A 50 per cent increase in a
low number is not difficult. We should set a higher
target for increasing the number of women mediators
and special representatives of the Secretary-General. A
third target could be earmarking at least 15 per cent of
post-conflict funding for women's empowerment and
recovery needs.

The second priority is a leadership and
accountability system for resolution 1325 (2000).
UNIFEM. welcomes the suggestion in the new
resolution that the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture should review the issue of strengthening
women's contributions to recovery and sustained
peace. Beyond the Peacebuilding Commission, we
must prepare for next year by planning for a stronger
system-wide architecture for leadership, expertise,
funding, monitoring and accountability with regard to
the agenda of women and peace and security. This must
be an important part of the new gender entity.

