Ms. Elsheikh (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank South Africa and the United Kingdom
for convening this open debate on women and peace
and security under the theme "Towards the successful
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda". I would also like to thank all the briefers.

Sudanese women have played an important role
in the glorious December revolution that has swept
the country since the beginning of this year and
have been an integral part of it. Women have been
actively participating in protests and demonstrations,
galvanizing and ensuring their peaceful nature. Women
also genuinely participated in the negotiations on the
Constitutional Declaration signed in August, as well
as the negotiations to establish the structures of the
new transitional Government. Four Sudanese women
are currently ministers in the new Government.
They are the Ministers of Foreign Affairs, Social
Development and Labour, Youth and Sports and Higher
Education. There are also two women in the Sovereign
Council - the highest authority in the country - one
of whom is a Sudanese Christian Copt. The Sudan has
also set a quota of 40 per cent women in the transitional
legislative council, in a clear sign of the political will
to empower women and to ensure their participation in
high positions, taking into consideration geographical
and religious diversity in the Sudan, and in the
development and reconstruction process.

The current transitional period in the Sudan has
genuinely and tangibly transformed the situation of
women. The Constitutional Declaration calls on the
State to promote the rights of women, including their
social, economic and political rights, as well as the
right to equal wages and other benefits. The Declaration
also commits the State to combating all forms of
discrimination against women while considering
provisional preferential measures in peace and war.
Such benefits are necessary to ensuring women's
participation in public life and maintaining peace and
security in the country.

Addressing violence against women is a priority for
the new Government, as it is one of the main obstacles
to the empowerment and advancement of women.
Efforts are being made to revoke all laws that restrict
women's freedoms, rights and participation in political
and economic life, especially in rural areas and those
areas affected by the conflict in Darfur. We note that
women played a significant role as arbiters in Darfur,
thereby contributing effectively to achieving peace and
participating in the disarmament campaign.
Since coming to power in early September, the
new transitional Government has sought to promote
human rights. On the margins of the General Assembly
at its seventy-fourth session, the Government signed
an agreement to open a new office on human rights
in the Sudan under Law No. 74 of 25 September. The
aim is to improve the situation of human rights and
to provide the necessary technical assistance in this
regard. That step is important to supporting the rights
of Sudanese women and their participation in peace and
security efforts.

The Sudan is committed to implementing
resolution 1325 (2000) by adopting a national action
plan for women, security and peacebuilding. It is
currently under review to bring it in line with recent
developments in the country so that it can be adopted
by the end of this year.

The delegation of my country seizes this opportunity
to thank Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the
African Union (AU) Commission, for instructing the
AU Special Envoy on Women, Peace and Security to
lead a solidarity mission to the Sudan during the period
26-30 August to ensure the commitment of the new
Government to addressing the concerns of Sudanese
women with respect to peace and security and to ensure
that their voices are heard, their rights are guaranteed
and their participation in decision-making is ensured,
in order to enable them to lead on an equal footing
with men.

