Ms. Taha (spoke in Arabic): I would like to thank
the Spanish delegation for organizing this meeting on
human trafficking and for inviting me to speak to the
Council today. I would also like to thank the United
States delegation for inviting me to address the Council
for the first time a year ago (see S/PV.7585). 1 also thank
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and its
Executive Director, Mr. Yury Fedotov, for appointing
me Goodwill Ambassador for the Dignity of Survivors
of Human Trafficking.

When I was here in December 2015, I testified
about crimes of the so-called Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham (ISIS) committed against me and the
Yazidi community. I told the Council about how ISIS
attacked my village of Kocho, how they rounded up all
the men and killed more than 700 of them in a single
day, including six of my brothers. I told the Council that
my mother was killed along with other older women. I
also recounted that I was enslaved by ISIS for sexual
slavery, along with more than 6,000 other Yazidi
women and children. I spoke about my ordeal - how
we were bought, sold and treated like property. I also
explained how I was raped by ISIS militants multiple
times per day.

Since I first sat before the Council, the ISIS
genocidal campaign against Yazidis has continued. As
of today, more than 3,000 Yazidis remain in captivity.
More than 350,000 Yazidis, along with more than
1.5 million other refugees, continue to live under
difficult conditions in the Kurdistan region of Iraq. In
my own family, two of my sisters-in-law, two nieces
and two nephews are still hostages of ISIS. A year ago,
my beloved niece Katherine was killed in an explosion
as she attempted to escape ISIS territory on foot. She
was just 18-years old.

My family has tried to rescue my nephew Malik,
now l3-years old. Malik has sometimes called us from
captivity, and we have learned that he has been held at
an ISIS training camp in Raqqa and is being trained as
a child soldier. A few months ago, a rescuer was able to
find Malik alone at a bakery in Raqqa. Malik refused to
try to escape with the rescuer, saying that Yazidis are
infidels who should convert andjoin ISIS. I am worried
sick that he will soon be on the front lines. Another one
of my nieces, Nasreen, remains in captivity. She was
just 16-years old when she was kidnapped by ISIS. As
we sit here having this discussion, she is probably being
tortured by ISIS militants three times her age.

Three months ago, I came to the United Nations
with my lawyer, Amal Clooney. We asked the Security
Council to establish an independent body to investigate
the crimes committed by ISIS against all Iraqis. We
have pointed out that the Iraqi Government made that
request and that it was the least the Council could do in
the face of ISIS' systematic atrocities. We said that the
evidence was disappearing and time was running out.

There has been some progress. The United Kingdom
has shown great leadership in the Security Council
in proposing the establishment of an international
response to the global threat posed by ISIS, including
by setting up a mechanism to gather evidence of
international crimes committed by ISIS in Iraq. The
representatives of that country have spoken about that
this year at the United Nations including just last week
at an event at which the Attorney General spoke when
Amal Clooney and I met with representatives of France,
the United States and Russia. They were generally
positive with regard to the idea of establishing such a
mechanism in cooperation with the Iraqi Government.
The Iraqi Government has also encouraged it, as well.
Since the high-level summit of the General Assembly
this fall in New York, we have discussed it in Baghdad
and London. Six weeks ago, the Iraqi Minister for
Foreign Affairs also committed to working with the
United Kingdom to implement a United Nations-
led campaign to act and preserve evidence of crimes
committed by Da'esh. I would like to thank Foreign
Minister Al-Jaafari and Prime Minister Al Abadi for
voicing support for that initiative.

However, time is running out, and statements of
support are not enough. Action needs to be taken. But
I do not know what more it will take for the Council
to act. I do not understand how there is no court able
to prosecute the perpetrators of crimes committed
against Yazidis or any independent body to investigate
them. I do not understand why the bodies of my
murdered mother and brothers still lie unprotected and
unexamined in mass graves. I do not understand how
ISIS militants can publish evidence of their crimes
online and fail to be arrested. I do not know how it is
that, although ISIS has no friends on the Council, the
latter still does not move forward. I am not a diplomat,
and my message is not political. My fight is one for
all Iraqis who have suffered at the hands of ISIS. My
cause is that it can never be wrong to collect evidence
of genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity,
and that it is imperative, if we are not able to stop such
crimes, that we at least commit to establishing a record
of them.

Therefore, on behalf of all Iraqis who have suffered
at the hands of ISIS, I call on Prime Minister Al
Abadi to send a letter to the Security Council asking
for the establishment of an international independent
commission for Iraq to investigate and document the
crimes committed by ISIS. I hope that the Council will
then act swiftly to create such a commission. My fight
is one forjustice, and I know thatjustice is important to
all victims of human trafficking throughout the world.
Yet many survivors whom I have met feel abandoned
and ignored. Minority groups see themselves as
forgotten and left to become a footnote of history.
Women and children in conflict areas are sacrificed
instead of being protected.

The worlds' most powerful nations that are
represented here can stop that by ensuring that
human traffickers face punishment for their crimes;
contributing to the United Nations Voluntary Trust
Fund for Victims of Trafficking in Persons, especially
women and children, which was established by the
General Assembly to provide critical assistance and
support to survivors; by providing assistance to the
establishment ofinternational safe zones; and by taking
in refugees who are fleeing brutal wars, as countries
such as Germany, France, the United States, Canada
and Australia have already done or pledged to do with
regard to the Yazidis. Today, I ask members to take a
first step towards ensuring justice is done for Iraqi and
other victims of war, genocide and human trafficking
so that, one day, I can face my abusers in a court of law
and tell them what they have done, and so that other
victims of war terror and those who abuse them learn
that this is what the United Nations stands for and does.

We have waited long enough.

