Ms. Gambhir (India): We thank you, Madam
President, for convening this open debate on this
important issue. We also thank the Secretary-General
and the other briefers for their useful remarks.

The normative and operative frameworks relating
to the women and peace and security agenda have
considerably strengthened across the United Nations
system over the past two decades. Today, there is
greater awareness about the centrality of the meaningful
participation of women in United Nations peace and
security efforts, including peacekeeping.

In the Declaration of Shared Commitments on
United Nations Peacekeeping Operations under the
Action for Peacekeeping initiative, Member States
agreed to collectively commit to implement the women
and peace and security agenda and its priorities by
ensuring the full, equal and meaningful participation
of women in all stages of the peace process and by
systematically integrating a gender perspective into
all stages of analysis, planning, implementation and
reporting. They further recommitted to increasing
the number of civilian and uniformed women in
peacekeeping at all levels and in key positions.

In that context, India welcomes the recently
launched uniformed gender parity strategy and sees
it as a collective commitment towards implementing
Action for Peacekeeping.

India is committed to increasing the number of
women peacekeepers and to meeting targets in that
regard within the specified timelines. The landmark
first-ever deployment by the United Nations of an all-
female formed police unit in Liberia by India became a
role model for the local women to participate in policing
and in the relevant rule-of-law frameworks.

India is fully prepared to deploy a female
engagement team, comprising 22 women officers and
soldiers, as part of a rapidly deployable battalion in
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo by August.
We will also deploy a women formed police unit in the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan by the end of
this year.

We fully welcome the initiatives by the United
Nations Secretariat in driving the formulation of
policy frameworks to increase the number of women
peacekeepers. However, we perceive that there is
some hesitation to put strong commitments into the
policy framework. In order to achieve the increased
targets under the uniformed gender parity strategy,
we should encourage countries that are willing to
contribute full women units. However, we note that to
accommodate those who cannot fulfil the all-women
unit commitments, the policy frameworks are being
diluted in favour of mixed units over all-women units.
Ifthat is the approach, how can we possibly achieve the
target that we set for increasing women participation
in peacekeeping.

Instead of supporting a policy of mixed units,
we believe that all-women units perhaps need to be
incentivized to encourage greater participation. Priority
should also be given to deploying from the pending
pledges related to women peacekeepers.

For its part, India stands ready to make every
effort to fulfil those goals and strengthen institutional
capacities as well as international cooperation on
this issue.

India partners with UN-Women towards capacity-
building initiatives at the New Delhi-based Centre for
United Nations Peacekeeping, which conducted the
third United Nations female military officers course for
40 women military officers from 26 countries. India
also provides adequate predeployment training on
gender sensitization to its peacekeeping forces.

We will continue to engage with partners to
work towards ensuring the meaningful participation

of women and for building inclusive, peaceful and
resilient societies.
