Mrs. Sealy-Monteith (Jamaica): Madam President,
I am delighted to see you in the Chair leading this
very important debate. I am honoured to address the
Security Council and to participate in this discussion
on women and peace and security, in recognition of
the historic adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) in 2000
and to mark the fourteenth anniversary since that
action was taken. Resolution 1325 (2000) holds much
significance for Jamaica, as it was adopted during our
tenure on the Council from 2000 to 2001 and under the
presidency of our sister African country, Namibia. We
are pleased that you, Madam President, have continued
that tradition. We commend Namibia for its initiative in
placing that important issue on our agenda - an issue
that since 2000 has garnered the attention of, and action
by, the international community.

Resolution 1325 (2000) sought to promote a
gender perspective for peace and security issues by
highlighting the special needs of women and girls, the
significant role played by women in the prevention of
armed conflicts and women's contribution to the peace
process, as well as the full involvement of women in the
decision-making process for their development.

As we meet on the fourteenth anniversary of its
adoption to review the progress that has been made
in realizing its objectives, it is indeed timely and
fitting that we focus our attention on the situation of
refugees, internally displaced and stateless women
and girls. In the past year alone, we have witnessed
an increase in violence, mass displacement flows and
related humanitarian catastrophes. We note with grave
concern that incidences of sexual violence, abhorrent
crimes, human rights violations, and the forcible
displacement of women and girls from their families
and communities have escalated to unprecedented
levels. We must come to grips with the dangerous
emerging violence and conflicts associated with the
proliferation of militias and armed groups and with the
cases of violent extremism, where innocent civilians,
particularly women and girls suffer the greatest harm.

Against that background, it is important to highlight
the responsibility of the international community, and,
indeed, ofeach State, to develop and implement measures
to protect women and to ensure access to justice and
redress for victims of exploitation. Furthermore, women
need to be included in decision-making processes that
would incorporate a gender perspective and analysis in
the broader political process, and in efforts to prevent,
respond to and resolve conflict, displacement and the
effects of violent extremism.

My delegation welcomes the Secretary-General's
report on women and peace and security (S/2014/693),
which identifies the areas of progress - limited in
some instances, commendable in others - made
over the reporting period, even as it underlines quite
frankly the remaining challenges and, simultaneously,
the opportunities for all of us to make good on our
commitments. In keeping with that resolution on
women and peace and security and the principle of
gender equality, over the years Jamaica has deployed
a total of 26 female officers who have served with
distinction in United Nations peacekeeping operations,
thereby enhancing their awareness and sensitivity to
those situations.

Jamaica believes that the empowerment of women
and their increased participation in decision-making are
effective strategies that complement other mechanisms
in the maintenance of peace and security. We cannot
but commend the resilience of many of the women who
experience war and conflict. We salute those who have
tackled their situations under difficult circumstances
and have survived, and those who act on their behalf.
In their name, we must move beyond the rhetoric of
support and take actions to implement measures in
areas where progress is possible and achievable.

At national and international levels, it is particularly
important that there be adequate funding for the
sustainability of programmes to effectively enhance
the full participation of women in peace and security
initiatives. That can be greatly facilitated by the more
deliberate involvement of the United Nations system,
Member States and other actors.

Looking ahead to a redoubling of our efforts,
Jamaica welcomes the high-level review to assess
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) to be
held in 2015, and the prospects for incorporating and
integrating the commitments made under that and
successor resolutions aimed at prioritizing and giving
greater meaning to women's issues on the peace and
security agenda.

