Ms. Heyzer: I thank you, Sir, for the honour of
addressing the Council on the important issue of
women, peace and security, focusing on gender-based
violence.

In times of conflict, violence against women
becomes more than personal devastation; it becomes -
as we have seen all too painfully in the Democratic
Republic of Congo, Rwanda, Bosnia and today in
Darfur - a means for the wholesale destruction of
communities and peoples. The international
community is now fully aware that rape and other
forms of violence against women are systematically
used as a weapon of war. And in many wars and
conflicts, rape has been used as a way of humiliating
the men of the other side, infecting women with HIV/
AIDS, forcing them into sexual slavery and destroying
women's ability to revitalize their communities.

What ultimately must we do to achieve justice
and accountability for victims of gender-based
violence? Impunity for gender crimes continues to
prevail in post-conflict societies and will likely never
be completely eliminated, given the shortcomings of
international and national justice in dealing with sexual
crimes. However, justice and accountability are critical
to the healing and peace process. As we work towards
ending impunity, it is important to ensure that those
responsible for crimes against women are not rewarded
with State power and high-profile jobs as a result of
negotiated peace agreements. It is important to include
women at the peace table and in the process of
reconstruction. It is important to address the nature and
root causes of violence against women.

Within the human rights framework, violence
against women is recognized as a manifestation of
deeply-rooted historical patterns of discrimination
against women and of systemic gender inequalities.
Seen in its true light, gender-based violence in times of
conflict is part of the continuum of violence that runs
through women's lives, from times of peace to times of
war. It only deepens with war. In all cases, its origins
lie in inequality. Gender inequality is, in fact, a seed
that, in times of conflict, bears the bitter fruit of
systematic campaigns to destroy the lives of women,
families and communities.

The good news is that we now know so much
about effective measures to eliminate violence against
women. Great strides have been made in setting norms,
standards and legal frameworks, and the challenge now
is to ensure the implementation of the very good laws
that many countries have already developed, working
closely with and providing the necessary support for
national players. Mechanisms for enforcing rights and
redressing violations are critical to accountability and
justice.

Legal reforms must be accompanied by the
training and reform of the criminal justice system,
which is not very sensitive to the needs of women
victims. Some of the changes that have been made to
the administration of justice - through the creation of
specialized police stations, the training of police forces
as a whole and partnerships with women's groups -
must be instituted as broadly as possible. Coordinated
community-level interventions must bring together
men, local Government, traditional leaders, medical
and legal professionals, and the leaders of women's
organizations so that the framework of international
and national laws can be firmly connected to women's
lived realities.

We also know that violence must be dealt with at
multiple levels and in multiple sectors of society
simultaneously, and that the root causes of violence
must be addressed, including women's poor economic,
social and political status. Through the United Nations
Trust Fund in Support of Actions to Eliminate Violence
against Women, administered by the United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM), initiatives
have been taken in all of those areas. Those initiatives
hold the key to lives free of Violence for all women,
but they need to be scaled up and adequately resourced
to become standard practice in crisis and post-crisis
situations.

At the end of the day, the root causes of violence
must be addressed by enforcing women's rights and
eliminating all forms of discrimination against women.
Gender justice requires the integration of gender
perspectives within every dimension of justice and the
participation of women in shaping justice frameworks
and rule of law institutions in ways that promote their
human rights, legal equality and inclusion. It requires
legal justice to address discriminatory laws against
women, such as inheritance laws which prevent women
from owning property. It requires justice to address
violations of human rights and war crimes so that
women can move beyond their trauma and begin to
construct new lives for themselves. It requires
economic and social justice to address political,
economic and social inequalities that frequently
underlie violence and conflict. Women have been the
victims of war; women must now be part of the
solutions for peace.

In our work on gender justice, we have been
supporting all of those dimensions. For example, in
Afghanistan we have supported gender and rights
training, the involvement of women in the drafting of
laws and their participation in elections. In Rwanda,
our support for women leaders has helped to promote
their role in Government and today the country has the
highest percentage worldwide of women judges and
women in Parliament. Our support has also led to the
passage of the inheritance bill, which guarantees
women and girls the right to inherit property, and will
go a long way in helping the agricultural sector. In the
Great Lakes region, we assisted the office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General as well
as women's organizations in preparing for the Great
Lakes Regional Women's Meeting. The calls issued at
that Meeting must now be seriously attended to at the
meeting of heads of State and Government of the
region.

We must never allow the opportunity that post-
conflict reconstruction presents for establishing the
rule of law to be overlooked. The real cure for violence
against women lies in constitutions with strong and
clear guarantees of gender equality. It is to be found in
legal reforms that ensure equality in marriage and
family relations, in the ownership of property and in
equal access to secure employment. It depends on
women being supported to participate in elections as
voters and in ensuring their rightful representation in
Government.

With those fundamental building blocks in place,
not only will all women be assured of redress for
violence, but the prospect of reducing and eventually
eliminating gender-based violence finally comes into
view. The wholesale damage to lives and communities
that is inflicted by the kind of violence that we have
seen can never be undone, so our sights must be set not
only on redress in the immediate sense, but also on the
essential concern of cutting violence off at its roots.

We are at a historical crossroads where the
opportunity now exists to make the rule of law and the
perspective of women central to peace processes. As
noted in the Secretary-General's report, much has been
achieved since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
but much remains to be done. I would like to draw the
Council's attention to three areas in particular that
were recently highlighted at the Conference on Gender
Justice in Post-Conflict Situations.

First, the participation of women and the
incorporation of gender dimensions must be increased
in all stages of the conceptualization, planning and
implementation of United Nations peace operations.
Peace operations should have adequate numbers of
gender-justice specialist staff in all offices and should
seriously draw on the specialized gender expertise
available from the United Nations funds and
programmes operating on the ground, including
UNIFEM. United Nations bodies must also collaborate
more closely and more frequently on gender justice
objectives with local, professional and academic
groups engaged in training women judges and lawyers,
and with networks of women and men to help change
attitudes and ensure the full participation of women in
the post-crisis phase.

Secondly, United Nations peacekeeping personnel
have a special obligation not to violate the trust that
women and girls place in them. Unfortunately, serious
misconduct has been identified. Gender justice must be
extended to our international guardians. Means must be
developed to ensure the responsibility and
accountability of United Nations peacekeeping
personnel, who serve as role models to the local
communities, for proper behaviour towards women.
Comprehensive policies and procedures must be
established to prevent and punish trafficking, sexual
exploitation and abuse. We have to keep our own house
in order if we expect others to do the same.

Thirdly, gender justice must be a priority within
the United Nations system, including United Nations
peace operations, and institutional arrangements must
be strengthened to accelerate progress. We still lack the
adequate organizational structures, staffing, resources
and coordination needed to achieve gender justice. For
post-crisis situations, the United Nations should have a
central mechanism to focus on coordinated assistance
for gender justice. Together with the United Nations
Development Programme and the International Legal
Assistance Consortium, UNIFEM. will be following up
on some of the recommendations of the Gender Justice
Conference, including through the Partners for Gender
Justice Initiative. However, further steps will require
the involvement of the United Nations system as a
whole, as well as Member States, regional
organizations and civil society.

Gender justice will not be achieved unless we
address the current institutional deficit within the
United Nations regarding gender. Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) is a good example of how
women have been able to bring issues of protection and
their role in peacekeeping to the attention of the
Security Council. What is needed now is a serious
strategy and comprehensive implementation through a
stronger and more coherent gender architecture within
the United Nations system and through partnerships
with local organizations that address current challenges
and promote strategies that have worked.

It has taken more than two decades for women's
voices to be seriously heard, a decade to establish the
norms and legal frameworks for gender justice needed
to eliminate violence against women and to empower
women economically and politically. Women from
war-torn societies across the world are now waiting for
us to fully address the recommendations of resolution
1325 (2000) in ways that can make real differences in
their everyday lives. We cannot allow another decade
to pass before that happens.

