Mr. Jenie (Indonesia): Mr. President, thank you
for convening this meeting today on the agenda item
before us, which reflects the renewed determination of
the Council to protect women in armed conflicts and
promote their role in addressing issues of peace and
security. I would also like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Jean-Marie Guehenno and Ms. Amy Smythe
for their important briefings.

On the occasion of the anniversary of Council
resolution 1325 (2000), concerning women and peace
and security, my delegation wishes to affirm its support
for the resolution. Since its adoption on 31 October
2000, we note encouraging progress resulting from the
implementation of the resolution by Governments,
United Nations bodies, non-governmental
organizations and other relevant sectors of civil society.

Gender mainstreaming activities by United
Nations bodies continues in the fields of peacekeeping
operations, peace-building, and disarmament. We
welcome the initiatives by the United Nations
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to incorporate
gender focal points and gender affairs offices in field
operations and by the United Nations Development
Fund for Women (UNIFEM), the United Nations
Department of Economic and Social Affairs and the
United Nations Department of Political Affairs to
promote programme activities in enhancing women's
role in peace-building. We also welcome the
development of the Gender Mainstreaming Action Plan
by the United Nations Department for Disarmament
Affairs, which incorporates gender perspectives in the
fields of disarmament and security, and the
establishment of the Inter-Agency Task Force on
Women, Peace and Security, which serves as a focal
point for implementing all aspects of resolution 1325
(2000).

My delegation also notes with interest the actions
taken by the relevant non-governmental organizations
to disseminate the resolution and to promote women's
role in peace and security. Their contribution should
fortify the work of Governments and the United
Nations system in that field.

Despite the aforementioned progress, much
remains to be done in the future. In our view, as long as
conflicts occur in various parts of the world, we will
continue to deal with women and other vulnerable
populations in such situations.

During armed conflict, women often become
targets of groups who use terror as a tactic of war, and
suffer from gender-based violence. They have often
been forced to become sex workers. Women have also
been abducted and trafficked for sexual exploitation.

When women are forced to leave their countries
and become refugees or internally displaced persons,
they often have to deal with violence at camps. A
report by UNIFEM, entitled "Women, War and Peace",
indicates that sexual exploitation of women and girls
occurred at refugee camps in some conflict zones and
its impact was devastating. The teenage pregnancy rate
reached 50 per cent at the camps. Women often
suffered from attacks by members of different ethnic
groups. They also often risked abuse from their own
relatives.

Armed conflicts have also brought about severe
impacts on women's health. This has been more serious
for women who were pregnant or breastfeeding their
children. Women often suffered from infectious
diseases, injuries and wounds, mental fatigue and
stress-related diseases. Access to health services
became scarce because war had ruined the health
systems and access to providers of health services.
In some conflict areas, women have also been at
risk for HIV/AIDS. According to the UNIFEM. report,
women's exposure to HIV in war zones was due to
sexual violence and exploitation, lack of adequate
health care facilities and medical treatment,
contaminated instruments and the mixing of civilians
and combatants. Underlying factors but not direct
causes of the epidemic were economic destitution,
psychological trauma and poor nutrition.

My delegation has in the past supported concerted
international efforts to alleviate the suffering of women
dragged into conflicts. We believe that the rights of
women in armed conflicts should be acknowledged as
an explicit priority and firmly entrenched in peace-
making, peace-building and conflict resolution
processes, as well as in demobilization and
reintegration plans.

We give particular emphasis to the efforts to
make women central to peace-building by promoting
the understanding of the impact of conflicts on women,
improving protection and assistance for women,
placing women and gender perspectives at the core of
peace processes and fostering gender justice. We also
value initiatives to develop networking among women
stakeholders, such as the Mano River Women's Peace
Network.

My delegation stresses the need to address the
cases of sexual exploitation and abuse of women and
girls in humanitarian crises and conflict situations,
including those cases involving humanitarian workers
and peacekeepers. We welcome in this regard the
Secretary-General's bulletin on special measures
against sexual exploitation and sexual abuse and other
measures developed by the United Nations system to
prevent and address such incidents.

We also see the need for contributing countries to
incorporate the six core principles of the Inter-Agency
Standing Committee on emergencies, the relevant
provisions in the Beijing Declaration and Platform for
Action, the outcome of the United Nations General
Assembly's special session on women and relevant
provisions of the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women into pertinent
codes of conduct for peacekeeping personnel.
Contributing countries are also encouraged to develop
appropriate disciplinary measures and accountability
mechanisms and to improve awareness of the
responsibilities of United Nations peacekeepers,
especially in the protection of vulnerable populations.

Among the Secretary-General's recommendations
in his last report was the expression of his intention,
which we supported, to establish a database of gender
specialists and women's groups and networks in
countries and regions in conflict. We look forward to
obtaining some elucidation on how work is progressing
on this database, which will be of tremendous help
when conflict breaks out in a particular region. In this
regard, we recommend the support of this idea by
Member States of the Organization, donors and civil
society towards providing financial, political and
technical support for women's peace-building
initiatives and networks.

Indonesia looks forward to the forty-eighth
session of the Commission on the Status of Women in
2004, which, in accordance with its multi-year
programme of work for the period 2002 to 2006, will
review the thematic issue of women's equal
participation in conflict prevention, management and
conflict resolution and in post-conflict peace-building.

We also welcome the initiative of the Division for
the Advancement of Women, in collaboration with the
Office of the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General
on Gender Issues and Advancement of Women and the
Department of Political Affairs, to organize an expert
group meeting on "Peace agreements as a means for
promoting gender equality and ensuring participation
of women - a framework of model provisions", to be
held in Ottawa, Canada, from 10 to 13 November 2003.

Indonesia wishes to reaffirm its commitment to
implementing resolution 1325 (2000) and to
constructively contributing to the deliberations on that
issue at the forthcoming session of the Commission on
the Status of Women.

