Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
am grateful to the Togolese presidency for convening
this open debate on sexual violence in armed conflict,
as well as to Ms. Margot Wallstrom, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Armed Conflict, for her presentation of the
Secretary-General's report (S/2012/33), which informs
us in a more detailed manner regarding the situation on
the ground on this subject. We are also grateful for the
interventions by Mr. Herve Ladsous and Ms. Amina
Megheirbi.

We recognize that the mandate to combat sexual
Violence in situations of conflict is a very complex one.
When such crimes are perpetrated against women and
girls in a massive and systematic way by armed groups,
they have the aim, among other aspects, of punishing,
humiliating and destroying the fabric of society.
Moreover, such crimes often include deeply rooted
discriminatory practices, sheltered by a culture of
impunity. Among many other aspects, they constitute
grotesque Violations of human rights, with grave
consequences for individuals, families and societies.

Over the past three years the Security Council has
been working to strengthen collective measures to
combat sexual violence in armed conflicts. The
adoption of resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and
1960 (2010) underscored the Council's commitment to
fight the utterly unacceptable violence and terror that
women suffer because of sexual Violence during armed
conflicts. The work of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General has been crucial to this effort.

12-2393]
We applaud some of the conceptual advances
contained in the Secretary-General's report in proposing
a more detailed characterization of the scope of
conflict-related sexual Violence, based on analysis of
cases and trends of some twenty situations on the
ground. That offers better elements for preventive
measures and the eventual use of early warning systems
and for improving access to services for victims - or, to
use the term of the report, survivors - of this scourge.

We are aware of the diverse consequences of
armed conflicts, which increase the likelihood of
sexual violence. It cannot be denied that factors such as
the fear of reprisals, insecurity, social stigma and the
lack of prompt services for victims often prevent such
crimes from being reported. Moreover, we must fight
the perception that it is futile to report them. We must
work to strengthen the administration of justice, both
civilian and military, so that the perpetrators and those
responsible are brought to justice. It is imperative to
obtain firm commitments to prohibit sexual violence
on the part of the high-ranking commanders of armed
forces, and the armed groups, and to adopt codes of
conduct that prohibit sexual violence.

We strongly agree with the specific
recommendations in the Secretary-General's report. We
must increase the pressure against those responsible for
acts of sexual violence in conflicts. In that regard, we
commend the list of parties and even of individuals that
are credibly suspected of committing or being
responsible for systematic rape and other forms of
sexual violence during armed conflicts and in
post-conflict situations.

We also believe that the Council should
systematically consider sexual violence in armed
conflicts when authorizing or renewing mandates of
United Nations peacekeeping missions. Moreover, we
should guarantee the participation of women in the
solution and prevention of conflicts. Rehabilitation and
reconstruction are important parts of the efforts for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). Guatemala
supports the idea that women should play a greater role
in the good offices work and in mediating
controversies. We encourage the Secretary-General to
appoint more qualified women as special
representatives and special envoys.

We are concerned by the delay in the deployment
of women's protection advisers in peacekeeping
operations. Such advisers were approved in resolution

1888 (2009). We hope that in future their deployment
can be expedited so as to effectively comply with the
mandate of that resolution.

Finally, we reiterate our support for the United
Nations campaign against sexual violence in conflicts
and for the Secretary-General's zero-tolerance policy
with regard to personnel of peacekeeping missions. We
also encourage Ms. Wallstrom to continue her visits to
the field, and we commend her five recent visits and
the agreements reached with the Governments. We
trust that in this task she will engage with regional
bodies to coordinate actions at the highest possible
level.

