Mr. Winid (Poland): Let me begin by expressing
our condolences to our German and Russian colleagues
following the tragic terrorist attack in Berlin and the
tragic assassination of Ambassador Andrey Karlov
in Ankara. We ask them to accept our sympathy and
words of condolence.

We thank Spain for organizing today's important
open debate and for facilitating the adoption of the
ambitious resolution 2331 (2016) on trafficking of
persons in conflict situations, which Poland proudly
co-sponsored.

Poland aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union, but
I would like to add some further comments in my
national capacity.

The findings in the report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of measures to counter trafficking
in persons (S/2016/949), released in November this year,
are worrisome and alarming. The report acknowledges
various instances of human trafficking, both within
and beyond conflict zones. Civilian populations,
notably women and often children, often war refugees
and migrants, are subjected to a wide range of forms
of exploitation, including sexual violence, forced and
compulsory labour, enslavement, as well as forcible
recruitment into armed services.

Particularly disturbing is the nexus between
conflict-related sexual violence and human trafficking,
acknowledged earlier in the Secretary-General's report
on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2016/361/Rev.1).
Abductions of women and children, systematic and
widespread exploitation and abuse, including rape,
sexual violence, forced marriages and sex slavery,
perpetrated by Da'esh, Boko Haram and other terrorist
and armed groups, are horrifying and deeply deplorable,
and demand our immediate response. We are also
alarmed by the widespread practice of the recruitment
of children by parties to conflicts, including in
Syria. In that context, I wish to reiterate the primary
responsibility of State authorities for ensuring the
safety of its population, especially members of ethnic
and religious minorities.

Twenty years ago, at the fifty-first session of the
General Assembly, Poland submitted the first draft of
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime, which was adopted by the Assembly
in 2000 (resolution 55/25). We subsequently also
ratified its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children. We are also a State party to the International
Labour Organization's Forced Labour Convention
and its Protocol and the Worst Forms of Child Labour
Convention. We join the Council in urging countries
that have not yet done so to embrace the international
legal framework for preventing and combating
trafficking in persons. Adopting appropriate measures
within national legal systems is the first step in
efforts to combat and prosecute such crimes and hold
perpetrators accountable.

We must also accelerate the international response
to that dangerous and inhumane phenomenon, which
undermines fundamental human rights and gravely
impacts the lives of victims and affects whole
communities. We appreciate the work of international
bodies such as the International Criminal Police
Organization, the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the International
Organization for Migration. We urge Member States to
cooperate even more closely on that common challenge.

Apart from governmental cooperation, building
partnerships with civil society and the private sector
should foster information sharing and the identification
and protection of victims, with the goal of dismantling
criminal networks involved in trafficking in persons.
Cooperation with the private sector is especially
important, so as to cut off funding sources to terrorist
and violent extremist groups, which often profit
from human trafficking. Fighting sexual and gender-
based violence must be better reflected in counter-
terrorist efforts.

Last but not least, we must ensure that the stories
of trafficking not fall into dehumanizing silence by
making the voices of survivors well heard. To conclude,
we once again applaud Spain's initiative to discuss this
topic in this forum, and we appreciate Spain's work on
resolution 2331 (2016), which complements the existing
framework aimed at fighting human trafficking in
conflict situations.

