Mr. Khiari (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I would
like, first of all, to congratulate the Uruguayan
presidency of the Security Council on having taken
the initiative to organize this open debate on an issue
that, regrettably, has become recurrent and topical,
namely, sexual violence in conflict as a tactic of war
and terrorism.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for the high quality of his report (S/2017/249), in which
he makes some very relevant recommendations, after
having provided a clear picture of the state of sexual
violence, in particular in the context of displacement
caused by conflict, the rise of violent extremism and
terrorism, the trafficking in human beings for sexual
exploitation and the use of women and girls as a tactic
of war.

Tunisia is participating in this open debate in order
to recall the particular interest it attaches to this issue
and to renew once again its commitment to the need
to protect vulnerable populations, to promote their
rights, to raise awareness on the danger of the use of
sexual violence in times of conflict as a tactic of war
and terrorism and to reiterate its firm conviction that
women are and will remain indispensable and active
partners in any process of prevention, mediation and
conflict resolution.

It is no coincidence that the Tunisian national
strategy to combat extremism and terrorism, adopted
in November 2016, which is based on four fundamental
lines, namely, prevention, protection, follow-up and
response, gives women a central role in the prevention
of extremism, but also protects them as a vulnerable
target who can be intimidated and subjected to
violence. A review workshop was organized, on 3 May
in Tunisia, at the initiative of the Ministry of Religious
Affairs to discuss the various forms of polarization of
women by terrorist groups, the need to protect women
from indoctrination and harassment and their key role
in preventing and combating terrorism.

The Security Council, in its resolutions adopted
since 2008, including resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888
(2009), 1960 (2010) and 2106 (2013), has judiciously
considered sexual violence to be a tactic of war and an
obstacle to maintaining and restoring of international
peace and security, by exposing the most vulnerable,
especially women and children, to the worst forms
of abuse, hence the importance of our meetings
today and tomorrow. There must be widespread and
comprehensive mobilization.

Tunisia, in 2013, through the adoption of the Organic
Law on Establishing and Organizing Transitional
Justice, has made uncovering the truth and putting an
end to impunity one of its main objectives in order to
evoke, recognize and condemn all forms of violence
and attacks against the most vulnerable populations. In
that conneciton, the Truth and Dignity body, which was
organized for that purpose, organized a public hearing
devoted exclusively to women on 10 March 2017. This
was a first, which broke the taboos and went beyond
social and societal constraints and requirements.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate my country's
readiness to pursue these efforts and initiatives in order
to combat all forms of sexual violence against women.

