Mr. Gertze (Namibia): I would like to start by
thanking you, Mr. President, for organizing this open
debate on the topic of sexual violence in conflict.
I would also like to thank Germany for its strong
commitment in support of the women and peace and
security agenda.

I thank all the briefers for their riveting, detailed
and comprehensive briefings. My delegation aligns
itself with the statement to be delivered by Ms. Fatima
Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the Africa Union
(AU) to the United Nations, as well as that of the
Deputy Permanent Representative of Canada, who
spoke on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women,
Peace and Security.

Aswemarkthetenthanniversaryoftheestablishment
of the mandate of the Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, the Secretary-General's most recent
report on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2019/280)
reminds us that, while there has been a paradigm shift
in how the Organization and Governments address
those crimes, there is much work to be done on the
ground. Accountability for those crimes must be
guaranteed. As the report of the Secretary-General
notes, "accountability remains elusive" (S/2019/280, para. 22). The report further notes that

"[A]cross most countries, victims express reluctance
to report their experiences owing to stigma, the
fear of reprisal, rejection by their families and
communities, and their lack of confidence in
judicial and non-judicial responses"(ibid.).

That must change. Actionable change, first
and foremost, must come from Member States.
International and regional organizations must also
play a role. Furthermore, civil society organizations
can play a guiding role, given their presence on the
ground and contact with survivors and perpetrators.
A survivor-centred approach must be at the heart of
our programmes, interventions and investments. As
outlined in the Secretary-General's report, sexual
violence results in multiple consequences for survivors
and their families. They often require immediate,
life-saving health care. Greater efforts also need to be
made to ensure their rehabilitation and reintegration
into their communities.

The African Union has taken a strong stance on
sexual violence in conflict and underscored its full
commitment to eradicating sexual and gender-based
violence on the African continent. In 2018, the AU and
its member States endorsed the African Union Policy
on Prevention and Response to Sexual Exploitation
and Abuse for Peace Support Operations. The Policy
notably aims to strengthen leadership and management
engagement, roles and responses to sexual exploitation
and abuse. Member States of the AU have also adhered
to a number of instruments developed by the body. That
includes the Protocol to the African Charter on Human
and Peoples' Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa,
adopted in 2003, and the Solemn Declaration on Gender
Equality in Africa, adopted in 2004. The Women,
Gender and Development Directorate and the Office of
the AU Special Envoy on Women, Peace and Security
led the operationalization of those various instruments.
On a larger scale, the AU-United Nations partnership,
especially in the area of women and peace and security,
has contributed to strengthening that partnership and
the work in that field.

Within the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) region, the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo continue to be faced
with conflict-related sexual violence. The report of the
Secretary-General clearly outlines the severity and
number of those crimes. In 2018, the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) documented 1,049
cases of conflict-related sexual violence. There are no
doubt many more cases that have gone unreported.
The SADC-deployed Intervention Brigade, under
MONUSCO, and the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are working together to combat
and eradicate sexual violence in conflict, notably with
the training of commanders and security officers on the
prevention of conflict-related sexual violence.

In 2008, SADC adopted a Protocol on Gender and
Development. The Protocol sets out six specific targets,
notably the on need to enact and enforce legislation
prohibiting all forms of gender-based violence and the
need to ensure that the laws on gender-based violence
provide for the comprehensive testing, treatment and
care of survivors of sexual assault. The SADC Gender
Protocol Barometer is updated annually by the Southern
Africa Gender Protocol Alliance and measures the
success of those six commitments at the member-
State level.

In Namibia, laws on gender-based violence have
been strengthened over the years, and a new clinical
handbook for survivors subjected to intimate partner
violence and/or sexual violence was recently approved
by the Ministry of Health and will be issued for
distribution shortly. The publication will be used by
medical professionals, social workers, counsellors, law
enforcement agencies and others to help and improve
services to victims and survivors.

Next year's twentieth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000) should spur us to redouble our
efforts to strengthen the prevention of and response to
conflict-related sexual violence, to promote a survivor-
centred concept of justice and accountability, and to
address the root causes of those violations. Survivors
of conflict-related sexual violence are very often
young women and men. They represent the future of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central
African Republic, Mali and many other countries. We
must ensure and protect their future to enable them
to successfully contribute to the rebuilding of their
respective countries.

