Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank you, Mr. President, and your delegation for
having organized this meeting. We welcome the
statements by the Secretary-General and Ambassador
Wittig, Permanent Representative of Germany, in his
capacity as Chairperson of the Peacebuilding
Commission.
My delegation acknowledges the value of the
reports we have before us (S/2010/386 and S/2010/466) and shares the view that we must place
peacebuilding at the very centre of the work of the
United Nations in various areas, including the
participation of women and the strengthening of the
Organization's peacebuilding capacity.

Meeting the challenge of peacebuilding requires a
collective endeavour that rests upon the pillars of the
United Nations: peace and security, human rights,
development and humanitarian affairs, while
guaranteeing respect for international law and always
focusing our efforts on generating and strengthening
national capacity.

We welcome the recommendations contained in
the report (S/2010/386) on the action plan to strengthen
capacities and mechanisms to ensure an effective,
systematic, planned and consistent response by the
Organization in matters relating to peacebuilding in the
aftermath of conflict. We consider it relevant to
establish new guidelines for the integrated planning
process for peacekeeping missions in order to bolster
the collective and coordinated work of United Nations
agents in the field and to achieve a greater
complementary effect in the sectors of peace, security,
humanitarian assistance and development.

We reiterate the importance of deploying an
increased international civilian capacity in a prompt
and coordinated manner in countries emerging from
conflict, in particular taking advantage of the
capacities of the southern hemisphere and of women,
taking into account their important contribution in
generating national capacity, in particular in spheres
such as the strengthening of the rule of law,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
security sector reforms, mediation and electoral
assistance.

We await the study by the Peacebuilding Support
Office of ways to extend and improve the list of
available civilian experts, including the role of the
United Nations Volunteers programme. Likewise, we
acknowledge the importance of developing strategic
relations between the United Nations and the World
Bank with a View to articulating effective responses
and improving coordination and the collective impact
on the ground on the basis of accountability and the
delimitation of functions and responsibilities.

With regard to the report on the participation of
women in peacebuilding (S/2010/466), we welcome
the plan of action aimed at implementing resolution
1325 (2000) through concrete peacebuilding measures.
Over the past 10 years, the Security Council has made
progress and has put in place a solid framework for its
gender agenda. But the time has now come for it to
adopt concrete measures that enjoy the full support and
political backing of the Security Council, as well as the
political will of States, the United Nations system and
strategic partners.

We support the plan of action for the participation
of women and its seven commitments. We are aware
that it is an ambitious plan, but it can be achieved by
joining the efforts of all of us who make up the United
Nations. Likewise, it will be crucially important to
ensure that all the relevant agencies, including the
recently established United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women, participate
actively to ensure women's contributions in conflict
resolution and decision-making processes and that their
particular needs are taken into account in the very
design of security and justice strategies.

In discussing positive actions that should be
undertaken by States at this stage of the peace process,
countries have an unparalleled opportunity to ensure
respect for the human rights of women and to
contribute to their involvement in the civilian, political,
social, cultural and economic spheres.

Last December, the Presidents of the General
Assembly and the Security Council named Mexico,
together with Ireland and South Africa, as
co-facilitators of the Peacebuilding Commission
review process. During the first semester of this year,
we held informal, open consultations with Member
States, wide-ranging debates with key agents in the
United Nations system, and meetings to consult with a
broad range of interested parties and associates. On
21 July 2010, we submitted a report (S/2010/393, annex) that reflects the opinions that Member States
transmitted to us in the context of a broad-ranging,
open, transparent and inclusive process.

Subject to the views of our colleagues from
Ireland and South Africa, we believe it important to
draw attention to the specificity of this dual process.
That is, both the General Assembly and the Security
Council should continue to work on the basis of the
recommendations contained in the report, in the
interest of strengthening and raising the profile of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

I conclude by expressing the support of my
delegation for the presidential statement that we will be
adopting at the end of this meeting.

