Mr. Suarez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): It is an honour for the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to speak on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (NAM). This
is a summarized version of our statement.

Everything that pertains to improving the efficiency
and effectiveness of peacekeeping operations is a
matter of crucial importance to NAM, bearing in mind
the fact that 88 per cent of peacekeeping personnel
deployed in the field ground come from NAM. member
States. Therefore, we emphasize the need for effective
triangular consultations or, in other words, a renewed
and revitalized alliance between the Security Council,
police- and troop-contributing countries and the
Secretariat with shared responsibility. That will allow
us to undertake objective evaluations and harness the
potential of the mandates of peacekeeping operations.

Moreover, NAM. reaffirms its principled position
regarding such operations, which must be carried out
in strict compliance with the purposes and principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. At the
same time, we stress that respect for the principles of
sovereignty, territorial integrity, independence and
non-interference in the internal affairs of States are
fundamental elements of joint efforts for the promotion
ofinternational peace and security. In that regard, NAM
reiterates that respect for those principles is essential
for the success of operations, in particular those with
civilian-protection mandates.

Furthermore, recognizing that operations have been
an indispensable tool in the promotion and maintenance
of international peace and security, we emphasize that,
in the context of a comprehensive approach and the
objective of achieving lasting peace and security, the
implementation of all tasks entrusted to operations
must be paired with and supported in parallel by a
broad and participatory political process in order to
sustain peace. That process should be well planned and
carefully designed, find its basis in national ownership
and support from the international community, and
operate with the consent and commitment of the parties
concerned. Peacekeeping operations should not be
used as an alternative to addressing the root causes of
conflicts, or to manage conflicts themselves.

The Movement welcomed the Secretary-General's
Action for Peacekeeping initiative and supported
his Declaration of Shared Commitments, which is
aimed at ensuring collective efforts to improve the
effectiveness and efficiency of peace operations, with
a view to addressing changing realities. Similarly, the
Movement stands ready to translate the Declaration
into a practical, integrated and mutually reinforcing
implementation framework. In that regard, we would
like to note Egypt's efforts to that end, including
through the introduction of the Cairo road map. As
we approach the twentieth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, the States members of the Movement express
their commitment to increasing the number of female
civilians and uniformed personnel in peacekeeping
operations at all levels, including in key positions, and
to ensure the full, equal and meaningful participation
of women in all stages of peace processes.

In conclusion, the Movement takes this opportunity
to pay tribute to, and acknowledge the commendable
work of, the troops - men and women - who in many
cases do their jobs under adverse conditions on the
ground, in contexts of armed conflict, putting their
lives at risk on a daily basis. Our sincere appreciation
goes out to all of them, as well as to those who lost their
lives in the field defending the United Nations flag and
the cause of peace.

