Mr. Perera (Sri Lanka): I congratulate the
Plurinational State of Bolivia on its presidency of the
Security Council and thank it for organizing today's
open debate. I thank the Secretary-General and
other briefers for their remarks and acknowledge the
contributions made by the Executive Director of UN-
Women and other representatives.

Sri Lanka firmly believes that it is the meaningful
participation of women in the international peace and
security agenda that will bring about change in the world.
It does not suffice that women are present at the peace
table merely to satisfy a superficial gender-balance
requirement or to check a box on a management-reform
achievements sheet. Women must be given the space to
truly engage both at the peace table and beyond, and at
all levels - as leaders, researchers, workers, penholders
and agents of change. Sri Lanka has identified gender
equality and women's empowerment as a priority
area and is party to numerous relevant international
conventions and declarations, including the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women. My Government is currently working
to achieve gender equality by enacting gender-sensitive
laws and formulating related policies and action plans.
Gender equality has been addressed through our
Constitution's chapter on fundamental rights and by
meeting treaty obligations, as well as by achieving the
gender indicators in the Sustainable Development Goals.

Sri Lanka was one of the first countries in Asia
to grant a universal adult franchise in 1931. Following
that, we enacted laws in 1939 and 1945 to ensure free
education for all at the primary, secondary and tertiary
levels. Those positive policies, implemented over the
years, have resulted in gender parity in education.
The right to a free education is enshrined in the Sri
Lankan Constitution, which also mandates compulsory
schooling between the ages of five and 14. More than
60 per cent of university undergraduates are women.
At the primary level, female school attendance is
essentially universal, while it stands at 99 per cent for
boys. Free health care was introduced very early after
Sri Lanka gained its independence in 1948. Sri Lanka
adopted a women's charter two years before the Beijing
Platform for Action, and we already have in place a
national plan of action for women.

For Sri Lanka, sustaining peace through women's
political and economic empowerment - a subject
that the Bolivian presidency has so carefully chosen
for our debate today - is very close to our hearts. Sri
Lanka is now in a post-conflict era, traversing a path
of reconciliation and justice. Never has the political
and economic empowerment of women been more
vital to our peace and prosperity than it is today. The
protracted and brutal armed conflict in Sri Lanka
left 24 per cent of our female population widowed.
Sri Lanka is aware that the protection and economic,
social and infrastructural needs of women affected by
war continue to require our attention. To that end, we
have found it crucial to incorporate gender into our
transitional justice process, as stipulated in resolution
1325 (2000). Our Government is focused on three
priority areas of women's empowerment - economic
enhancement and financial identity, the elimination of
violence against women and engagement in public and
political life.

The mechanisms and processes for achieving
national unity and reconciliation are being conducted
under the overall guidance of our office of national
unity and reconciliation. Sri Lanka is also in the
process ofimplementing peacebuilding projects, which
involve joint programming with the United Nations
Development Programme - along with agencies such as
UNICEF, the United Nations Population Fund, the World
Health Organization and UN-Women - to implement
the joint United Nations programme on preventing and
responding to gender-based violence in Sri Lanka,
funded by UN-Women. One of the key target groups
in our empowerment programmes is female-headed
households, including war widows. A national
secretariat for widows and households headed by
women has been established in former conflict areas in
order to serve target groups better.

Sri Lanka has addressed the issue of violence
against women using three approaches - prevention,
intervention and advocacy for the formulation of policies
and laws. A toll-free help line has been established in
the Ministry of Women and Child Affairs to receive
complaints and provide redress to victims through
referral services. Sri Lanka also launched a national
action plan for human rights for the period from 2017 to
2021, which reiterates the need to achieve substantive
equality, particularly in the economic, political and
cultural spheres. In that regard, the Government has
allocated a quota of 25 per cent of posts for women in
local Government bodies. The Ministry of Women and
Child Affairs has also set aside at least 25 per cent of
budgetary allocations for projects for rural economic
development for women's economic enhancement.

Sri Lanka is also working to reserve a minimum
of 25 per cent of the representation in Parliament for
women in the near future. In that regard, however,
we are ever mindful of the challenges that women
face when entering politics and the toxic atmosphere
they encounter. Compared to men, they experience
disproportionate personal scrutiny, discrimination,
character assassination, violence and defamatory
statements. Unfortunately, politics has become
an inhospitable environment for women, and my
Government is committed to fighting the root causes
and institutional biases that prevent women from
becoming fully empowered in their chosen fields.

Sri Lanka has demonstrated its wholehearted
commitment to the elimination of sexual exploitation
and abuse. It was one of the first countries to sign the
Secretary-General's voluntary compact on eliminating
sexual exploitation and abuse. The President of Sri
Lanka has joined the Secretary-General's circle of
leadership on the prevention of and response to sexual
exploitation and abuse in United Nations operations,
and we have made contributions to the Trust Fund in
Support of Victims of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse.

Finally, for more than five decades, Sri Lanka has
been making modest contributions to United Nations
peacekeeping efforts. We are equally committed to the
inclusion of our highly trained and disciplined female
forces in peacekeeping efforts. As Sri Lanka proceeds
with its reconciliation and peacebuilding process, with
the active participation of women at all levels, we
will continue to share our experiences and practices,
especially in relation to the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda.

