Ms. Dlamini (South Africa): Let me take this
opportunity to thank you, Sir, for organizing this
important debate. We also thank the Secretary-General
for his report on the subject under consideration
(S/2010/498).

My delegation aligns itself with the statements to
be delivered by the representative of Namibia on behalf
of the Southern Africa Development Community and
Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace and
Security of the African Union.
My delegation would like to take this opportunity
to welcome the appointment of Ms. Bachelet. This
move was a demonstration of the firm commitment of
United Nations Member States and the Secretary-
General to achieving the objectives and goals of
advancing the equal participation and full involvement
of women in the maintenance and promotion of peace
and security. We would like to assure Ms. Bachelet of
our full cooperation and support in the fulfilment of
her mandate. We appreciate the Security Council's
invitation to UN Women to contribute regularly to its
work on women, peace and security. We are convinced
that the new entity will be very strategic in
coordinating women's efforts in peacebuilding and the
prevention of sexual violence in conflicts.

It has been 10 years since the Security Council
adopted resolution 1325 (2000), following the adoption
of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women. Resolution 1325
(2000) reaffirms the need to implement the obligations
of these instruments, aimed at addressing the situation
of women in armed conflict. The adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) at the dawn of the twenty-first century and
the new millennium was a significant milestone in the
recognition of the role that women played and continue
to play in the maintenance of international peace and
security. In South Africa, women played a critical role
in the struggle for liberation, the transition to
democracy, and post-conflict reconstruction and
development.

As we commemorate the tenth year of resolution
1325 (2000), South Africa believes that, while progress
has been made in the implementation of its provisions,
a lot remains to be done in achieving its objectives.
Today's meeting presents a perfect opportunity to
review the impact of interventions and to assess
progress in order to identify gaps and consolidate new
perspectives towards streamlining and accelerating the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

In Africa, the African Union and subregional
organizations, as well as civil society, play a pivotal
and strategic role in the prevention and resolution of
conflict. Women are always ready to play a role in
conflict resolution initiatives, such as the promotion
and protection of human rights and the rule of law,
both of which are vital to peace, security, stability and
prosperity. Consistent with these efforts, and in order
to promote the effective participation of women in
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and security, the African
Union in February 2009 declared 2010-2020 as the
African Women's Decade. It further committed its
subregional organizations and member States to use the
frameworks of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008) to integrate gender policies, programmes and
activities on conflict and peace, and to create regional
consultative platforms on peace for the sharing of
knowledge and information and the harmonization of
strategies.

The South African Women in Dialogue forum has
initiated dialogue between South African women and
women in conflict countries, in particular Burundi, on
how best to mainstream gender in peace missions in
Africa and beyond. The African Women's Peace Table

was established in 2007; it is another South African
initiative whereby female soldiers and civil society
define the peace agenda and discuss strategies for
peacebuilding in the continent.

South Africa today stands as one of the top
troop-contributing countries in the world, with the
largest women's contingent deployed in peace support
missions. Currently, 19 per cent of South African
National Defence Force personnel deployed in peace
support operations are female.

It is a shame that sexual violence against women,
particularly in armed conflicts, still exists and has not
yet been fully resolved. Sexual violence is one of the
major tragedies in conflict and post-conflict situations,
where women and girls bear the brunt and often
become casualties. Sexual violence constitutes a war
crime and a crime against humanity when committed as
part of a widespread and systematic attack on a civilian
population by State and non-State actors. It was for this
reason that, when the International Criminal Court was
created, South Africa recommended that sexual
violence be among the crimes referred to the Court,
which is a tool against impunity.

It is also for this very reason that South Africa
condemns in the strongest terms possible the mass
rapes committed in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in the past two months. We call
for the urgent identification of the perpetrators of these
war crimes so that they may be brought to justice. The
days of impunity at the expense of women and children
are over.

My delegation believes that the full participation
of women in the prevention and resolution of conflict
has become a critical element in adequately addressing
such tragedies. Placing women in leadership positions,
at senior levels, as decision makers in peace
consolidation processes, in public life and in
transitional Governments could provide space for
gender perspectives in order to resolve conflict and
achieve stability.

In conclusion, we support the set of indicators
contained in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2010/498) and trust that their application will go a
long way towards speeding the implementation of 1325
(2000). The United Nations has come a long way and
played a critical part in defining the role of women,
particularly in conflict situations. Nonetheless, a lot of
support to these women is still required. My delegation
supports the presidential statement on women, peace
and security (S/PRST/2010/22) and welcomes its
adoption.

