Mrs. Wahab (Indonesia): The delegation of
Indonesia would like to express its appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for having convened this important open
debate on women and peace and security, barely one
week after the report of the Secretary-General was
issued. In our view, this is a reflection of the
importance that this subject deserves.

Appreciation is also due to the Secretary-General
for his detailed report, pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000), on this issue, and in particular
for his 21 far-reaching recommendations towards
strengthening and accelerating the implementation of
the objectives contained in that resolution.
We have come here today eager to participate in
this debate, not only because of our complete faith in
resolution 1325 (2000) and its commitment to
improving the lot of women and girls during armed
conflict, but because the advancement of women is
accorded great importance as one of the priority
national policies of Indonesia.

As a signatory to the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women, Indonesia fully and willingly assumes
responsibility for participating actively in international
efforts to end discrimination against women. We have
also continued to demonstrate our opposition to
trafficking in women and girls and to violence against
women migrant workers.

Many of these issues are particularly difficult to
deal with after conflict has already broken out, but we
believe that, if policies are already in place, it is easier
for the international community to deal with any
violations of established law. In this connection, we
agree with the Secretary-General that there is a failure
on the part of the international community to convert
what is already known about the impact of conflict on
women and girls into specific policies and planning
and implementation processes in all peace operations,
humanitarian activities and reconstruction efforts.

While recognizing the importance of considering
the efforts being made by the Secretary-General on this
issue, the delegation of Indonesia underlines the fact
that such efforts and those already being undertaken in
the Commission on the Status of Women are mutually
reinforcing.

Similarly, not only is the contribution of women
and girls in the promotion of peace and peace processes
becoming increasingly important, but it is also
achieving greater recognition, and my delegation is
happy to observe that development. The open support
of the Security Council for the involvement of women
and girls, as well as for the peace-oriented grass-roots
organizations in which they are playing key roles, will
go a long way to enhancing their political status and
relevance.

In this connection, our delegation is of the view
that the ninth recommendation for action, which calls
for the full involvement of women in the negotiation of
peace agreements at the national and international
level, including through the provision of training for
women and women's organizations on formal peace
processes, merits further consideration by the
international community.

On a related issue, we offer our support for the
expressed intention of the Secretary-General to
establish a database of gender specialists and women's
groups and networks in countries and regions in
conflict. We share his encouragement, extended to
Member States, donors and civil society in this regard,
to provide financial, political and technical support for
women's peace-building initiatives and networks. As
an extension of that idea, we urge the Secretary-
General, using the existing extensive network of
United Nations resources, to establish such a database
throughout the developing world, so that it is ready to
be tapped when needed, and not only during periods of
conflict.

The commitment of Indonesia to the advancement
and protection of women in times of both peace and
conflict is reflected in our national policies. Towards
that end, we fully encourage the progress being made
in the integration of a gender perspective into all
aspects of the work of the United Nations, including
within the Secretariat, as well as in peace processes,
peacekeeping and humanitarian operations and
reconstruction and rehabilitation efforts. We urge the
Council to make a more conscious effort to integrate
gender consciousness and perspectives into its
decisions and resolutions.

Needless to say, the contribution of all members
and segments of society is required, if peace is to be
maintained and conflict avoided. The involvement of
women and girls is critical not only for any efforts in
that direction, but also for the maintenance of the
family, which remains the basic unit of society and,
therefore, of social harmony. Any investment of
resources in the education and protection of women is
therefore an investment in the education and protection
of society.

Our delegation shares the view of the Secretary-
General that it is essential for the international
community to increase its awareness of the differential
impact of conflict on women and girls and to address
this issue in a comprehensive manner so as to enable it
formulate a better strategy for specific responses.

It is two years this week since the Security
Council passed resolution 1325 (2000), a powerful,
well-intentioned resolution that was received with
appreciation throughout the world. The report of the
Secretary-General - called for by the Council in the
resolution - has now taken the process forward by
bringing a set of 21 recommendations for action before
the Council. It is our hope that the Council will move
this process forward with appropriate pace and
wisdom.

