Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): At the outset, I
would like to thank the Government of Togo for
convening this important debate today. It provides me
with an opportunity to inform members of the Security
Council of our joint efforts and the challenges that we
encounter as we implement this extremely significant
mandate.

The mandate related to sexual violence in
situations of armed conflict is one of the most
demanding in peacekeeping. The Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and the Department
of Field Support (DFS) remain deeply concerned that,
despite universal and repeated condemnation, sexual
violence continues to be used as a tactic of war, in
particular against women and children.

We greatly appreciate the political advocacy and
leadership of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Wallstrom, in heading the United Nations Action
against Sexual Violence in Conflict. During the past
year, collaboration between my Department, Special
Representative Wallstrom, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and
United Nations Action has been strengthened. Thanks
to these partnerships, we are continuing to produce
concrete results.

Since last year's debate, we have worked with the
Office of Ms. Wallstrom and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner of Human Rights to
develop terms of reference for women's protection
advisers. A tripartite approach has been adopted in the
context of the advisers by placing them in gender and
human rights organizations and in the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in the
relevant peacekeeping operations to facilitate
cooperation. This approach maximizes existing
capacities in the field and avoids fragmentation and
duplication of responsibilities.

Several peacekeeping operations were selected
and invited to identify women's protection advisers
within the limits of existing resources. However, in
cases of conflict-related sexual violence on a major
scale, additional resources should be made available to
deal with the high volume of work. Our efforts to

12-2393]
identify and deploy advisers are currently focused on
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
the United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire and the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan.

In 2011, the Office of Special Representative
Wallstrom and United Nations Action developed
guidelines on the monitoring, analysis and reporting
arrangements. The human rights structures in our
peacekeeping operations direct monitoring and
verification, in close collaboration with other mission
components and the members of the United Nations
country team.

While the arrangements are not an end in
themselves, they should contribute towards a better
prevention and programming policy response. There
remain challenges that we are trying to address:
mobilizing capacities to implement the arrangements;
ensuring the presence of uniformed women in affected
areas to reach out to women and girls; and addressing
inadequate infrastructure and communications to gain
access to important regions to monitor and verify
incidents. Ultimately, impunity, scarce services in rural
areas and insecurity deter survivors from reporting the
sexual violence to which they have been subjected.

The DPKO and the Department of Field Support
stand ready to provide the necessary support to
encourage Governments to institutionalize the
prohibition and prevention of and accountability for
conflict-related sexual violence through the
development of policies and national security sector
training. We must recognize the close links between
time-bound commitments and security sector
development. Meticulous and systematic assessments
of armed groups must be part of any integration policy
in national forces.

We are proud to be an active member of the
United Nations Team of Experts on the Rule of Law
and Sexual Violence in Conflict established pursuant to
Security Council resolution 18 88 (2009).
Accountability for sexual violence must be established
to combat sexual discrimination and inequality. The
reform of existing legislation, access to a functional
justice system and witness protection programmes are
fundamental.

Political will is also essential to ensure that
perpetrators of international human rights and
humanitarian law violations, including sexual violence,

12-2393]

are tried and held accountable. The rule of law as a
whole must prevail, by means of security and judicial
sectors, including correctional systems.

In that regard, the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) has worked
with civil society and women in particular to ensure
that the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur included
provisions for the Government of the Sudan to take the
steps necessary to deliver effective and timely justice
for serious human rights Violations, including sexual
violence, and to prevent amnesty in cases of crimes of
sexual Violence.

(spoke in English)

Progress has also been made in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, where MONUSCO supports
civilian and military prosecutors in investigating
allegations of conflict-related sexual violence. In 2010
and 2011, MONUSCO undertook more than 30 joint
investigation team missions with magistrates and
police officers to investigate cases of sexual violence.
MONUSCO also supported the holding of trials, so as
to strengthen the military justice system, including
through mobile court proceedings in remote areas. As a
result, 217 judgments on sexual violence were
delivered in 2011. MONUSCO and partners also
support 39 legal centres, which provide free legal
assistance to survivors of sexual violence and to their
families. In 2011 more than 2,200 survivors received
assistance.

May I add that when I was in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo a month ago I visited an
incredible place in Goma named Heal Africa. It is a
hospital primarily devoted to treating victims of rape,
physically and psychologically, as well as to teaching
them trades for them to live on after they leave the
facility. It is through just that type of clinic that we can
have a positive impact on the lives of unfortunate
Victims. We should encourage such projects.

Capacity-building is an important element of the
sexual violence mandate, which we are carrying out in
support of host Governments and within our missions.
For example, in Timor-Leste, Liberia, Haiti and Darfur,
United Nations police work in support of the national
police to develop dedicated spaces to receive survivors
of sexual and gender-based Violence. For example,
three such spaces are being launched this month in at-
risk camps in Haiti. To that end, the Police Division is
working with police-contributing countries to develop

training and trainer modules to standardize the
prevention and investigation of sexual and gender-
based Violence in post-conflict environments, for
United Nations police and national police forces. In the
course of last year, 103 police trainers were certified
through five regional training courses.

To capacitate our military components, we have
developed training modules, in consultation with
Member States, to accompany the military gender
guidelines. We are piloting them regionally. We have
also introduced a module on conflict-related sexual
violence, developed under the auspices of UN Action
into the DPKO/DFS protection of civilians training
modules for military, police and civilian components.
Those modules were recently finalized and
disseminated to our missions and key peacekeeping
training partners.

Ultimately, protection from sexual violence is a
key element of the protection of civilians mandate of
United Nations peacekeeping operations. Given the
diverse environments in which peacekeeping missions
operate, different protection arrangements have
emerged. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for
instance, joint protection teams and community liaison
assistants have become essential elements of
MONUSCO's efforts to address the protection of
civilians. Community alert networks established
through the use of cellular phones and high-frequency
radio networks are currently being piloted.

Another example is Darfur, where UNAMID and
the United Nations country team regularly conduct
joint assessment field missions in selected camps for
internally displaced persons, to identify security and
humanitarian concerns, such as access to basic
services, the human rights situation, patterns of
population movement and communities' coping
mechanisms. The missions verify reported cases of
sexual violence, and therefore they also address the
problem of conflicting information.

In order to capture good practices and lessons
learned, we are conducting an inventory of our
structures and practices, which can be replicated in
other contexts. Furthermore, the United Nations Action
early warning indicators matrix on conflict-related
sexual violence, to which the Special Representative
referred, will be adapted to the operational
environments of two peacekeeping operations and
8
piloted and introduced into the protection arrangements
of other peacekeeping operations later this year.

It is important to underscore that the host
Government is ultimately responsible for the protection
of its civilian population. Missions cannot act as a
surrogate for State authority. Where mandated,
therefore, we must strengthen frail State institutions, to
facilitate their protection response. In that regard, we
welcome the recent adoption of the Secretary-General's
human rights due diligence policy on United Nations
support to non-United Nations security forces, which
ultimately strengthens the protection abilities of the
host Government's forces.

MONUSCO is implementing that policy in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which makes the
Mission's support to the Forces armees de la
Republique democratique du Congo (FARDC) and the
Police nationale civile (PNC) conditional on their
respect of international humanitarian law, human rights
law and refugee law. The policy seeks to improve
FARDC behaviour through screening the chain of
command of its units for past humanitarian law and
human rights violations, including acts of sexual
violence, before support is provided by the Mission.
Indeed, in the course of last year, MONUSCO screened
more than 2,000 FARDC and PNC personnel. Support
was suspended to two FARDC battalions based on
evidence of human rights Violations. I am pleased to
highlight that collaboration and progress has been
achieved with the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Last month I also had another
meeting with a senior general commanding FARDC
forces in North Kivu, who acknowledged that our due
diligence policy had now been fully understood and
taken on by himself and his troops: they respect and
take full account of our requirements in the matter.

In conclusion, I would like to draw attention to a
few key points. In countries where conflict-related
sexual violence is taking place, we call on Member
States to fund women advisers in order to strengthen
the implementation of the monitoring, analysis and
reporting arrangements and the sexual violence mandate
from a peace and security perspective. Time-bound
commitments are part of security sector reform and a
strong tool for preventing sexual violence from taking
place. Our missions stand ready to support host
Governments to address those commitments, to work
with the security sector to address the integration of
armed groups in national security forces and to work in

12-2393]
close support of national military and civilian justice
systems to ensure accountability for incidents of sexual
violence. DPKO and DFS also look forward to close
collaboration with host Governments to implement the
Secretary-General's human rights due diligence policy.

Uniformed women in peacekeeping are key to
addressing conflict-related sexual Violence. DPKO and
DFS call on troop- and police-contributing countries to
commit to that issue and to increase the number of
women represented in national security forces. We
have set the objective of 20 per cent women in the
United Nations police forces by 2014, but we must go
further.

Finally, I would like to underline that political,
social and economic empowerment of women in fragile
States is fundamental to eradicating discrimination,
inequality and sexual and gender-based violence.
Women's exclusion from the sectors responsible for
their disempowerment must be addressed through
adopting the principles of resolution 1325 (2000) and
mobilizing strong political will. Political will is what it
is really about.

