The President: I thank the representative of South
Africa for his kind words about England's rugby team.

I shall now make a statement in my national
capacity.

I wanted to say that we share the strong support
that has been expressed for the visit by the Deputy
Secretary-General and Ambassador Mohammed. I
think that it has been a fantastic venture in highlighting
how central the women and peace and security agenda
is to African peace and security. The United Kingdom
strongly supports all our colleagues who have called
today for increasing the numbers of women in political
processes in general and in peace processes in particular.
In turn, I think that means that there must be an even
greater focus on the issue of girls' education so that
we can start to help young girls and women take their
rightful place at the top tables of their communities
and nations. I would like to mention several country-
specific examples.
The United Kingdom has a strong partnership with
Somalia in serving and protecting women and girls.
We work to include women in reconciliation efforts,
security reform and political dialogue and to address
sexual and gender-based violence, and we support
access to comprehensive sexual and reproductive health
care. I very much endorse what others have said today
about the full, equal and meaningful participation of
women in Somalia's upcoming elections. We encourage
Somalia to maintain its commitment to the 30 per cent
quota for women in Parliament, and we hope to see the
bills on sexual offences and female genital mutilation
making swift progress through the Somali legislature.

Turning to the Sudan, I think that the Security
Council wishes the Sudan well and wants to do
everything it can to support it. The United Kingdom
feels the same way. At the General Assembly in
September we were delighted to hear the Prime Minister
reiterate his commitment to women's full participation
in Government (see A/74/PV.10). We have all referred
to Alaa Salah's very important contribution to last
week's open debate (see S/PV.8649), and I think we look
forward to even greater engagement and participation
in public life for women.

We were very pleased that the Deputy Secretary-
General was able to visit Eritrea. There is a clear
opportunity for real change in United Nations and
African Union engagement with Eritrea, following
its historic agreement with Ethiopia and the lifting of
sanctions. We believe that it is essential that increased
international engagement deliver further improvements
in regional security and concrete progress on human
rights there.

Finally, with regard to Ethiopia, I join other
colleagues in paying tribute to Prime Minister Abiy
Ahmed and the award to him of the Nobel Peace
Prize, which is an important testimony to his role in
promoting peace in the region and political reform at
home. What everyone has said about the Ethiopian
President is extremely important. It is very good that
50 per cent of Ethiopia's Cabinet positions are reserved
for women, and that may be a lesson for all of us. We
hope to see Ethiopia build on that progress and promote
women's participation as voters and candidates in
upcoming elections, as well as reforming security and
justice institutions to make them more responsive to
the needs of women and girls. The continued outbreaks
of violence in Ethiopia are concerning, however, and
they highlight the need for all actors to work to reform
institutions and the importance of peaceful dialogue.
We wanted to make this meeting interactive. I
therefore would like to ask a few questions, if I may, in
addition to those that my colleagues have already raised.

First, with regard to girls' education, how can we
make sure that increased investment in girls' education
translates into women's economic empowerment? I
think the Indonesian Ambassador already asked what
practical steps would improve women's participation
in peacekeeping. The Deputy Secretary-General has
given us some, but if there is more that can be said
in that regard, we look forward to it. Besides that,
what additional support do our briefers think women
mediators and civil-society actors need so that they can
strengthen their participation in political dialogue?

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I would like to invite first the Deputy Secretary-
General and then the observer of the African Union to
respond to the good number of questions that have been
asked today. I will be happy to repeat them if necessary.

I give the floor to the Deputy Secretary-General

