Ms. Colakovie (Bosnia and Herzegovina):
Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes and greatly
appreciates the convening of this meeting to mark the
tenth anniversary of the adoption of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000). We view this anniversary as an
opportunity to look back on our achievements while
also assessing what remains to be done in the next
decade in order to fully implement the resolution's
provisions and advance women's participation in peace
and security.

We would like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, Under-Secretary-General Michelle Bachelet,
Under-Secretary-General Alain Le Roy, the President
of the Economic and Social Council His Excellency
Datuk Hamidon Ali and Ms. Thelma Awori for their
comprehensive briefings. We extend our warm
welcome to the ministers from Austria, the United
States and Uganda, the Vice-Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Japan and Ms. Laura Carrera of Mexico, as
well as the other ministers present here today.

At the outset, I would like to emphasize that
Bosnia and Herzegovina fully supports the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), the
provisions of which have been incorporated into the
Bosnia and Herzegovina gender action plan and the
action plan for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) in Bosnia and Herzegovina for the period
2010-2013.

The establishment of UN Women, the
appointment of its head and the appointment of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict are important recent
developments. We believe they will ensure that the
United Nations is working in a concerted and
coordinated manner and will strengthen the capacity of
the United Nations system to match the commitment to
gender equality with the leadership, resources and
expertise needed to deliver changes on the ground. The
further development of indicators to track the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) will be a
significant step in broadening this agenda.

Contemporary conflicts create situations in which
women and children are most affected by the
deterioration of living conditions and fundamental
rights. Deprivation of rights and violence often go hand
in hand with conflict. We emphasize that rape as a
weapon of war is unacceptable. Efforts to fight
impunity, provide assistance to victims and hold
perpetrators accountable must be intensified and better
coordinated. Regrettably, sexual and gender-based
violence often continue after peace deals are reached,
due to insufficient investment in protection and
prevention strategies or weak security and justice
institutions.

We are aware of the fact that peace cannot be
sustained unless women play a critical role in the
process. We therefore underscore the importance of full
and effective participation of women at all stages of
peace processes, giving them an equal role in the
prevention and resolution of conflicts as well as in
early peacebuilding. Women must be fully engaged in
peace talks, post-conflict needs assessments and
planning frameworks. This is particularly relevant with
regard to financial allocations to address their specific
needs and improve gender equality.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has taken significant
steps to integrate the gender perspective into national
policies. We are among the first countries in the
Western Balkans region to have adopted a national
action plan for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). Goals in the plan include increasing the
participation of women in decision-making positions at
all levels of public administration, increasing the
number of women in leadership positions within police
and military forces, increasing the participation of
women in peacekeeping operations and introducing a
gender perspective in the training of personnel for
peacekeeping missions. The goals also include
increasing the knowledge and capacity of State
services to apply resolution 1325 (2000) and improving
cooperation with non-governmental and international
organizations in the implementation of the resolution.
Each goal in the national action plan has a timeline and
indicators for monitoring implementation.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has also adopted a
gender action plan. The two documents link activities
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and international activities
by addressing a broader concept of women and peace
and security, translating them into genuine political
commitments and mainstreaming 1325 issues across
the relevant Government and non-government sectors.
We are convinced that these activities will certainly
accelerate the implementation of the resolution in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and contribute to the common
goal of empowerment and protection of women.

Indeed, much has been accomplished in the past
decade. But much remains to be done to obtain real
results for women on the ground. To that end, it is of
vital importance for the Security Council to continue to
use all tools at its disposal for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), as appropriate.

At the same time, Member States need to take
decisive action, accompanied with clear goals,
baselines and indicators to monitor and assess its
implementation. The goals for the future have been
identified. Now we must have the will and persistence
to achieve them. I can assure the Council of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's full cooperation in that endeavour.

