Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka: There is a common message
coming from women affected by conflict and actors
who are concerned about women and peace and security
matters - whether it be women in Afghanistan, Libya,
the Sudan, Burundi, the Philippines, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Yemen or Colombia; whether
it be Kurdish or Yazidi women, or young women who
are here for this week or global focal points on women
and peace and security from different countries;
whether it be women peacekeepers like the ones from
South Africa who shared their touching stories with us
yesterday, highlighting the need to increase the number
of women in uniform - the loud and common message
is that progress is too slow, political will is not strong
enough and pushback against the needs and interests
of women is threatening the progress we have made,
and is pushing further away those who most need our
resolve and support. That is despite the many good
words, agreements, discussions and events. Change is
not as real as it needs to be.

As I address the Security Council today, I urge
that we heed the call of those women. As we discuss
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/800), we
must aim to close the gap between words and action,
as articulated by the Secretary-General. Even though
we agree on so much, the collective scorecard is not
where it should be. There is a stark contrast between
the expressed support from Member States and regional
and international organizations for the women and
peace and security agenda, and reality.

The correlation between gender inequality and
a society's propensity for civil or inter-State conflict
is now well-established. The link between the
participation of women and more durable peace has
also been established. And yet we still live in a world
that tolerates and excuses women's continued exclusion
from peace and political processes and institutions.
Violent misogyny is on the rise. We are witnessing
record levels of political violence targeting women.
Sexual Violence continues to be used as a weapon ofwar
and terror, while its survivors are left without justice
or support, and the support they need is sometimes
even minimized by decisions that we take here. After
conflict, economic recovery for women is primarily
limited to micro-credit and micro-enterprises, while
large-scale reconstruction is dominated by men and
overwhelmingly benefits men. Feminist organizations'
repeated calls for disarmament, arms control and
shifting military spending to social investment still go
unanswered. It seems easier to use arms than to deliver
clean water and energy or heal the women in north-
east Nigeria from the recurring tremor, as noted last
week by Assistant Secretary-General Asa Regner. The
list of examples of people who should be, but are not,
benefitting from this resolution is way too long.

Last year, the Secretary-General tasked UN-Women
with commissioning an independent assessment of
progress in the implementation of the gender-related
recommendations ofthe three peace and security reviews
that the United Nations conducted in 2015. Its findings

are summarized in the Secretary-General's report. Of
the recommendations that targeted the United Nations
specifically, 50 per cent have been implemented or are in
progress and 10 per cent have either regressed or are not
progressing. From 1990 to 2018, fewer than 20 per cent
of peace agreements included provisions that addressed
women or gender, and last year none of the agreements
reached in United Nations-led processes included such
provisions. The United Nations-led processes are also
supported by Member States; therefore, together, we
have a responsibility to do better.

Many of the countries that will speak here today
generously support mediation and peace negotiation
efforts. But we need all of those countries to also
advocate for the full deployment and use of women with
tremendous skill that are committed to the agenda. We
need them to demand women's direct and meaningful
participation in all phases of peace talks.

Women's absence from peace tables is still
commonplace, but it no longer goes unnoticed. Partners
that support peace talks also do not include women, or
are represented by very few women. This is not from
lack of trying on our part. As we speak, in all ongoing
peace processes, fewer than 8 per cent of agreements
reached contained gender-related provisions, down
from 39 per cent in 2015. In the recent past, even
where agreements include specific gender provisions,
ensuring implementation remains a challenge.

The 2016 peace accord in Colombia is a landmark
agreement, and great efforts went into putting it
together. But a recent analysis shows that around half
of the gender-related provisions in the agreement have
not been initiated and that gender provisions are being
implemented at an even slower rate than the rest.

I have some promising news, however, and I
recognize that it is not nice to give such a gloomy
report. The independent assessment identified areas
where progress is under way, such as in the stronger
integration of gender considerations in preventing
violent extremism. However, we still face challenges
when national counter-terrorism legislation often
adversely affects women's civil society organizations.
The Secretary-General's report urges Member States to
review such legislation and to take action.

UN-Women has just supported two research
projects conducted by Monash University in four
countries - Indonesia, the Philippines, Bangladesh
and Libya. In all four, hostile sexist attitudes towards
women were the factors most strongly associated with
support for violent extremism - far more than age,
degrees of religiosity, level of education or employment.
That is a significant finding, especially because the
vast majority of studies on terrorism ignore gender. We
appreciate the close collaboration among the agencies
that are working in this area and are grateful for the
Member States that collaborate with us.

In addition, the number of countries that have
adopted a national action plan on women and peace
and security increased by 50 per cent since 2015. We
welcome and applaud those countries. But that still
represents fewer than half of the countries in the world,
and only 22 per cent of all plans included a budget at the
time of adoption. We urge countries with new plans to
make sure that they include budgets.

Women's economic empowerment is key to
sustaining peace. Women need to be given priority
in efforts to respond to crises and to plan for peace.
Without shelter, food, support for education and health
needs, woman's lives continue to be frozen in low-
intensity warfare. Discrimination against women and
their access to assets and productive resources Violate
women's human rights and leave them vulnerable to
extreme poverty, gender-based violence and trafficking
in all countries. Family members are also at risk of
being drawn into terrorism and of being in harm's way.

The marginalization of women in decision-making
and in the political economy of foreign aid,
reconstruction and economic revitalization is part
of the problem that the Security Council can solve,
and together we can move the needle. In fragile and
conflict-affected countries, only 4 in 10 women are in
paid work, compared with 7 in 10 men. Creating work
opportunities for women is therefore an important
contribution. In countries experiencing prolonged
crisis, such as Afghanistan, Syria and Yemen, the
gender employment gap is 50 or 60 points. In contrast,
in 2016 and 2017 only 0.2 per cent of total bilateral aid
to fragile and conflict-affected situations went directly
to women's organizations.

Investing directly in women is also critical. In 2018,
total world military expenditure reached $1.8 trillion.
Some of that money contributed to deepening crises
in the same fragile countries that we are meant to be
helping through resolution 1325 (2000). It is important
to say that the overall share of aid promoting gender
equality in some form has increased to 42.6 per cent,
which is higher than ever before, but less than 5 per cent
of it goes to programmes with the primary objective of
improving gender equality and women's empowerment.
This support comes from a small group of countries,
which we can really expand.

In the United Nations, only a few entities have
to date committed to achieving minimum targets on
allocation and expenditure on gender equality. The
Peacebuilding Fund remains the bright spot thanks to
the consistent championing by senior leadership and
to collaborative efforts that we can all learn from.
The Secretary-General's report on women and peace
and security urges United Nations entities next year
to benchmark targets and put in place accountability
mechanisms. The Security Council's active support in
that direction would go a long way to help.
I would further ask members to address the issue
of the participation and inclusion of women in all
peace processes, as well as the inclusion of women in
uniformed armed services. This is one of the important
components of resolution 1325 (2000), and Council
members can also do more to help us enforce and
implement it.

As I said last year, the United Nations and Member
States should not be giving support to peace processes
that exclude women, because if they take a stand on this
matter things will change. We know that such processes
have limited chances of bringing durable peace. It
is therefore important that the Council intervene
decisively. Choosing to exclude women therefore means
that we may be choosing to compromise our collective
desire for lasting peace.

Tomorrow, most representatives here will be at
the global forum for survivors of conflict-related
Violence, led by Nobel laureates Denis Mukwege
and Nadia Murad and my colleague Pramila Patten,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict. Thanks to many efforts
undertaken during the past decade, this is no longer
history's greatest silence. We know women are not just
victims. They continue to lead and to stand up, even
after terrible experiences. Nadia is living testimony
to the resilience of women who defy all odds, and I
applaud her contribution - which has been made in
partnership with the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights, the International Criminal Court,
Justice Rapid Response and others - to ensuring the
thorough investigation of crimes and that these crimes
are documented. I want to make sure that as we move
forward and prepare for the twentieth anniversary
celebration next year, we can close some of the gaps
within the year ahead of us.

In a few minutes, the Council will be listening
to women's voices and stories. Alaa Salah from the
Sudan is one of the many women who are leading the
change in her country. She represents the young women
of courage. The Council will hear about Congolese
women describing the political representation barriers
they faced in the lead-up to the country's first election
in 2011. Council members will also hear about South
Sudanese women and have listened in the past to
Afghani, Libyan and Yemeni women demanding
respect for women's rights and for the meaningful
participation of women in negotiations and decisions
that will determine the future of their countries.

On International Women's Day just a few months
ago, Angelina Nyajima Simon Jial, one of the members
of the South Sudan Women's Coalition, told the
Council that,

"We need not just to be consulted, but to be heard.
When we raise concerns about tensions mounting
or the need for services, we speak from an informed
position" (S/PV8480, p. 6).

There is lot of trust in and expectations for the
Council, and I hope that we will be able to rise to
the occasion. Between now and October 2020, on the
twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), let us
take big steps to close the gap. That is what women are
asking us to do. There is a lot we can do even in this
year. The Council's action can move the needle and set
the example of political courage - not just the courage
of people who have much less to give and much more to
lose. All of us together can take action.

