Mr. Staur (Denmark): Allow me to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting,
thereby ensuring that all key actors are engaged in the
vital debate on how to achieve full implementation of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) and its follow-
up resolutions.

The two recent reports from the Secretary-
General on women and peace and security
(S/2010/498) and on women's participation in
peacebuilding (S/2010/466) point to some of the main
prerequisites for ensuring that peacemaking,
peacebuilding and long-term planning after conflict
become sustainable through the full participation of
women. The implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
has for been inadequate over the past 10 years, but
these two excellent reports, which we fully support,
have made a big step forward by providing sound
analysis and concrete recommendations that are ready
to be implemented.

The remaining piece in the puzzle would seem to
be a single comprehensive framework for the United
Nations system, with clarification of the roles and
responsibilities of the various actors and with clear and
measurable goals, targets and indicators. Obviously,
the newly developed indicators presented in the
Secretary-General's report should guide not only the
work of the United Nations but also that of Member
States, regional organizations and civil society, all of
whom have equally important roles to play when it
comes to advancing this landmark resolution.

Denmark encourages the efforts aimed at further
consolidating the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture and enhancing system-wide strategies. We
welcome the establishment of UN Women and the
appointment of Ms. Michelle Bachelet as the first
leader of that entity. UN Women must play a key role
in leading the agenda on women and peace and
security, while ensuring close and effective cooperation
with all relevant United Nations actors, such as the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
Department of Political Affairs, the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Peacebuilding Support Office, as
well as funds and programmes. We see the creation of
UN Women as a vital step in achieving the full
mainstreaming of women and gender issues in this
area.

Denmark remains as committed as ever to
implementing resolution 1325 (2000). We were the
very first country to adopt an action plan for its
implementation, and we are currently implementing
our second national action plan for 2008 through 2013.
This plan places an even stronger emphasis on using
women's untapped potential, on involving women
actively and on an equal basis in peacebuilding
processes and decision-making at all levels, and with a
focus on visibility at the country level.

As part of our international outreach, Denmark
and the United States will co-host an international
conference on the role of women in global security in
Copenhagen later this week. The conference will
gather political, military, business and civil society
leaders and experts to share best practices and discuss
how to expand and effectuate women's key roles in
peacemaking, peacekeeping and in security-related
activities. The goal of the conference is to help us all
explore new paths to enhancing and improving
women's vital role in the critical political, military and
economic processes that lead to sustainable peace and
security.

The conference will build on concrete know-how
from a number of countries that are experiencing or
have experienced conflict, including Afghanistan,
Liberia and your own country, Mr. President, Uganda.
One concrete example of how we have chosen to
improve the conditions of women in a conflict zone is
our ongoing work in support of women's networks and
organizations in Afghanistan. The right of women to
justice, a strengthened rule of law and a strengthened
civil society at the provincial level are all fundamental
tools in combating the negative impacts that armed
conflict has had on women in Afghanistan. The
women's networks have built the basis on which
women can play an active and constructive part in
addressing the peace, reconciliation and reintegration
process in the country.

Finally, on the eve of the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000), we must not give up on the
accomplishments we have made so far. Rather, we
must strive to ensure that the women and peace and
security agenda finally becomes central to the peace
and security debate.
