Mr. Elbahi (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened this
open debate on women and peace and security. It is one
of the most important items of the Security Council's
agenda.

Mindful of the need to strengthen the role of women
in society, in 2007 my Government adopted a national
strategy for the empowerment of women, which focused
on six main pillars: health, the environment, education,
economic development, women's active participation in
decision-making, conflict settlement and peacemaking,
and the protection of their rights. In order to implement
the pillars of that policy, the State drew up a detailed
action plan as part of its five-year plan for 2007-2011.

In addition, a number of administrative units have
been established to review the position of women
and improve the gender balance within the various
Government sectors and ministries at the national
and provincial levels. Those units continue to form
focial points and to guide plans and strategies for
the empowerment of women and to promote their
participation in society.

My Government has also set up a number of
economic projects for women, such as funds to promote
women's employment in the unofficial sector and
their socioeconomic development, as well as smaller
women's projects financed by mandatory aims and
earning graduates. Microcredit initiatives have also
been established to finance small family businesses
and farms. Those projects focus on the economic self-
sufficiency of women in rural areas, in particular in
Darfur, Southern Kordofan and the Blue Nile.

My country has made great strides in empowering
and advancing women and in strengthening their
participation in society. For example, national
legislation has provided for equal pay for equal work
since the 1970s. A law enacted in 2003 stipulates that
men and women receive pensions at the same age. We
have also enacted a law in 2008 on increasing women's
participation in Parliament by up to 25 per cent. Women
have been able to stand as candidates and to vote since
the 1950s and 19605. In the most recent elections, the
list of presidential candidates included a woman.

Now, 66 per cent of Government officials are
women; 28 per cent serve in Parliament. Their
participation in the private sector is 54 per cent. They
contribute 87 per cent of the gross domestic product.
In the judicial sector, women account for 80 per cent
of the judges. There are 50 female diplomats, including
ambassadors and heads of diplomatic missions. Women
also participate in the armed forces, the police and
security forces, and have reached the rank of Major-
General. They also play an active and successful part in
the private and business sectors.

My country adopted the rural development plan for
women, which is an integrated project focusing on the
States of the Sudan, in particular Darfur state. The plan
covers issues and concerns of rural women and funds
microprojects to alleviate poverty, to promote training
and to further raise awareness of women's health and
nutritation, human rights and peacebuilding. Thirty
per cent of the national budget has been earmarked for
microprojects.

My Government has also established a number
of specialized units at the national and provincial
levels to coordinate women's activities in the areas
of peace and development and to provide guidance to
women on gender equality. In that connection, we note
that disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes give particular priority to the status of
women in close coordination with the relevant United
Nations agencies, including UN-Women. That is with
a View to implementing the plan of action called for in
resolution 1325 (2000).

Along with our policies of empowerment, my
Government developed a strategy to combat gender-
based violence in 2005. We established a unit within the
Ministry of Justice to combat violence against women
and girls, as well as a specialized police unit within the
Ministry of the Interior. We have had a national strategy
in place since 2008 to combat female circumcision.

After the outbreak of rebellion in Darfur, the
Criminal Act of 1991 was amended to include clauses on
crimes against humanity and war crimes and to revise
article 149, on rape and adultery. The Consultative
Council for Human Rights devoted special attention to
publicity in order to raise awareness of issues related
to violence against women in the state of Darfur,
in cooperation with the United Nations Population
Fund and the human rights division of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
That publicity included announcements of medical
registration so that victims of rape could be suitably
compensated. In that connection, we note that the latest
cooperation agreement signed with the Government
of South Sudan will have a positive effect on women's
lives and advancement in both countries.

The situation of women in armed conflict is
inextricably linked to the root causes of conflict. That
is why we call for measures to address such root causes
as poverty, lack of development and problems of climate
change.

In our view, measures taken by the Security Council
should be based on the country reports presented by
States and the accurate information contained in
the periodic reports of the Secretary-General. They
should not be based on reports from non-governmental
organizations or the mass media.

In concluding, we hope that the deliberations of
the Council on this important matter will lead to the
development of an integrated approach to addressing
the issue of women and peace and security. After all,
women constitute half of society, if not, in a certain
way, all of it.

