Ms. Eilon Shahar (Israel): At the outset, Israel
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this open debate on women, peace and security as we
mark the fifth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000).

On issues having to do with economy, politics,
diplomacy, security and all other aspects of our society,
Israel firmly believes that women must play an equal
role. We have no doubt that the progress and
advancement of women will translate into nothing less
than progress and advancement for all. To that end,
Israel remains committed to the goals and objectives of
the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, as
well as to the principles outlined in the outcome
document recently adopted by our leaders at the world
summit. The outcome document appropriately
reaffirms the commitment of all Member States to the
full and effective implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).

As in all other areas, Israel is convinced that
women must play a key role in questions of peace and
security. We believe that an increased role for women
on both the Israeli and Palestinian sides of the
negotiating table will positively reshape the outcome of
peace negotiations.

The Israeli parliament continues to devote
considerable attention to bolstering the role that
women play in this area. For example, the Israeli
women's equal rights law was recently amended - in
the spirit of resolution 1325 (2000) - and now
mandates that the Israeli Government must include
women in any group appointed to peacebuilding
negotiations and conflict resolution. That legislation
deals specifically with the adequate representation of
women in shaping national policy and with the explicit
goal of integrating women in all governmental boards
and bodies established for the purpose of designing
public national policy in foreign and interior affairs,
including the resolution of international conflicts, inter
alia, through peace treaty negotiations.

Because Israel believes so strongly in the
contribution of women to peacebuilding, the Israeli
Ministry of Foreign Affairs has sponsored a series of
seminars on the voice of women in conflict resolution
and peacebuilding at the Golda Meir Mount Carmel
International Training Center in Haifa. The goal of the
seminars is to open dialogue between Israeli and
Palestinian women and further education towards
peace. Of the 300 participants thus far, 50 per cent
have been Palestinian women.

Those efforts are augmented by the work of
numerous Israeli - and specifically women's - non-
governmental organizations, which represent a wide
spectrum of Israeli society and politics. Their active
contribution and involvement in influencing Israel's
agenda on peace issues, among others, have been
widely felt.

For Israel, the topic of peace and security is
fundamental. Israel has endured more than 20,000
terror attacks in recent years. Just yesterday, Israel
sustained yet another suicide bombing, which like so
many of its predecessors, claimed the lives of innocent
civilians.

I would like to take a moment of the Council's
time to address the comments made previously by my
colleague from Egypt. In fact, he brings up a good
point: Palestinian women are currently suffering. But,
since the topic has been raised, let us be very clear as
to the exact nature of the suffering. The seemingly
endless barrage of Palestinian terror attacks against
Israel has resulted in the murder of thousands of
innocents. Palestinian terrorist organizations have time
and time again exploited Israeli goodwill gestures and
manipulated social realities to perpetuate terror attacks
against Israelis. On numerous occasions women have
abused their status to cross security checkpoints with
explosives and other weapons. In fact, several
Palestinian women have succeeded in carrying out fatal
suicide bombings. Thanks to the security procedures
that my colleague decries, Israeli forces have arrested
Palestinian women intent on carrying out suicide
bombings. Just this past July, for example, Israeli
security forces managed to apprehend a woman who
had attempted to exploit a medical visa in order to
carry out a suicide bombing in the very hospital in
which she was receiving treatment. So, without
question Palestinian women are suffering, but they are
suffering at the hands of terrorist organizations that
take advantage of women's status to carry out barbaric
attacks.

At a time when the Middle East is enjoying a new
momentum as a result of Israel's unilateral
disengagement from the Gaza Strip and parts of the
West Bank, it is our hope that all parties in the region
will capitalize on the new opportunities presented. We
firmly believe that women should play a unique role,
helping the region to take advantage of this new era of
hope.

Both the status of women and the prospects for
the future of the region are severely jeopardized when
terrorists and their supporters manipulate women for
evil purposes. Israel is committed to further advancing
the role of women because it is right. Israel is resolved
in its determination that women will play an
increasingly active role in peace negotiations, because
we recognize the unparalleled value of their
contribution. And Israel stands here today, full of hope
that an enhanced role for women in peace negotiations
will build bridges of understanding in Israel and with
our neighbours.

