Mr. Abdullah (Malaysia): At the outset, I wish to
congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for this month. I also wish to thank
you for convening this open debate on the important
issue of women and peace and security. I would like
to thank the Secretary-General for his remarks and
Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict;
Ms. Angelina Jolie, Special Envoy ofthe United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees; and Ms. Jane Adong
Anywar of the Women's Initiatives for Gender Justice,
for their invaluable briefings on the issue.

Malaysia is deeply concerned about the effect of
sexual violence - the physical, psychological and
emotional terror and trauma that it creates for women
and girls. We strongly condemn acts of sexual violence
against women and girls and underline the need for
a deeper examination of the emerging incidence of
sexual violence perpetrated against male victims and
the plight of children born as a result of rape and the
practice of forced marriages by armed groups.

Without a doubt, ending impunity is critical in
ending sexual violence, whether it is committed by
individuals, groups or States. Nonetheless, Member
States bear the primary legal and moral responsibility
for the protection of their civilian populations. Malaysia
therefore welcomes the continuous work of the United
Nations and other stakeholders, including the Team of
Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict, which focuses its efforts on strengthening the
capacity of national rule of law and justice actors. We
feel that its engagement with relevant Governments will
strengthen the latter's capacity to effectively address
sexual violence against women and girls.

In our effort to secure peace and security, we must
move urgently to replace the prevailing culture of
impunity with one of deterrence that promotes the need
for the rule of law, justice and accountability. Malaysia
views accountability as a duty of Member States under
both domestic and international law. The national
system in that regard should be steered towards meeting
international standards in ensuring accountability and
justice. The perpetrators of crimes of sexual violence
should never go unpunished.

Malaysia believes that the equal, full and active
participation of women is key to peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. My delegation is of the View that women
should not just be seen as victims, but as central to all
efforts to end this global phenomenon. It is crucial
to bring women into peace processes. They must be
active participants in all efforts to combat this horrific
phenomenon.

We consider the routine deployment of women's
protection advisers as crucial in addressing sexual
violence. At present, only eight such advisers have been
deployed in the United Nations Mission in the Republic
of South Sudan. It is therefore encouraging to learn that
more are being recruited for the United Nations missions
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Cote d'Ivoire
and the Central African Republic. Malaysia supports
appointing more women's protection advisers, as the
positive value they bring in creating greater awareness
about sexual violence issues, reporting incidents of
sexual violence and implementing Security Council
resolutions on the ground cannot be overstated.

In that context, we welcome today's adoption
of resolution 2106 (2013) on the issue discussed. My
delegation hopes that there will be sufficient impetus
for the actual realization of the relevant resolutions,
including the landmark resolution 1325 (2000), to
increase women's participation in the area of peace and
security. We should also seriously consider appointing
more women to senior positions in United Nations
missions, lest we be accused of ignoring experienced
and potential women leaders in the security and defence
SGC'EOI'S.

Malaysia reaffirms its strong commitment to the
efforts to address sexual violence in conflict and post-
conflict situations. We strongly believe that the subject
of women and peace and security deserves the Security
Council's sustained attention. In that regard, the
Council can be assured of our continuous engagement
and unrelenting support for the advancement of the
issue in our pursuit of achieving peace and security at
the national, regional and international levels.

