Mrs. Tripathi (India): We thank South Africa for
convening this open debate, and we thank the United
Kingdom for continuing it.

Women's participation is critical to the success
of all efforts to build sustainable peace. It is not only
about the realization of women's rights, but also about
building peaceful societies. There is sufficient evidence
that establishes that peace processes are more likely to
succeed when women are fully engaged. Yet nearly
after two decades of the formalization of the women
and peace and security agenda, women continue to
face exclusion and their concerns are neglected in
peace processes. It is time to walk the talk. Regional
initiatives, such as the African Women Leaders
Network, are ensuring that women are at the forefront
of building peaceful societies.

The valiant leadership ofAfghan women in bringing
peace to their communities and to the country needs
to be supported. We also need to address challenges
with regard to the implementation of gender provisions
in peace agreements. Violence against women and
girls perpetrated by terrorists remains rampant. The
subjugation of women in public and in private spheres
continues across situations that are on the agenda of the
Security Council. It is important that the Council strive
to effectively integrate women and peace and security
considerations into sanctions regimes, including by
listing terrorist entities involved in violence against
women in armed conflicts.

As everyone today discusses our collective
action, one delegation has been regurgitating rhetoric
about women's rights in my country. That delegation
represents a system that has been exporting terrorism
and regressive extremist ideologies and stifling women's
voices for narrow political gains. That has devastated
the lives of generations of women and their families
in our region and beyond. Habitually making baseless
allegations without any relevance to the agenda under
consideration has become a staple for that delegation.
That has happened not only earlier during this debate,
but also during the open debate on the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question, that
took place on October 28 during the 8648th meeting
of the Council (see S/PV.8648). We firmly reject
these baseless allegations. The Council has not paid
attention to such deceitful narratives in the past and
we are confident that it will continue not to do so in
order to ensure that this agenda is not used as a ploy for
furthering interterritorial ambitions.

The positive impacts of the greater participation
of women in United Nations peacekeeping are well
recognized in the women and peace and security
agenda. Through the Action for Peacekeeping initiative,
Member States are committed to implementing the
women and peace and security agenda by increasing
the number of civilian and uniformed women in
peacekeeping. This has been complemented by the
uniformed gender-parity strategy. Yet, women make
up only 4.2 per cent of military personnel in United
Nations peacekeeping missions. We ought to encourage
the participation of all women units in order to achieve
the set targets in this regard.

However, we note that, in order to accommodate
those who cannot fulfil their commitment to providing
all-women units, mixed units are being given preference
by diluting policy frameworks. If this continues, we
cannot possibly achieve our set targets. India remains
committed to increasing the number of women
peacekeepers and deployed a female engagement
team to the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
earlier this year.

We will continue to work for the meaningful
participation of women in peace and security issues.
The normative work done outside the Council and
India's experience of mainstreaming women's
leadership and political participation will continue to
inspire our actions.

