Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I thank
the Executive Director of the United Nations Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women,
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, for her briefing and for
conveying the message of the Secretary-General. I also
thank the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Edmond Mulet, for his briefing. I
welcome the presence of Mr. Chaloka Beyani, Special
Rapporteur on the human rights of internally displaced
persons, and of Ms. Suaad Allami, whose briefings
inspire us to redouble the Council's efforts.

I commend the Argentine presidency of the Security
Council for its choice of topic for this open debate, at
a time when the number of refugees and internally
displaced persons (IDPs) worldwide has reached a
level not seen since the Second World War. I thank the
delegation of the United Kingdom for facilitating the
negotiations on presidential statement S/PRST/2014/21,
just adopted by the Council. Luxembourg fully aligns
itself with the statement to be delivered on behalf of the
European Union.

Today's open debate marks the beginning ofa period
that it is hoped will be decisive in the advancement of
women worldwide. The year 2015 will indeed mark the
fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000) and allow us to take stock of the situation of
women with respect to peace and security. The review
of the implementation of the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action, on the occasion of its twentieth
anniversary, will allow us to examine the progress
made and the challenges to the full promotion of gender
equality and the empowerment of women. Finally, the
post-2015 development agenda and the sustainable
development goals should guarantee that women, as
agents of change, will play their deserved role in human
development.

Conflicts do not create new situations of
discrimination. They merely highlight and accentuate
those existing in peacetime. In that context, there is
no better illustration than the situation of refugee and
internally displaced women. Day after day, the news
coming from Syria, Afghanistan, Somalia and South
Sudan - the latter two visited by the Security Council
in August - illustrates the sad state of affairs. For
my part, I cannot forget the poignant testimony of
Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
who went for the first time to South Sudan early this
month and last week provided an account to the Council
of the tragic situation of internally displaced women in
the Bentiu camp (see S/PV.7282).

Refugee and internally displaced women are among
the most vulnerable populations; their rights to security,
sexual and reproductive health and education are
systematically trampled. Sexual violence in and around
IDP camps is endemic. Responsible for providing
for their families, women must often brave several
checkpoints in search of water and food. Left to their
own fate, they lack any means to defend themselves
against attackers. Fear of sexual violence can also
promote early marriage, as is the case for example in
Somalia. Those arrangements are supposed to protect
young girls, but have harmful consequences in terms of
health and access to education.

Refugee and displaced women face not only
sexual violence; access to education, justice and health
services represents some of the challenges contained
in the concept note of the Argentine presidency
(S/2014/731, annex). There can be no simple answer to
this complex situation; a holistic approach is needed.
The joint commitment of Member States, the United
Nations system and civil society is required.

I will address four areas that I consider priority. We
must put an end to impunity for perpetrators of violence
against women and girls. Without credible judicial and
security systems, the perpetrators of those crimes will
pursue their malfeasance. The international community
must support the capacity-building of Member States
in the short and long term. Innovative initiatives exist
and must be supported. I am thinking primarily of
the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict and the Justice Rapid Response
initiative. Luxembourg actively supports those two
initiatives. I also reaffirm my country's full support for
the International Criminal Court - an institution that
strengthens the fight against impunity and plays a very
important role.

Condemning the perpetrators of crimes is only one
aspect ofjustice; ensuring that victims receive genuine
compensation for the harm they have suffered is equally
essential. In that context, we welcome the Guidance
Note of the Secretary-General on Reparations for
Conflict-Related Sexual Violence that was published
in June by UN-Women and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.

Thirdly, women's participation in all discussions
related to their specific rights and needs must be
guaranteed in the decision-making structures of refugee
and IDP camps, in the development of humanitarian
programmes and in peace negotiations. Women's
participation is a necessary condition to guarantee the
success of any measure taken. To that end, we must
strengthen and support the role of civil society and of
women defenders of human rights.

My fourth point is to recall the role that the Security
Council must continue to play in this area, including
during its field visits. Our recent visit to South Sudan
and Somalia allowed the Council to meet with women's
civil society organizations. During its visit to the Great
Lakes region in October 2013, the Security Council also
met with internally displaced women in the Mugunga
III camp, near the city of Goma. That practice should
be maintained.

As I said earlier, the year 2015 will be an important
one for women throughout the world. We eagerly await
the results of the global review of the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) that the Security Council
requested in resolution 2122 (2013) and that Luxembourg
supports through an important programme implemented
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.

We sincerely hope that we can collectively live
up to the expectations to which promised to respond
almost 15 years ago. Let us ensure that this fifteenth
anniversary does not become an opportunity for
complacency, but that it encourages us to redouble
our efforts to end discrimination against women in
conflict and to thereby guarantee more lasting peace
and security.

