Mr. Lucas (Angola): We are grateful to the
Secretary-General for his opening remarks and to UN-
Women Executive Director Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-
Ngcuka for presenting the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2016/822), and we welcome Ms. Rita
Lopidia of South Sudan, who spoke on behalf of the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security.
We were deeply touched by the message she conveyed
to the Council on the dire situation of women in
South Sudan.

Since the holding more than a year ago of the
open debate celebrating the fifteenth anniversary
of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, and the high-level review, this is an occasion
to assess the progress achieved so far. The global study
on the resolution's implementation highlighted the
critical contribution of women to peace and security.
We join the Executive Director of UN-Women in her
call on Member States, regional organizations and the
United Nations to do more to take forward the study's
recommendations and turn commitments into concrete
action.

We further share the Secretary-General's view
on the need to strengthen women's particiaption and
leadership in peace and security endeavours and on
United Nations progress towards achieving a gender
balance in its staff at all levels by emphasizing the
essential link between women's involvement in
conflict prevention and resolution and post-conflict
reconstruction in order to ensure the effectiveness
and sustainability of these processes. The Permanent
Representative of the United States was particularly
eloquent in illustrating that reality.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2016/822)
provides key information on progress made following
the high-level review, highlighting some headway
made in the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
More women are involved in peace talks, more peace
agreements include provisions related to the special
needs of women and girls in support of their rights,
additional personnel are being trained to prevent and
respond to sexual and other forms of violence against
women, and more countries are implementing national
action plans or related strategies. The establishment
of national focal point networks for women and
peace and security is step forward in strengthening
the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda and in assisting Member States and
regional organizations through the exchange of best
practices and by improving coordination, funding and
assistance programmes.

Despite these improvements, including several
judicial cases of conflict-related sexual violence,
violations of the rights of women and girls persist,
including by non-State actors and terrorist organizations
that attack the fundamental rights of women as part of
their political agendas, making women and children
the main victims in conflict and post-conflicts
situations. We urge States to comply with international,
humanitarian, refugee and human rights law and to hold
violators accountable. The equitable participation and
full involvement of women in preventive diplomacy and
related decision-making processes regarding conflict
resolution and peacebuilding have been highlighted
by the Security Council and are attested to by the high
quality of gender expertise provided by the United
Nations in relevant mediation processes.

In Angola, women's participation was decisive to
the attainment of peace. After the end of the armed
conflict, their direct involvement in peacebuilding
efforts was instrumental in providing psychological
support to the victims as counsellors of peace, in
national reconciliation and in strengthening social
cohesion. Moreover, relevant measures were adopted
promoting women's empowerment, and women
are currently playing a crucial role in the political,
economic and social life of the country.

Following the review of resolution 1325 (2000),
significant progress was made in formulating a national
action plan, which has already been drafted by the
Commission for Social Policy and is due to be approved
soon by the Council of Ministers. The action plan sets
out seven objectives, with specified activities, goals
and indicators of performance aimed at increasing
the participation of women and integrating gender
equality into the prevention and resolution of conflicts;
the training and empowerment of women, girls and
boys focused on gender equality and gender-based
violence, the promotion and protection of women's
and girls' rights, their empowerment and education;
the participation of civil society in preventing and
eliminating gender-based violence; raising awareness
and knowledge of the women and peace and security
agenda in all ministerial departments, including a
gender-perspective in the national budget with a view
to fulfilling the commitments set out in resolution
1325 (2000); promoting women's socioeconomic
development in rural communities; increasing food
security and contributing to poverty eradication.

Finally, we support the systematic inclusion of
provisions related to preventing conflict-related sexual
violence in relevant country-specific resolutions and
in the mandates of special political and peacekeeping
missions, and to increasing the inclusion of women
and gender advisers. We attach utmost importance
to the empowerment of women in peacebuilding
and sustaining peace efforts by making them full
participants in conflict prevention and resolution and
post-conflict reconstruction.

