Archbishop Auza (Holy See): My delegation would
like to thank the German presidency for convening
today's open debate to consider sexual violence
in conflict.

This topic is sadly all too familiar to the members
of the Security Council. Reports of the Secretary-
General on crisis situations refer regularly to crimes of
sexual violence. Used as a weapon of war to subjugate
and humiliate victims and cause them physical,
emotional and psychological harm, sexual violence also
has profoundly negative impacts on the communities to
which victims belong and from which they sometimes
find themselves ostracized.

Far too often, rape, gang rape and other forms
of sexual violence, including unspeakable crimes
committed against children and infants, are perpetrated
when the rule of law is weak or non-existent and when
there is no respect for principles of humanitarian
law. What is more, impunity is often the norm and
consequently victims are often afraid to speak out. The
silence must be broken. We cannot remain indifferent
when such widespread cruelty is inflicted on the
innocent. Impunity must give way to accountability so
that there can be justice and reparation.

The landmark resolution 1325 (2000) demands
that parties in armed conflict take special measures
to protect women and girls from violence, particularly
from rape and other forms of sexual abuse. It also calls
for the participation and full involvement of women in
all efforts to maintain and promote peace and security.
Indeed, one way that women and girls can help to lay
the foundations for durable peace and justice is when
their own voices are heard. In particular, survivors of
conflict-related sexual violence should be considered
experts - their pain should be acknowledged, their
strength recognized and their wisdom harnessed.

Terrorist organizations and other non-State actors,
including criminal gangs, have committed crimes of
sexual violence on a massive scale. We know, however,
that they are regrettably not the only perpetrators of
such crimes. Members of armed forces and even some
who serve under the United Nations flag have, in
some instances, added to the misery. My delegation
notes with appreciation the initiatives to prevent and
combat sexual abuse in United Nations peacekeeping
operations, including through specialized training of
personnel, with the specific aim ofreducing risks in host
countries through campaigns to enhance sensitivity,
promote respect for the dignity of others and encourage
populations to speak up.

Those who have suffered conflict-related violence
are victims at multiple levels. They are burdened by war
and then condemned to carry the marks of that trauma in
their own person. Their educational, development and
other basic needs are often not met. Among the victims
are also men and boys - a reality so taboo in some
cultures and contexts that it is hidden and shrouded in
even greater silence. To add insult to injury, victims
are afraid to speak out in many cases for fear of being
shunned by their own communities, indeed by their
own families, making their plight even more desperate.

Discussion of this delicate topic inevitably raises
the equally sensitive question of children conceived
and born as a result of sexual violence in conflict. The
human rights of those children need to be respected
and guaranteed as they would be for any child. Those
young, innocent lives should be welcomed, cherished
and given the means necessary to flourish and reach
their full human potential. Those children need to be
supported and loved, not shamed, stigmatized, banished
or, worse still, denied the most basic right to exist and
be born.

Our hope is that today's open debate and the
attention that it brings to the subject will give more
space to survivors and victims to come forward to
find healing and hope through the recognition of their
personal dignity, and that more robust mechanisms
will be established to bring to justice those who have
committed violations against them.

