Mr. Naanda (Namibia): Namibia is pleased to
participate in this open debate on sexual violence in
conflict under the agenda item "Women and peace and
security". I wish to congratulate you, Madam President,
and your country, Nigeria, on assuming the presidency
ofthe Council for the month oprri12014. I also wish to
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, and his Special
Representative Zainab Bangura for their informative
statements.
Sexual violence has increasingly become a grave
concern and has proliferated in conflict and post-
conflict situations. Women and girls are raped, forced
into prostitution and sexual slavery, and subjected to
various sexual acts that leave them with severe physical,
psychological and emotional trauma. Their lives are
shattered, their hopes are destroyed and they are left
with permanent stigma.

The report (S/2014/181) before us clearly indicates
that the prevalence of sexual violence during periods
of conflicts often leaves lasting legacies, with acute
consequences for the security ofwomen and children in
the post-conflict era and beyond. That is demonstrated
by high levels of rape and other forms of sexual violence
perpetrated against women and children in some post-
conflict settings, which ultimately has a direct impact
on the durability of peace and prospects for sustainable
development.

The United Nations, and in particular this body,
have convened meetings to deliberate on mitigating
factors that can be employed to prevent and or curb
such a scourge. However, despite all efforts, the scourge
still persists and continues to terrorize communities,
thereby posing a serious security concern. That is
so because perpetrators are left unpunished and the
culture of impunity aggravates conflict cycles.

Fighting sexual violence in conflict is a shared
responsibility that requires a broad-based approach
that involves the international community, regional
and national Governments, civil societies and other
stakeholders. National Governments should foster
national programmes that take measures aimed at
preventing and stopping the occurrence of sexual
violence and prosecute perpetrators. In that regard,
national stakeholders should be fully engaged in
order to foster national ownership, leadership and
responsibility. While recognizing that Governments
bear the primary responsibility for the safety and
rights of women and the protection of all citizens in
their countries, the international community should
support those efforts, while fully respecting national
sovereignty and focusing on capacity-building and
resolving funding and technical difficulties.

Furthermore, it is important to ensure that sexual
violence considerations are explicitly and consistently
reflected in ceasefire and peace agreements, as
well as in all security sector reform, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes that involve
the United Nations. In that regard, the adoption by the
General Assembly of the Arms Trade Treaty was of
critical importance, as it is the first international legal
instrument that explicitly includes a gender criterion in
arms transfers ifthere is a possibility that such transfers,
would be used to commit violence against women and
children. We celebrated the first anniversary of the
historic adoption of the Arms Trade Treaty on 2 April
and we look forward to its entry into force.

The elimination of conflict-related sexual violence
would not be possible without addressing the root
causes of gender inequality and changing the mindset of
the perpetrators, Victims and society at large. Victims
should be encouraged to speak out and report violence.
In most cases victims, especially women, prefer to
remain silent to avoid the stigma of being ostracized
from their communities, cast out by their husbands and
families, and left destitute with their children. Women's
empowerment and mainstreaming gender equality
in peacekeeping processes and ceasefire agreements
are crucial in fighting the scourge. Furthermore,
survivors and their families should be provided with
sufficient medical, psychological and legal support and
rehabilitation programmes.

Capacity-building and technical support from the
international community are relevant in helping national
Governments deal with sexual violence matters.
Governments lack adequate national capacities to
investigate sexual violence cases and prosecute sexual
violence offenders, and that, regrettably, impedes on
accountability. Sufficient resources must be devoted
to women-led civil society organizations, particularly
those providing services to survivors and those that
enable women to access justice and participate in
decision-making.

We recognize the work of non-governmental
organizations in their role of training officials from
Member States, as investigators of gender-based
violence for rapid deployment to conflict areas. Namibia
supports such initiatives as they can go a long way in
assisting the international community in investigating
those horrible crimes by bringing the perpetrators to
book.
Namibia wishes to re-emphasize the importance
of the role of women in conflict prevention and post-
conflict peacebuilding. As such, we fully support the
inclusion of women in security systems, such as the
armed forces, the police and peacekeeping operations
and special political missions in support of various
United Nations resolutions that recognize that important
role. We remain convinced that for the achievement of
comprehensive and sustainable peace, all efforts should
be made to ensure the participation and contribution of
women to peace negotiations and during the execution
of post-conflict strategies and programmes.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that Namibia
condemns all forms of violence against women in
armed conflict and calls for the full implementation
of relevant Security Council resolutions. We also urge
the parties to conflicts to abide by international legal
instruments to protect women and other disadvantaged
groups.

