Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): At the outset, let me
join others in commending you, Mr. President, for
organizing this open debate on the occasion of the
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000). We warmly
welcome the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/498) and the recommendations contained
therein as an important step in moving the women,
peace and security agenda from rhetoric to action. We
also align ourselves with the statement delivered by the
representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security.

When the Security Council adopted the landmark
resolution 1325 (2000) on 31 October 2000, it
acknowledged the negative impact of armed conflict on
women and highlighted their decisive role in conflict
prevention and in consolidating peace.

Ten years later, however, the plight of women and
girls in armed conflicts continues unabated. The
implementation of the women, peace and security
agenda remains slow and uneven at best. Recent
incidents in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
confirmed once again that sexual violence is used as a
method of warfare to achieve military and strategic
ends. Women are still excluded from decision-making
processes in peace negotiations and post-conflict
reconstruction.

Women continue to be seriously underrepresented
as special representatives of the Secretary-General. We
therefore welcome the Secretary-General's action plan
for women's participation in peacebuilding. We do
regret, however, that the Council was not able to
expressly welcome that forward-looking report
(S/2010/466).

It is our firm belief that the advancement of the
women and peace and security agenda is intrinsically
linked to the way the Security Council receives and
analyses information on implementation. Of course, it
also depends on the commitment of Member States to
take concrete action. We therefore commend the
Council for endorsing the 26 indicators against which
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) will be
measured. We believe that information collected
through the indicators should, where appropriate, also
be disaggregated by disability in order to address the
lack of data in that respect.
We reiterate our support for the call to action of
the ministerial event of 25 September 2010, which
encouraged Member States to commit themselves to
concrete, time-bound and measurable actions. To
underscore this commitment, we have contributed to
the financing of the monthly action points of the NGO

Working Group on Women, Peace and Security. These
points highlight how the Security Council can integrate
relevant content of resolution 1325 (2000) in its daily
work, in particular on country-specific issues. We hope
that this can make a small contribution to the more
general goal of effectively integrating the substance of
the Council's thematic work in its operational
decisions.

In addition, we have partnered with Switzerland
to support the PeaceWomen project to publish the
Women, Peace and Security Handbook. The handbook
provides language derived from best practices and is
meant to assist the Security Council in incorporating
relevant substance of resolution 1325 (2000) when
designing mandates for missions on the ground.

Furthermore, we will continue our financial
support for the Trust Fund for Victims of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), which adopts a
gender-based perspective across all programming and
has a specific focus on victims of sexual and gender
violence. We hope that the Fund will get more support
from States as a result of their national efforts to
implement resolution 1325 (2000).

Resolution 1325 (2000) and its follow-up
resolution 1820 (2008) call for decisive action against
sexual violence in times of armed conflict. The explicit
inclusion of sexual violence in the provisions dealing
with war crimes and crimes against humanity was one
most significant advances in international law reflected
in the Rome Statute of the ICC. Today, the Court is
dealing with a number of situations where sexual
violence is rampant, including in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The Court therefore has
jurisdiction over any crimes within the remit of its
Statute committed in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo since 1 July 2002. In fact, the Court will soon
begin trying Callixte Mbarushimana, a Forces
democratiques de liberation du Rwanda militia leader
arrested on 11 October this year, who is indicted on
charges of sexual violence, among other things.

The work of the Court is therefore of direct
relevance to the 1325 agenda, as the Security Council
anticipated when referencing the Rome Statute in
resolution 1325 (2000) ten years ago. It is therefore
astonishing that the role of international criminal
justice in general and the ICC in particular are entirely
absent from the latest report on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). This is not the report's only
defect, but is perhaps the most serious one. Fighting
impunity is clearly a central part of our efforts to
eradicate sexual violence. It must therefore be an
integral part of any future efforts in this body and of
the reports submitted for its consideration.

