Mr. Almahmoud (United Arab Emirates): On
behalf of the United Arab Emirates, I would like to
congratulate the United Kingdom on its presidency of
the Council this month and its championing of efforts
to combat human trafficking around the world. We
hope that today's debate will contribute to a greater
understanding of the role of conflict and instability in
exacerbating the problem of modern slavery and offer
an opportunity to exchange experiences in combating
human trafficking at the national level.
This is a front-line concern in our own region,
where war and displacement are rendering a significant
portion of the population defenceless. Da'esh and other
extremist and terrorist groups have subjugated innocent
people on a horrific scale as forced combatants or as
sources of revenue through their labour. But it is not
just monetary gains that such groups are reaping. The
exploitation of the vulnerable, particularly women, is
fundamentally tied to extremist ideologies that pose an
existential threat to our region and our way of life.

In order to tackle this global phenomenon, we
have to start with what is possible within our national
borders and build on that effort with others in a network
of coalitions. As a champion of gender equality,
the United Arab Emirates is particularly concerned
about the disproportionate impact that this crime has
on women and girls. We take that abuse of human
rights very seriously and are working aggressively to
combat human trafficking through law-enforcement
mechanisms and dedicated institutions throughout our
Government. Without addressing the shortcomings and
gaps in our own legislative and normative frameworks,
we could not tackle this problem head on, so in 2006
we passed a federal law - the first anti-trafficking
law in the region - banning the practice of human
trafficking and protecting its victims by implementing
strict enforcement provisions and penalties for
convicted traffickers.

However, we have discovered through experience
that legal frameworks are not enough to confront this
problem at its core. So in 2007, the United Arab Emirates
established a national committee to combat human
trafficking, implementing a multi-pronged strategy that
aims to prevent the occurrence of this crime, prosecute
and punish perpetrators, protect survivors and promote
local, regional, and international cooperation. We also
strengthened our law-enforcement ability by creating
specialized units in police departments across the
country for fighting trafficking. To build capacity and
awareness throughout law enforcement, we instituted
training sessions and workshops, including a five-month
intensive course on human trafficking, the first of its
kind in the Arab world.

Individuals subject to this heinous crime must be
protected with shelter and counselling and must be
recognized as victims, not as part of the criminal gangs
that have exploited them. So we have beefed up our
support for victims, whether women, men or children,
by opening shelters across the Emirates that offer
medical, psychological and social assistance, and by
establishing a private fund to support victims' recovery
and resettlement.

Given our challenging regional context, our national
and multilateral defences must evolve as quickly as the
traffickers' criminal offences do. That is why it is critical
to ensure regional cooperation on anti-trafficking
alongside our international engagement. Looking
ahead, I would like to propose three recommendations
for combating human trafficking that could be applied
at the international level, and specifically with regard
to the crises in our region.

The first is on prevention. While we must tackle
trafficking within our own borders, we must also
cooperate with the countries where trafficking
originates. This means working with Governments
to ensure legitimate migration channels, as well as
focusing on preventing circumstances that open the
door for traffickers to exploit individuals, by promoting
the rule of law in order to protect citizens and by
offering them economic opportunities. The prevention
that results from achieving sustainable and inclusive
development for all is essential to tackling the root
causes of this issue.

Secondly, the agencies combating modern slavery
are facing challenges as numerous as they are complex.
Because of that, multilateral institutions, including
the United Nations, must take the lead in improving
international cooperation between the private and public
sectors and between Governments and international
institutions. When we adopt the forthcoming global
compact on safe, regular, and orderly migration, it must
include provisions that address modern slavery.

Lastly, we urge the Security Council to enhance
its response to human trafficking, which is a problem
linked to violent extremism and terrorism. We support
the Council's full use of the instruments at its disposal
to combat the wrath of the groups that are exploiting the
vulnerable and fomenting conflict. It is only when the
community of nations truly works together that we can
holistically confront and eradicate this grave threat to
international peace and security.

