Ms. Elman: The scale of human trafficking in
Somalia is devastating. What is even more disturbing
is that, despite the widespread systemic enslavement
of people, it is not constituted as a crime against a
person or a crime against humanity in my country.
Rather, it is normalized by virtue of circumstance.
Forced labour in conflict is rarely viewed as slavery,
and it is the selective understanding of modern slavery
is that creates space for this crime to thrive, and why
it continues to remain low on the priority list during
humanitarian crises globally.

The world is facing the largest humanitarian crisis
right now, with more than 20 million people, in four
countries, at risk of starvation, Somalia being one
of them. On the heels of a recent visit to Somalia by
the Secretary-General, who called for urgent and
immediate action to alleviate the situation, we note that
there is a very high probability of a recurrence of the
famine that caused more than 260,000 people to starve
to death across the country in 2011. I am afraid we have
not learned much since then. We did not prepare and we
did not plan. And so here we are again.

In the same way that we were blind to the signs of
a drought and famine unfolding before us, we are still
blind to what undignified contexts of such desperation
do to the affected population. In 2011, the majority
of those whom my organization was assisting were
internally displaced persons (IDPs) living in hovels
in makeshift camps in Mogadishu and its outskirts,
primarily women with children in tow, or child-headed
households - people who had tracked by foot for days
to make it to the capital in order to receive some sort
of humanitarian aid. On arrival and on route, they
were sexually abused, tortured and extorted for what
little they had in their possession. Some of their family
members never made it, as they died along the way.

Within the IDP camps in Mogadishu, sexual abuse
became rampant, and a culture of impunity created
opportunities for it to remain so. Women and girls
were forced into transactional labour, such as sex for
food, sex for medical aid, sex for protection and sex
to pass checkpoints and to reach distribution sites. A
14-year-old refugee from Yemen who ended up in an
IDP camp in Mogadishu, along with her elderly father
and younger siblings, is currently staying at one of our
safe houses after escaping a forced marriage - one that
was offered as a solution to the extreme poverty her
family was living in. Her small dowry, of $20, became
a lifeline for the rest of the family. She did not leave
her family to be a wife, she became a sex slave. The
house became a brothel. For three months, her father
received $20 from the man he gave her to, without any
contact with his daughter. He did not know that the man
was charging other men to have sex with his daughter,
or that the money he was receiving was a product of
her enslavement. The abuse continued for nine months
before she escaped. Human trafficking is severely
exacerbated in situations of conflict and extremist
groups like Al-Shabaab, Da'esh and Boko Haram
survive off of the forced labour, domestic servitude
and sexual slavery they inflict on the civilians living in
chaos of conflict.

Last month at the General Assembly here in New
York I commemorated the twentieth anniversary of
the children-in-armed conflict mandate. I spoke about
what has been achieved in the past two decades. Last
week I met with a father of one of the children in
our programme with whom we were planning an exit
strategy for his son. His son was forcibly recruited by
Al-Shabaab and, after being apprehended by security
forces on front lines, he was handed over to our care
and placed in our programme for children disassociated
from armed groups. His son has been with us for nearly
a year now. His father begged us to keep his son safe
because, just days prior to our meeting, Al-Shabaab
militants went to his home and demanded that he hand
over his remaining, 10-year-old, son. When the father
appealed to keep his son, he was told that he would
have to either hand over his son, supply them with
arms or pay a monthly fee of $30. What options but to
provide labour to terrorists or criminal organizations
do communities living in the mix of disaster, extreme
poverty, oppression and conflict have? The father is
living in conditions of slavery in which he has been
forced to service the armed group in order to save
his son.

The same children who are forced into armed
groups and manage to escape and surrender to
Government security forces are then forced into labour
again, only to be used as informants by Government
security forces. All parties to the conflict in Somalia
are guilty of forced labour and enslavement in some
way. Through my work with survivors of sexual and
gender based violence, I know that women and girls, as
it relates to human trafficking in conflict, are primarily
viewed as victims - the spoils of war given the forced
temporary marriage, sexual slavery, impregnation by
militants and abandonment or ostracizing from their
communities, which are all too rampant. This has
introduced many gender-specific constraints in the
reintegration process for women and girls when the
conflict subsides.

Another role that women play in human trafficking
that is often overlooked is that of perpetrators,
organizers and mobilizers of trafficking. We have
worked on exposing numerous small organized
operations led by women who prey on the most
destitute segments of society - such as those living
in IDP camps - and go to IDP communities with the
promise of employment, food, clothing and anything
else to draw in the desperate. The most worrisome part
of human trafficking in Somalia is that, because of the
conflict, people are not even aware of the real risk and
how to protect themselves and their children from it.
Because of weak governance, the south and central
regions of Somalia are now used as transit routes
for international trafficking, while other parts of the
country are regions of destination, transit and origin
for victims of international human trafficking, as well
as local trafficking between the regions.

Local trafficking and forced labour mostly affect
women and girls in Somalia in the domestic work sector.
The victims are mainly women and young children,
and most are trafficked for domestic work, forced
prostitution and, as recent reports indicate, even organ
removal. Conflict and insecurity breed desperation,
and traffickers present themselves as a ticket out of
all of that. Dismantling the operations of trafficking
networks has been mostly unsuccessful in Somalia,
with the majority of interventions focused on rescue,
negotiations of release and reactionary approaches,
as opposed to prevention. Yet organized networks are
accessible. Their contact persons are traceable, and a
testament to how a 17-year-old boy or a 16-year-old girl
knows exactly who to reach and can find a way to get
out of Somalia through a perilous journey facilitated by
a trafficker who takes them via the sea and to Libya with
the promise of reaching Europe or elsewhere one day.

The information is there but the intent, resources
and the strategy for ending human trafficking
in conflict have not been at an adequate level.
Communities are not informed well enough to know
that traffickers masquerading as employment prospects
are leading them down a fatal path. More often than
not, those who were forced into sexual slavery are left
with false promises of employment abroad and then
further exploited for debt bondage and other forced
labour. Very recently, that has also extended to include
military service.

I urge the Security Council and its members to use

the authority and legitimacy of the Council to denounce
human trafficking in conflict, reinforce global norms
against it, counter the emerging narrative that normalizes
slavery in conflict and promote accountability. I urge the
Security Council and its members to report on efforts to
better implement existing mechanisms for countering
trafficking in persons in general, not limiting it only to
conflict. Finally, I conclude by emphasizing the need to
strengthen the capacity of the relevant officials likely to
encounter and identify possible victims of trafficking
in persons, which includes civil society organizations
at the grassroots level.

