Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for

joining us at this important meeting of the Security
Council. We would also like to welcome to the Council
Chamber Mr. Bedouma Alain Yoda, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Burkina Faso, and Mr. Alain
Joyandet, Minister of State for Cooperation and
Francophonie of France.

I would like in particular to welcome you,
Madam Secretary of State, and to acknowledge your
personal commitment and leadership, which have
created renewed impetus for the issue of the protection
of women's rights and the prevention of all forms of
violence against women. My delegation would also
like to thank the delegation of the United States for
leading negotiations on resolution 1888 (2009), which
has just been adopted.

With the unanimous adoption of that resolution,
the Security Council has reaffirmed its commitment to
the protection of women in armed conflict. The
significant number of delegations that joined in
sponsoring this initiative shows that the international
community is resolved to ensure that women and
children no longer remain the principal victims of the
armed conflicts which, deplorably, are occurring in
many parts of the world.

Council members were able to see for ourselves
the gravity of the acts of sexual violence against
women and children in areas of armed conflict in the
course of our visit to a number of African countries last
May, in particular the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. On that occasion we witnessed the
consequences of these crimes for societies and their
negative impact on efforts to find solutions to crisis
situations and promote an effective process of national
reconciliation. For that reason we wish to reiterate, as
does resolution 1888 (2009), the primary obligation of
all parties to an armed conflict to respect and to
enforce at all times international humanitarian law,
which grants special protection to women and children.

My delegation believes that the establishment of
the post of Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on sexual violence in situations of armed
conflict will make it possible to improve the systematic
and comprehensive attention that the United Nations
pays in response to sexual violence in these situations.

This new mandate should work in a coordinated
manner with other United Nations mechanisms and
agencies in order to harness synergies and to prevent
duplication. In particular, there is a broad relationship

between the objectives of resolution 1888 (2009) and
resolution 1882 (2009), on children and armed conflict,
which was adopted by the Security Council last
August.

These common objectives must be duly explored
with a view to providing comprehensive protection for
all those who, due to their condition, suffer most from
the consequences of armed conflict, that is, women and
children. In the light of the aforementioned, we believe
that the Security Council must also pay close attention
to the ongoing negotiations on a composite gender
entity within the framework of the General Assembly
and decide to review the mandate of the Special
Representative in a reasonable period of time and in
the light of the results of the procedure outlined in
General Assembly resolution 63/311.

While more can be done at the international level
in order to prevent sexual violence in situations of
armed conflict, the eradication of sexual violence will
only be achieved if national capacities among those
States that are addressing situations of conflict are
improved with a view to bringing the perpetrators of
such crimes to justice.

Therefore, one of the most relevant aspects of the
resolution is the identification within the United
Nations of a multidisciplinary team of experts who,
when their assistance is required and with the consent
of the State concerned, can be deployed to the field in
order to work jointly with the Government and the
United Nations system to undertake projects for
technical cooperation to strengthen the rule of law,
prevent impunity and address victims' needs.

It is clear that currently we have strong tools for
preventing sexual violence in areas of conflict. The
true challenge that we face is making full use of this
array of instruments, if we truly wish to ensure that
more women and children do not fall victim to the
spiral of violence that is caused by armed conflict.

