Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Deputy Secretary-General Mohammed and
Ambassador Antonio for their briefings.

China welcomes the joint United Nations-African
Union visit to Nigeria and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. The visit has a positive significance for the
international community in helping it to understand
the situation on the ground related to the protection of
women and children in relevant countries and regions. It
will assist the international community and the United
Nations in providing further assistance to relevant
countries. China commends the visit.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo and north-
eastern Nigeria are faced with varying challenges
related to armed conflict and terrorism. Their security
situations are complex and grave. Women and children
in the region are under the severe threat of sexual
violence. The international community should pay
greater attention to that issue and comprehensively
enhance the protection of vulnerable groups of women
and children. I would like to emphasize the following
three points.

First, effective measures need to be adopted in
order to stabilize the situation and improve security
at an early date. The international community should
stick to the general direction of settling hotspot issues
by political means, and pushing relevant parties to
settle their disputes peacefully through dialogue and
negotiation. Efforts to combat terrorism and cross-
border organized crime should be enhanced in order
to cut off the channels for the movement of terrorists,
provide necessary protection and humanitarian
assistance to vulnerable groups, such as women, and
create a secure and stable environment.

Secondly, integrated measures should be used
to enhance the capacity-building of the countries
in question, which bear the primary responsibility
for preventing and combating sexual violence in
conflict and for protecting women and children in the
country. The international community should respect
the sovereignty and will of the countries in question,
respect the measures adopted by the Governments in
question in the light of their own situations, provide
targeted and constructive assistance so as to promote
their recovery and development, and enhance their
capacity-building in the sectors of security, social
services and governance.

Thirdly, synergy arising from cooperation between
United Nations agencies and regional organizations
should be ensured. The Security Council should
fully play its role as the organ bearing primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security; strengthen coordination with the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council, the
Peacebuilding Commission and UN-Women; and
continue to strengthen cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations, such as the African Union,
in order to coordinate its work related to women, peace
and security.

China would like to work with the international
community to create a peaceful, secure and stable
international environment and make a greater
contribution to the swift eradication of sexual violence
in conflict and continued advancement in the global
cause to empower women.
