Ms. Stiglic (Slovenia): Allow me first to thank
the United States for organizing this important open
debate. I should also like to thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict Margot
Wallstrom and the Council's other invitees for their
briefings.

I would also like to align Slovenia with the
statement delivered by the representative of the
European Union and the statement to be delivered by
the representative of Costa Rica on behalf of the
Human Security Network.

In contemporary conflicts, sexual violence is not
a side effect but, rather, a front line consideration.
Civilians, mostly women and girls, are often the
deliberate targets of such violence. Sexual violence in
conflict situations is frequently invisible but rarely
non-existent. The international community was
shocked by the reported mass rapes in the Democratic
Republic of Congo in July and August this year.
However, alarming news on sexual violence is also
coming from other conflict and post-conflict situations.

Sexual violence in conflict and post-conflict
situations takes many forms, not just rape. Under
international law, sexual violence constitutes different
forms of crimes and acts. Although the victims of
sexual violence are predominantly women and girls,
we should not forget that sexual violence is also
committed against boys and men. The current report
(S/2010/604) of the Secretary-General gives a very
good overview of the issue of conflict-related sexual
violence in general, and specifically about the
situations in countries on the Security Council's
agenda. Slovenia welcomes the progress made in
carrying out the five-point priority agenda of the
Special Representative. We also welcome the
recommendations in Secretary-General's report.
5
It is of the utmost importance to prevent the
continuing sexual violence by fighting impunity. In
that regard, the role of international criminal justice
should be recognized, in particular that of the
International Criminal Court. Slovenia supports the
recommendation to increase pressure on the
perpetrators of sexual violence, as well as those in the
chain of command responsible for such acts, through
the adoption of sanctions and other targeted measures
against individuals and entities by the relevant
sanctions committees.

As timely, objective, accurate and reliable
information is fundamental in addressing conflict-
related sexual violence, Slovenia supports the
recommendation to establish a monitoring and
reporting mechanism that would build on the
experience and practice of the mechanism established
under resolutions 1612 (2005) and 1882 (2009), on
children and armed conflict.

There is yet much to be done in the area of victim
assistance. Disabled women face heightened
vulnerability to sexual violence and exploitation. It is
commendable that, in recognition of the risk faced by
women maimed or wounded by antipersonnel
landmines, sexual violence has been specifically
included in the 2010 gender guidelines for mine action
programmes that have been developed by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations.

We look forward to the strategic framework on
civilian protection and the series of scenario-based
training modules, which will also address sexual
violence, that are being finalized by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field
Support. We support the recent United Nations
activities on this issue aimed at finalizing training
materials for United Nations and national police,
including the development of gender guidelines for
military personnel in peacekeeping operations that also
address the protection of women and girls from sexual
violence.

I would like to take this opportunity to inform the
Council that, a month ago, Slovenia adopted its 2010-
2015 national action plan for the implementation of
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008). One of the
three main objectives of the plan is to prevent sexual
violence against women and girls and to protect them
during and after armed conflict. Furthermore, the
action plan includes measures to strengthen the role of
6
women in conflict resolution and conflict prevention,
as well as in peacebuilding and peacekeeping.

In conclusion, I would like emphasize that sexual
violence poses an obstacle to peace and security. It
impedes women from participating in peace and
democratic processes and in post-conflict reconstruction
and reconciliation. As a tool of war it can become a way
of life: once entrenched in the fabric of society, it
lingers long after the guns have fallen silent. Many
women lose their health, livelihoods, husbands, families
and support networks as a result of rape. This, in turn,
can shatter the structures that anchor community values,
and with that disrupt their transmission to future
generations. Children accustomed to acts of rape can
grow into adults who accept such acts as the norm. This
vicious cycle must stop, as we cannot accept a selective
zero-tolerance policy. Today's adoption of resolution
1960 (2010), on sexual violence, is an important step in
that direction. It is for that reason that Slovenia joined
in co-sponsoring it.

