Mr. Eloumni (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow
me to extend the heartfelt condolences of the Kingdom
of Morocco to the Government and the people of the
Russian Federation, as well as to the family of the
deceased, Ambassador Andrey Karlov, and to express
our outrage against the despicable criminal terrorist
attack of which he was the victim, in flagrant and
unacceptable violation of human values.

Morocco also condemns the attack yesterday in
Berlin, the cowardly 11 December terrorist bombing of
a Coptic cathedral in Cairo, as well as the 18 December
terrorist attack in the Karak province of Jordan. The
Kingdom of Morocco strongly denounces terrorism in
all of its forms and manifestations, and reaffirms its
unswerving commitment to fighting that scourge.

Allow me to thank Spain for having convened
today's debate on this topic, which is a dire one but
is timely and topical. Human trafficking is one of the
gravest attacks on humankind and a phenomenon that
undermines the dignity and value of the human being.
It occurs not only during tragedy and disaster, although
it is a direct consequence of such events, which also
lead to damage to infrastructure, loss of life and lack of
food, consequences that receive more attention.

Armed conflict is a breeding ground for human
trafficking. During conflict, traffickers take advantage
of the lack of normalcy and the rule of law to exploit
the existing vulnerabilities of people and act with
impunity to finance war, provide sexual services and
reduce, if not eliminate, ethnic or religious minorities.
Despite efforts deployed to curb the phenomenon, it
has reached alarming dimensions in past years. Indeed,
well-structured groups run human trafficking using
networks that are often hard to dismantle, profiting
from the vulnerability and fragility of its victims, most
frequently women and children.

While it is true that non-State armed groups have
long exploited vulnerable people for sexual purposes,
military service and forced labour, those groups,
particularly Da'esh and Boko Haram, encourage and
run a slave trade of unprecedented dimensions. They
openly organize slave markets, using the most modern
and sophisticated techniques, notably electronic social
networks, to auction off the victims oftheir trafficking.

In December 2015, the members of the Security
Council made human trafficking one of its concerns,
under the presidency of the United States of America.
Members heard, for the first time, the poignant testimony
of Nadia Murad Basee Taha, a Yezidi survivor of sexual
slavery at the hands of Da'esh. Today, we should heed
her distress call and her appeal for concrete actions to
be taken.

The December 2015 presidential statement
S/PRST/2015/25 was an important step in that regard.
Resolution 2331 (2016), submitted by Spain and
adopted this morning and co-sponsored by Morocco,
is a historic step for the Council. The Council now has
powerful means to reverse that pernicious trend and to
help States punish such crimes. We must continue to
work on identifying individuals and groups that fund
terrorist groups through their sexual trafficking and
violence. Recognizing the need to combat that type
of crime, Morocco has ratified several international
conventions on the subject, including the Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, supplementing the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime.

In the meantime, the Government of Morocco has
undertaken a number of legislative and institutional
reforms aimed at providing the Kingdom with a legal
arsenal and specific means for strengthening its actions
aimed at combating various forms of organized crime,
particularly human trafficking, illegal immigration and
terrorism. Morocco recently adopted a law on human
trafficking, with the aim of adapting national legislation
to international standards, particularly the Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, supplementing the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime. That law includes sentence
guidelines and preventive measures to protect victims,
as well as provisions on institutional measures aimed at
combating the phenomenon through the creation of an
advisory commission to the Head of Government.

On the other hand, the Kingdom was one of the
few countries to have pursued a courageous and
proactive policy aimed at regularizing the status of
clandestine migrants fleeing conflicts or precarious
economic situations. Its policy, based on an integrated
and comprehensive humanitarian approach, made it
possible for more than 25,000 migrants to integrate
socially and economically in Morocco over the past
year. On 12 December, King Mohammed VI ordered
the immediate launch of the second phase of the efforts
to integrate undocumented migrants.

In conclusion, allow me to emphasize the following
points. First of all, an effective response to human
trafficking must include preventive measures to limit
the potential pool of victims. Secondly, we must
identify measures to prevent trafficking in persons
fleeing conflicts, including the establishment of
regular migration channels, respect for the principle of
non-refoulement and, where appropriate, a study of their
ability to access the labour market in the host country.
Thirdly, we must create a human registry, including
for those living in camps for displaced persons and
refugees, as a means of combating the risks of human
trafficking. Finally, we must effectively implement
relevant commitments under Goals 5.2, 8.7 and 16.2 of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.

