Mr. Barbalic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I would
like to thank you, Madam President, for having
organized this important debate. We appreciate the
significance that the United States attaches to the issue
at hand and commend your personal tireless efforts and
engagement. Our appreciation also goes to Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon, Special Representative
Wallstrom, Under-Secretary-General Le Roy and
Military Adviser Gaye for their comprehensive
briefings.

At the outset, allow me to express our gratitude
for the information provided by Special Representative
Wallstrom relating to Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
needed to hear those words. The only way to move
forward is to face the truth and deal with it. And a great
deal of institutional and individual effort has been
committed and invested to that end in Bosnia. There
are, however, a number of obstacles that are
occasionally still encountered.

The examples presented prove how difficult and
delicate the issue under discussion today is, and how
far post-conflict societies have to go to fully engage
and deal with their pasts. However, I wish to ensure
you of our firm commitment to do everything to reach
justice. We will continue that longstanding struggle and
prove that justice must be satisfied for the sake of both
the past and the future.

Bosnia and Herzegovina attaches the utmost
importance to confronting the grave issue of sexual
violence and is particularly encouraged by the
commitment of the Security Council to keep the matter
on its agenda. That commitment was unequivocally
demonstrated by the adoption of resolutions 1820
(2008), 1888 (2009) and 1894 (2009), which have
paved the way for concrete action aimed at preventing
sexual violence. The appointment of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence and the creation of UN Women were
significant steps towards ensuring the coherence of
United Nations activities. We also welcome
cooperation between the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
and the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.

In addition, we must use this opportunity to
underscore the responsibilities of States and parties to
conflict to observe and uphold their international
obligations and respect international humanitarian law,
which grants special protection to women and children.
We are of the opinion that United Nations bodies and
donors should extend more support to national
Governments in building capacities and developing
gender-sensitive programmes for survivors of sexual
violence, with services ranging from access to justice
to provision of psychological care. The role of
non-governmental organizations is particularly relevant
in this process.

The United Nations and the international
community have demonstrated their firm commitment
and political will to prevent sexual violence against
women, combat impunity and enforce accountability.
On the other hand, it is equally crucial that national
authorities make every effort to ensure that perpetrators
of sexual crimes be brought to justice and not go
unpunished. In that context, international assistance is
of vital importance as post-conflict countries' rebuild
their justice systems and prosecute the perpetrators of
sexual violence.

We reiterate the need for adequate capabilities
and clear and appropriate guidelines to enable
peacekeeping missions to carry out their mandated
tasks, including preventing and responding to sexual
violence. Recruiting women in civil, military and
police components of peacekeeping missions can
encourage local women to report incidents of sexual
violence. Deployment of a greater number of female
police and military personnel with adequate training in
gender-based violence is vital for better addressing
issues related to sexual violence on the ground. It can
also contribute to establishing better communication
with local communities.

Furthermore, we consider it crucial that the
Security Council continue the practice of including,
where applicable, designation criteria pertaining to acts
of rape and other forms of sexual violence when
adopting or renewing targeted sanctions pursuant to
resolution 1888 (2009). We also strongly encourage the
flow of information about sexual violence between
United Nations peacekeeping missions or other United
Nations missions or bodies and the corresponding
Security Council sanctions committees.

Bosnia and Herzegovina supports the
establishment of arrangements for monitoring,
analyzing and reporting sexual violence in situations of
armed conflict. Such a mechanism is necessary for data
collection so that the use of systematic sexual violence
in conflict situations on the Council's agenda can be
tracked. In order to halt incidents of sexual violence,
those who are credibly suspected of being responsible
for patterns of rape and other forms of sexual violence
should be listed in the annexes of the reports. Listing
and de-listing of persons responsible for those
horrendous acts must be performed according to
verifiable data and clear benchmarks.

We would also like to commend the delegation of
the United States of America for their efforts in
drafting resolution 1960 (2010), adopted today. We are
convinced that this resolution will contribute towards
more effective monitoring, reporting and analysis of
data on sexual violence in situations of armed conflict.

Finally, we would like to point out that the
international community has taken noteworthy steps,
including the adoption of relevant resolutions, to tackle
the issue of sexual violence. But, more importantly, the
time has come to start converting commitments and
promises into real actions on the ground to prevent
violence, protect individuals, punish perpetrators and
provide redress to victims. Bosnia and Herzegovina
stands ready to contribute to those efforts.

