Mrs. Pobee (Ghana): It is an honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the Group of Friends of
the African Women Leaders Network to the United
Nations, which is co-chaired by Ghana and Germany.

At the outset, the Group of Friends of the African
Women Leaders Network wishes to thank the Federal
Republic of Germany for convening today's open
debate on the women and peace and security agenda,
with a focus on sexual violence in conflict. I also wish
to express the Group's appreciation to the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive report on the subject
(S/2019/280) and to all the briefers for their informative
briefings and contributions.

It is a sad fact that, throughout history, sexual
violence has been used as a weapon of war, often
employed as a deliberate strategy by State and non-State
actors. It is even more disheartening that, in spite of the
landmark Security Council resolutions that condemn
such horrific crimes and acknowledge the threats
they pose to international peace and security, sexual
violence continues to be a common feature of armed
conflicts around the world.

It is significant, therefore, that this debate is taking
place in the tenth year of the establishment of the
mandate of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence and in the lead-up to the
twentieth anniversary of the adoption of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000). It is an opportune
moment to explore the root causes and effects of
conflict-related sexual Violence and how to enhance
preventive mechanisms, promote survivor-centred
responses and ensure justice and accountability.

The Group of Friends of the African Women
Leaders Network wishes to focus this intervention
on five major areas of this issue. First and foremost,
we share the view that structural gender inequality
and discrimination are at the heart of conflict-related
sexual violence and must be given due primacy in our
collective and national preventive efforts. Addressing
the imbalances in power relations between men and
women and promoting gender equality and women's
full inclusion in all aspects of national life cannot be
discounted in that effort.

We encourage Member States to pursue the
necessary national policies, legislation, education and
advocacy at all levels of society in that regard. We
also call upon the international community to continue
providing strong support to Member States, particularly
in conflict and post-conflict situations, to enable them
to fulfil their national responsibilities and deliver on
their commitments in response to the scourge of sexual
violence in conflict.

Secondly, the Group is of the view that the nexus
between sexual Violence, human trafficking, terrorism
and violent extremism is critical and must be clearly
understood in order to inform strategies in dealing with
that scourge and to better address specific vulnerabilities
in specific conflict situations. We share the View that
victims are not a homogeneous group and that a better
appreciation ofthe scope, patterns and emerging trends
in the use of sexual violence as a tactic of war would
enhance our responses and preventive mechanisms.

The high-level United Nations-African
Union-African Women Leaders Network joint fact-
finding missions to conflict zones in Africa in 2017
and 2018 provided significant outcomes to better target
appropriate responses in those situations. We wish to
advocate continuing support for that unique partnership
and collaborative effort between the United Nations,
the African Union and the African Women Leaders
Network for African conflict situations.

Thirdly, it is critical that the international
community supports a survivor-centred and community-
led approach in prevention efforts and responses to
sexual violence in conflict situations. Enhanced support
for survivors must include strengthening medical,
psychosocial, physiological and rehabilitation platforms
that prioritize the rights and needs of survivors.
We must engage religious and traditional leaders
within affected communities to mitigate stigma and the
reintegration of victims and their children in society.
Women-led organizations, especially in Africa, have
demonstrated a real potential for impact in those
interventions and, with predictable funding and
capacity-building, they can also be mobilized to provide
a reliable vehicle to enhance informal community-level
protection and response mechanisms. In that regard,
the Group of Friends is pleased to report that members
of the African Women Leaders Network initiative are
being proactive on the ground in that direction by
providing health services, psychological support, legal
aid, economic opportunities and other forms of support
to victims and survivors of sexual violence in conflict.

Fourthly, protection, relief and rehabilitation
efforts must be complemented by the urgent creation
of an enabling environment for women's participation
and leadership in prevention, peace, security and
governance processes.

Lastly, the Group of Friends of the African Women
Leaders Network wishes to stress the need for zero-
tolerance in dealing with incidence of sexual violence
in conflict, as they constitute a violation of human
rights and a crime under international humanitarian
and human rights law.

While it is widely acknowledged that perpetrators
must be held accountable, criminal accountability in
the face of those violations remains elusive, with little
chance for survivors to see their offenders face justice.
Victims' fear of reprisals and rejection, as well as a
lack of access to justice systems and other structural
barriers to reporting, should not be underestimated and
must be addressed.

The Group of Friends urges Governments to
reinforce the capacity of their justice and security sectors
to deal effectively with these challenges, working in
close partnership with community and faith-based based
organizations. We advocate the sensitization of national
security agencies and an increase in the representation
of women. In addition, gender-sensitive transitional
justice should be an integral part of peacebuilding and
post-conflict reconstruction processes.

