Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): We commend the United
Kingdom for convening today's debate and keeping the
issue oftrafficking in persons in conflict on the Security
Council's agenda. We would also like to acknowledge
the contribution that the Spanish presidency of the
Security Council for December 2016 has made to the
discussion of the issue.

Ukraine aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the observer of the European Union,
and I would like to personally align myself with
everything that was said by my Swedish colleague,
Minister Regne'r. I particularly deplore the hypocrisy
and lip service that many Governments display with
regard to the plight of the women and girls who are
major victims of human trafficking. I urge that they
abandon such behaviour and get down to business.

The issue of human trafficking has been on the
radar of the United Nations for decades. However, in
recent years, we have seen a significant evolution in the
forms that trafficking in persons takes, especially in
conflict and post-conflict situations. Like the deadliest
kinds of viruses, some forms of trafficking mutate to
the extent that they become immune to the actions and
mechanisms that are in place but that lag behind the
crimes they are supposed to prevent.

Trafficking for purposes of sexual exploitation is
still the most widespread form of trafficking, and the
majority of its victims are women and girls. That is why
we need to think about a more gender-specific, targeted
approach in all actions against trafficking.

Another aspect of the issue is that persons
displaced by conflict, including refugees, can be
especially vulnerable to all kinds of exploitation. In
that regard, Ukraine fully supports the commitments in
the New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants
to combatting human trafficking, including through
targeted measures to identify, protect and assist victims,
and to prevent human trafficking among those affected
by displacement, taking into account the particular
vulnerabilities of women and children.

Trafficking is a transnational threat that requires
a transnational response, including from this Council.
It is encouraging that the Council addressed this
issue in its December 2015 presidential statement
(S/PRST/2015/25) and adopted resolution 2331 (2016)
last December. We must build on that momentum. Both
the presidential statement and the resolution stressed
the need to ensure that trafficked persons are treated
as victims of crime and are not penalized for their
compelled involvement in the unlawful activities of
the perpetrators.

Widespread impunity is unacceptable because the
repetition of such crimes creates a vicious circle of
delinquency. Along with provision of psychological,
social and medical support to victims, we see the fight
against impunity as a key priority area.

Following on the statement of the Secretary-
General, I insist that human trafficking should be seen
as a threat to international security, at least equal to
trafficking in drugs and arms. For traffickers, human
beings are just a commodity that can be sold for profit.
The channels they use today for human trafficking may
be used tomorrow for arms smuggling or transporting
terrorists, if greater profit is promised The international
community should therefore unite its efforts to eliminate
those channels, treating them as a real danger.

The fight against this horrendous phenomenon
is at the top of the agenda of Ukrainian Government
activities in the field of human rights. In 1998, the
International Organization for Migration launched
the Counter-Trafficking Programme in Ukraine, with
a view to supporting Government and civil society
efforts to combat trafficking in human beings and to
ensure victims' access to assistance and justice.

Over the past decade, Ukraine has made a number
of important steps towards the establishment of a
viable nationwide counter-trafficking response, setting
up a Government-owned national referral mechanism
to identify, assist and protect victims of trafficking.
Ukraine has acceded to the main international legal
instruments aimed at combating human trafficking and
now has a solid national legal framework to address
that disgraceful and dangerous phenomenon.

Let me note, however, that all of the aforementioned
documents currently cannot be properly implemented
in non-Government-controlled areas of Ukraine. As
Commissioner Hyland stated here today, conflict is the
major driver of modern slavery around the globe. Three
years of Russian aggression against Ukraine have
led to an increased risk of human trafficking in the
affected areas. We have already seen numerous cases
of human trafficking and forced labour - and even
slavery - in certain areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk
regions outside the control of the Government.

But those cases remain largely unaddressed due
to the lack of both safe access and proper attention by
monitoring missions, especially the United Nations
Human Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine, UNICEF and
the International Committee of the Red Cross. It is
therefore important that those international presences
in Ukraine include the relevant activities in their
monitoring work in non-Government-controlled areas.
We also call on those organizations to provide relevant
training to field staff working there and to include all
cases of human rights violations in that area in their
regular reporting.

The situation is particularly complicated by the
400-kilometre section of the State border with the
Russian Federation that is out of Ukraine's control
and is widely used for the inflow of weapons,
ammunition and fighters into the zone of conflict. The
victims and perpetrators of trafficking in persons are
also moving across that uncontrolled section of the
border. In that connection, we have to be aware that
Russia does not have comprehensive mechanisms for
effective investigation, prosecution and punishment
of perpetrators in accordance the Council of Europe
Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human
Beings. Today, of all member States of the Council
of Europe, only Russia has neither signed nor ratified
that Convention, which was opened for signature and
ratification 12 years ago.

Trafficking is a blatant violation of human rights,
an offense against the dignity and integrity of a
person. The success of our common fight against that
scourge requires the effort of all concerned. A long-
term solution can only emerge from consistent political
commitment and the joint action of the international
community to eradicate human trafficking, to promote
justice and accountability, and to protect victims.

