Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, most
warmly on Jordan's presidency of the Security Council
this month. I would also like to thank you for convening
today's important debate.

I would like to praise the courage of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Bangura. She has indeed
played a key role in crystallizing the international
commitment to putting an end to sexual violence in
armed conflict.

In spite of the efforts of the international community,
including the Security Council, to establish legal
frameworks and standards, the phenomenon is
spreading and becoming increasingly more complex.
Sexual Violence is used as a weapon to humiliate the
enemy, undermine its dignity, destroy communities,
force people to flee their homes, and deliberately
spread HIV/AIDS. This terror is particularly atrocious;
it is a scourge that cannot be ignored. It is true that wars
often lead to the collapse oflegal systems but this does
not justify or explain such a horrible violation of human
rights. In this context, we reiterate our attachment
to resolution 1325 (2000) and all other resolutions
concerning sexual violence. We also endorse efforts to
swiftly eradicate Violence, heal the wounds of Victims
and reintegrate those who have fled back into society.

I have three points to make in this regard. First, there
is a need to scale up efforts to prevent violence - and,
naturally, sexual Violence - by setting forth national
legal frameworks and strengthening the rule of law.
There is also a need to improve outreach and awareness
raising. The participation of women must be guaranteed
in these efforts and there must be a mainstreaming of
gender equality in all peacekeeping activities. Women
can and must play various roles in times of conflict as
in times of peace. In this context, there is a need to
provide appropriate training to mediators and all those
who participate in the peace process, the cessation of
hostilities and ceasefires. Peace agreements also need
to include provisions having to do with bolstering the
role of women. More attention must be paid to the fate
of women who are subject to rape and other forms of
sexual Violence during conflict. There needs to be
a building of national capacity and the drafting of
legislation, with adequate resources being allocated.
These are sine qua nons for tackling this issue.

Secondly, there is a need to break the wall of silence
and raise awareness, which are two key conditions
for combating sexual Violence and protecting Victims
from humiliation and stigmatization, providing them
with the opportunity and ability to reintegrate into
their societies. I would also refer to the importance
of awareness-raising campaigns for the larger public,
not just through the sanctioning of perpetrators but
also through efforts to change mindsets. The end to
impunity lies in prosecuting perpetrators; there can be
no end to the scourge if perpetrators are not referred
to justice. In this regard, we welcome the contribution
of the Team of Experts in building national capacities
and strengthening national know-how in the area of
impunity. Victims of sexual Violence have limited legal
recourse in the majority ofcases. This has to be changed.
Otherwise, perpetrators will continue to remain at large
and justice will remain unattainable. In this context,
we stress the importance of prevention, protection and
reintegration. We would also highlight the important
role of civil society, women's organizations and
religious and social leaders.

Thirdly, while there have been high-level meetings
dealing with combating sexual violence in countries
in conflict or in post-conflict, including that held in
October 2013 (S/PV.7044), and consultations on such
international frameworks as resolutions 1325 (2000)
and 1820 (2008) and the Protocol on the Prevention and
Suppression of Sexual Violence against Women and
Children, our commitment is not limited to the United
Nations. In fact, there has also been an important
African Union initiative. We warmly welcome the
United Nations-African Union agreement on the
training of peacekeeping staff.

We continue to work nationally in an unstinting
manner to promote the role of women, as we continue to
believe that women play a key role in social progress and
bringing about the end of violence and inequality. We
also emphasize the importance of mainstreaming this
issue in the mandates of all special political missions
and peacekeeping operations. These missions should
also have special women protection advisers. We would
also like to address the possibility of considering this
question in sanctions committees.

Finally, I note that the drive for peace, security and
a better future will be in vain if we do not put an end to
all violence against women.

