Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): I join previous
speakers in thanking you, Mr. President, for convening
this open debate on a topic that has gained sound
public and political acknowledgment.
Armenia aligns itself with the statement delivered
this evening by Ambassador Serrano of the European
Union. I would like to make some brief observations in
my national capacity.

Let me start with a quotation from the Beijing
Platform for Action: "Peace is inextricably linked with
equality between women and men and development"
(A/CONFJ77/20, annex 11, para. 131). Although a very
simple and straightforward statement, it goes to the
heart of what we are discussing today, namely, that
gender equality and security go hand in hand.
Armenia takes note of some positive
developments. During the past decade, the Security
Council has put in place a normative framework for
women's participation in peace processes, the
elimination of sexual violence in armed conflict, the
protection and promotion of women's human rights,
and the mainstreaming of gender equality and
perspectives in the context of armed conflict,
peacebuilding and reconstruction.

As noted by the Secretary-General earlier this
year, many peace processes now regularly include
consultations with women's peace groups. In many
post-conflict countries, the number of women in
Government has increased dramatically, and they have
used their public decision-making roles to advance
women's rights.

Despite the progress, however, much still needs
to be addressed and accomplished, as the female voice
is not always heard. In that regard, the most important
item on the agenda is to increase the presence of
women in decision-making processes. Women remain
largely excluded, especially from efforts to find
workable solutions to conflicts. We should further
promote their participation.

The costs of conflicts are borne
disproportionately by women and children. Since
women pay the primary price when peace is absent,
they are important stakeholders in peacebuilding. As
such, the inclusion of women in all stages of the peace
process guarantees a more lasting and representative
settlement. A number of research studies have also
indicated that women generally are more collaborative,
and thus more inclined towards mutual compromise.
Women often use their role as mothers to cut across
international borders and divides.

We have experienced this first hand in our region.
Earlier this year, representatives of Armenian and
Azerbaijani women's non-governmental organizations
discussed ways to find peaceful solutions to the
Nagorny Karabakh conflict. The peace dialogues are
oriented towards increasing the role of Armenian and
Azerbaijani women in peace processes and towards the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). More
meetings between the sides are expected to take place.

As we discuss the role of women in peacemaking
and peacebuilding, we cannot ignore an issue that is
inextricably tied to it - violence against women and
girls in conflict situations. It is unfortunate that,
despite the existence of international legal instruments
and normative mechanisms, there has been a disturbing
escalation in levels of sexual violence during and after
armed conflicts.

During the past decade, particular attention has
been paid to addressing some of the specific crimes
experienced by women and girls during armed conflict,
namely, rape, trafficking, enforced prostitution and
enslavement. It is critical to ensure accountability for
past and present crimes and not to grant impunity to
perpetrators. Otherwise, we would provide amnesty for
future crimes.

Having had the privilege to chair the fifty-fourth
session of the Commission on the Status of Women
earlier this year, I would like to emphasize that special
attention needs to be paid to children who are victims
of rape and other forms of sexual violence, especially
girls, who are usually the largest group of victims in
armed conflict. In addition to the physical damage,
sexual violence often leaves lasting harm and stigma.

By recalling the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council, as well as
relevant provisions contained in instruments of
international law, the Commission on the Status of
Women has expressed grave concern about the
continuation of armed conflicts in many regions of the
world and about the human suffering and humanitarian
emergencies they have caused.

Peacebuilding needs the involvement of women.
Women's roles in peacebuilding in Bosnia, Rwanda,
Sri Lanka and many other places in recent decades
highlight the importance of their full participation.
Women need to be present to discuss issues such as
genocide, impunity and security if just and enduring
peace is to be built. Armenia will continue to work
closely with the United Nations and all other interested
parties - including the newly established UN Women,
under the competent leadership of Michelle Bachelet -
to implement and expand the agenda of resolution 1325
(2000), with a view to bettering the situation of women
around the world.

