Mr. Bhattarai (Nepal): First of all, I wish to
thank the Nigerian presidency for organizing this
important debate of the Security Council today. I also
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, his Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Zainab Bangura, and Ms. Rhoda Misaka of the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security
for their comprehensive briefings this morning.

For far too long, the role of gender in conflict has
remained the least studied, least understood and least
utilized in the realm of peace and security. I note the
progress made both in protecting women and girls
and in giving women the protection roles in United
Nations missions since the adoption of the landmark
resolution 1325 (2000). Yet, women and girls continue
to be the targets of choice of sexual and other violence
in conflict. It is only through concerted work that we
can succeed in eliminating all forms of violence against
women and girls during or after conflict.

Nepal believes that the United Nations system
should play the central role in dealing with sexual
violence in conflict. For this purpose, it should continue
to empower women by encouraging equality and by
implementing the human rights instruments already in
place. Women must be sent to the field as peacekeepers
and peacemakers in greater numbers. There must be
more women in the United Nations system, also at the
policy level. They must be the agents of positive change.
Only in developing a competitive edge by acquiring the
requisite skills will women be able to take advantage
of their opportunities and play their entrusted roles
effectively. At the end of the day, it is the quality that
sustains the gains of women to create a safer global
community.

Nepal has excellent experience with its national
plan of action to implement resolutions 1325 (2000) and
1820 (2008) - the first in South Asia. Encouraged by
positive results, the Government is now localizing them
at subnational levels. Our top priorities are increasing
the participation of women in decision-making
processes, protecting women and girls from sexual and
gender-based violence with a zero-tolerance policy and
ending impunity. Crucially, Nepal has also introduced

policy measures to provide relief to the victims of
conflict.

Since the peace process started eight years ago,
Nepal has steadily moved forward in empowering
women, including those affected by conflict. The
interim Constitution requires that women constitute
33 per cent of candidates at all levels of election,
including the Constituent Assembly. Moreover, this
proportion must also hold in each district-level peace
committee, thus enabling women to address local
level post-conflict issues across the board. As an
active troop- and police-contributing country, Nepal is
increasing the number of women in its army and police
forces, who also serve in United Nations peacekeeping
missions. The peacekeeping training package includes
courses on the protection of women and girls from
sexual violence, during and after conflict.

While the new Constituent Assembly is engaged
in delivering a constitution as desired by the people of
Nepal, instruments for transitional justice are also in
the making. The Government's total and unflinching
commitment to promoting and protecting human rights
has engendered mechanisms, from the centre to the
grass-roots level, designed to combat gender and sexual
violence.

Emerging from conflict, Nepal knows well that
even with the best of measures, the emotional and
physical turmoil victims suffer due to sexual violence
cannot be healed ex post facto. An enduring solution
necessitates the implementation of robust preventive
policies, which Nepal fully supports. Likewise, Nepal
stands ready to join hands in all efforts to ensure that
sexual violence in conflict is shunned everywhere and
at all times, that perpetrators are brought to justice, and
that the victims are protected and fully rehabilitated.

