Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I wish at the outset to thank you, Mr. President, for
initiating and organizing today's meeting. I thank the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, for his report on
the United Nations system-wide action plan
(S/2005/636). Our thanks go also to Under-Secretary-
General Jean-Marie Guehenno, Ms. Rachel Mayanja,
Ms. Noeleen Heyzer and other participants for their
presentations this morning.

In his report, the Secretary-General makes many
concrete recommendations for further implementation
by the United Nations system of resolution 1325
(2000). We welcome his recommendations and express
the hope that they can be effectively implemented.

This year marks both the fifth anniversary of the
adoption of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000)
and the tenth anniversary of the Fourth World
Conference on Women, held in Beijing. Those
anniversaries lend particular significance to this open
debate on the question of women and peace and
security.

Five years ago the Security Council adopted
resolution 1325 (2000), which focused the international
community's attention on the question of women and
armed conflict and which provided guidance for the
endeavour to promote gender equality, protect women's
rights and expand the role played by women. In the
five years since then - thanks to the efforts of the
Secretariat, the relevant peacekeeping operations, the
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Gender
Issues and Advancement of Women, the United
Nations Development Fund for Women and Member
States - much has been achieved in implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). The international community
now attaches greater importance to the role of women
in the settlement of armed conflicts, and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations has mandated
that enhanced protection of women be a very important
component of the daily work of peacekeeping
operations. Both at Headquarters and in many
peacekeeping operations, gender advisers have been
appointed.

At the recent High-level Plenary Meeting of the
General Assembly, world leaders once again stressed
the important role of women in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts and in peacebuilding and
reaffirmed their commitment to the full and effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

Five years on, when we look back on the road we
have travelled and forward to the path ahead, we can
see that a great deal of work remains to be done in
attaining the goals defined in resolution 1325 (2000).

First, we must strive to eliminate the root causes
of armed conflict and strengthen our conflict
prevention and early warning systems in order to create
an environment favourable to protecting women from
the harm that is caused by war. In other words, we
must cure the disease by addressing its root causes.

Secondly, crimes of sexual assault must be
punished more harshly; violence against women must
be more seriously investigated and its perpetrators
must be brought to justice. United Nations
peacekeeping operations must continue to pursue a
zero-tolerance policy to ensure strict compliance with
rules and adherence to standards.

Thirdly, women should be encouraged to
participate in peace processes at all stages. In
particular, it is essential to ensure that they have
decision-making power so that the special needs and
the role of women will be reflected in conflict and
post-conflict processes. Women are both the primary
victims of armed conflicts of all kinds and
indispensable participants in the resolution of any
conflict. Their ardent yearning for peace enables them
to play a more important role in the promotion of peace
processes.

Fourthly, a summary should be prepared of
successful experiences in protecting women's rights,
with a view to sharing and actively replicating them.
Efforts should be made to enhance awareness of the
need to protect women's rights and to ensure that
words are translated into deeds.

Fifthly, work carried out on this issue by the
relevant bodies should be effectively coordinated. All
parties should be encouraged to take steps with the
strength born of collective action and to make every
effort to achieve the best possible outcome. Organs
such as the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council have been considering women's issues
for many years and have rich experience to offer. The
Security Council should coordinate its activities with
theirs.

Women have played an important - indeed,
irreplaceable - role in the formation of human
civilization and the promotion of social development.
Progress for women is progress for all of humankind.
A popular Chinese saying has it that women hold up
half of the sky. We hope that, through our common
efforts, mothers, wives and daughters will no longer
shed their tears at the horrors of war and that all our
sisters worldwide will lead happy and peaceful lives.
We believe that our world will then be a brighter and
more beautiful place.

