Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to congratulate
South Africa on its successful presidency in October and
on the Council's adoption of resolution 2439 (2019), on
women and peace and security. We wish the delegation
of the United Kingdom a productive presidency and
would like to assure it of Equatorial Guinea's steadfast
collaboration and support. My thanks also go to the two
briefers, my sisters Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed and Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed, for
their informative statements.

We join others in commemorating the tenth
anniversary of the establishment of the mandate of the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary
General on Conflict-Related Sexual Violence. Our
Government will continue to support the various
elements of the United Nations architecture aimed
at combating sexual violence in armed conflicts, the
promotion of women's rights and the inclusion of
women in decision-making processes.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea believes that the
enhanced cooperation between the Security Council
and the African Union's African Peace and Security
Architecture, which also strengthens subregional
initiatives in the implementation of Council resolutions
to advance the women and peace and security agenda,
among other things, is an example of the type of
alliance that should continue to be supported in a
more predictable manner. In that regard, we would
like to highlight the high-level visits led by the Deputy
Secretary-General to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Nigeria in 2017, the Niger, the Sahel,
South Sudan and Afghanistan in 2018, and to Ethiopia,
Djibouti, Somalia and Eritrea this year, not forgetting
the visit to Cameroon in April. I would also like to
acknowledge the dedication of the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict to mainstreaming this agenda,
while also encouraging the strategic initiatives within
the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security concerning
the prevention of and response to conflict-related
sexual violence in Africa, bolstered by the support of
UN-Women, the African Women Leaders Network and
FemWise-Africa.

The strategic importance of the Horn of Africa and
the generally positive evolution of events in the region
made ajoint visit of the United Nations and the African
Union more than necessary. These visits are becoming
something of a tradition for the two institutions, which
complement one another in the quest for solutions to
issues affecting life on the African continent. Equatorial
Guinea has always applauded the cooperation between
the two organizations in Africa, given that their
partnership is a valid formula that is bound to have
positive results. The promotion of the women and peace
and security agenda must continue to be united in its
criteria and actions with a View to making more room
for women at the negotiating and decision-making
tables and benefiting from their unique perspective.
Only in this way, and with the support of subregional
institutions such as the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, will it be possible to make progress in
terms of conflict resolution and peacebuilding in the
subregion and throughout the continent.

The participation of women in the quest for
solutions to the problems affecting the region should
be encouraged. Women, together with young people,
must be at the heart of those efforts in order to forge
sustainable peace and development and seek out
lasting solutions in a context of humanitarian crisis.
And women must always play a principal role in post-
conflict situations.

