Ms. Algayerova (Slovakia): First of all, I would
like to express my delegation's gratitude to the briefers
for their presentations and to the Ghanaian presidency
for organizing this important debate on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on women
and peace and security.

Slovakia fully associates itself with the statement
to be delivered later by the representative of Portugal
on behalf of the European Union.

Slovakia strongly supports the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), which
represents a concrete and effective tool for the
promotion and protection of the rights of women in
conflict and post-conflict situations. The active and
equal participation of women in conflict prevention,
peacebuilding and peacekeeping, including in peace
and reconciliation efforts, represents the best way to
eliminate gender-based violence, sexual abuse and all
other forms of violence against women in conflict
situations. Women's empowerment plays a critical role
in peace and security processes.

In this respect, we welcome the second follow-up
report of the Secretary-General (S/2007/567) on the
implementation of the United Nations System-Wide
Action Plan for 2005-2007, as well as the proposed
further actions for the period 2008-2009. We are
pleased with the reported progress in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on a truly
system-wide scale. However, we are very well aware
that there is still much to be done.

The mainstreaming of the gender perspective in
conflict prevention, including the development of
gender-sensitive early warning mechanisms, increased
participation by women in peacekeeping operations
and decision-making and gender training for all staff,
have been promoted by action plans and other
important initiatives within United Nations entities,
such as the Department of Political Affairs, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Office for
Disarmament Affairs, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the United Nations Environment Programme
and the World Food Programme (WFP).

An appropriate presence of women and gender
training in armed forces, including peacekeeping
forces, have a clear and positive effect on the
behaviour of troops and on the actual conduct of their
duty. Therefore, the provisions of resolution 1325
(2000) are fully relevant for any security sector reform
plan. In this context, we welcome activities linked with
the promotion of women's participation in
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and the development of
specific action plans for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) by the field missions of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations.

We also very much appreciate the work of
UNICEF, which has provided gender training for 500
staff members of the international organizations based
in the Sudan, and which, in cooperation with Save the
Children, has provided gender training for 3,300
military observers, protection forces and civilian police
officers in Darfur. I would also mention the training
provided by OHCHR to military and police personnel
deployed in peacekeeping operations. The activities of
the United Nations International Research and Training
Institute for the Advancement of Women, the Geneva
Centre for the Democratic Control of Armed Forces,
the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human
Rights of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe are also commendable in this
area.

Gender perspective has also been mainstreamed
in some humanitarian assistance programmes, as well
as in the areas of post-conflict reconstruction and
rehabilitation. In those areas, for example, the World
Food Programme assisted States in gender
mainstreaming in food security programmes and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda provided
gender training for investigators and legal personnel,
establishing gender-sensitive policies and mechanisms
to coordinate the rehabilitation of witnesses.

The special needs of women and girls have been
reflected in the majority of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes. In
Liberia, for example, 22,370 women and 2,440 girls
out of some 100,000 ex-combatants were disarmed,
demobilized and reintegrated into the community. The
efforts of UNICEF and non-governmental
organizations led to the release of over 1,000 women
and girls from armed forces in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and of over 800 girls in Sri
Lanka.

Despite the tangible progress achieved in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) at the level
of the United Nations system, we remain extremely
concerned about the actual situation of women and
girls in conflict situations, where they continue to face
all possible forms of violence. I will not go into the
horrible details and recall the stories of women and
girls heard by the Council during the recent Arria-
formula meeting organized by France. Our particular
concerns are linked with rape and other forms of sexual
violence on an enormous scale, which are often
systematically used as a tool of war.

Slovakia strongly condemns such crimes and
supports the use of all available means to put an end to
the impunity of perpetrators. In that respect, we also
reiterate our full support for the zero-tolerance policy
with respect to crimes committed by United Nations
personnel.

We believe that national authorities and the whole
international community must respond more effectively
to widespread sexual violence in situations of armed
conflict, and that their responses need to be based on
reliable information. Slovakia therefore fully supports
the idea of establishing a comprehensive and effective
monitoring and reporting mechanism that will help to
identify the victims, patterns, real scale and
perpetrators of sexual violence in the context of armed
conflicts. We firmly believe that more detailed and
focused monitoring could lead to more effective
measures by Governments, the United Nations system,
civil society and all other actors working on the
ground.

