Mrs. Pucarinho (Portugal): I wish first to thank
Angola for having organized this very timely open
debate and for giving Member States the opportunity to
express their views on such a pressing issue.

From the outset, Portugal has been a staunch
supporter of the women and peace and security agenda,
as we believe it is crucial to address the disproportionate
impact of armed conflict on women and girls and to
enhance their participation in peace processes.

Over the past 15 years, the Security Council, through
the adoption of several resolutions, has recognized the
important role of women and girls in the maintenance
of international peace and security. However, while
recognizing the significant progress achieved and the
establishment of a strong normative framework, we all
know that enormous challenges remain, also due to the
changing nature of conflicts.

Women and children are disproportionately
affected by conflicts all around the world, including
in Africa. Besides being the victims of conflicts and
of gender-based violence, African women and girls are
also actors performing different roles and contributing
to the shaping of existing gender relations. Women in
Africa account for over 50 per cent of the continent's
population and workforce. It is simply unthinkable that
peace could ever be achieved and sustained without
their involvement and consistent engagement. Their
participation at all stages of conflict prevention and
resolution is key to ensure that their views are heard,
their rights protected and their needs addressed.

Beyond their numerical weight, girls and women in
Africa have their own perceptions, interests, priorities
and sensitivities, partially related to specific gender
roles and relations in the communities and societies.
Their voices must be heard, and their potential must
be fully developed and fully used, as their experiences
and resources are admittedly an essential contribution
to conflict prevention, resolution and reconciliation.

The women and peace and security agenda in
Africa is of particular concern during conflict and at
post-conflict stages, as several obstacles remain to the
effective integration of women in conflict prevention
in Africa. Among other constraints, there is a lack of
funding for that purpose, and women's initiatives are
very often relegated to the informal spheres.

Women in different capacities, such as care
providers in families and communities, as community
leaders, as religious and traditional leaders and as
political representatives and citizens, can perform highly
critical roles in conflict prevention in the security and
political areas, and at the same time, as development
agents. We all know that all these things are related:
conflict prevention, peace, security and development.

The approval by States of national action plans
for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on
women and peace and security is, in this context, a
very important tool to effectively promote the role of
women and girls in conflict prevention and resolution.
Portugal adopted in 2009 its first national action plan
on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), and a
second edition of that action plan was adopted in 2014
for the period 2014-2018.

The Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
(CPLP), of which six African countries are members,
also adopted a strategic plan to promote gender equality
and women's empowerment. The plan includes specific
actions to be carried out in the field of conflict prevention
and the promotion of a culture of peace by its member
States, by the Executive Secretariat, the CPLP Female
MPs Network and civil-society organizations. Planned
activities to be carried out in partnership with other
international organizations include the preparation and
implementation of national action plans to implement
resolution 1325 (2000); training and capacity-
building of resolution focal points; and technical and
military cooperation among CPLP member States to
implement the resolution. By mainstreaming gender
equality in diplomatic, military, security, justice and
development sectors, the implementation of those plans
seriously contributes to counting women as active
and constructive stakeholders and key players within
that framework.

Finally, I would like to welcome the fact that such
organizations as the African Union and NATO have
nominated special envoys on women and peace and
security, and that an increasing number of countries
have developed national action plans to implement
resolution 1325 (2000) and related resolutions later
adopted by the Council.

Further efforts are necessary to maintain and build
upon what has been achieved so far and to ensure
greater progress and new commitments to the agenda by
Member States, regional organizations and, certainly,
by the entire United Nations system.

