Mr. Logar (Slovenia): First of all, I would like
to thank the Russian Federation for convening this
important and timely meeting.

I have the honour of speaking on behalf of the
members of the Human Security Network, a cross-
regional network made up of Austria, Chile, Costa
Rica, Greece, Ireland, Jordan, Mali, Norway, Panama,
Switzerland, Thailand, South Africa as an observer
State and my own country, Slovenia. The Human
Security Network is an informal group of States that
promotes the integration of a human security approach
into policies and programmes at international, regional
and national levels.

We welcome this important and timely debate.
One year ago here in the Chamber we reaffirmed
commitments to further realize the women and peace
and security agenda (see S/PV.7533). With the adoption
of the resolution 2242 (2015), the Council once again
reaffirmed the importance of the agenda.

A crucial element of the women and peace and
security agenda is the involvement of women in
peace-related activities. We see today that more
women are involved in peace talks and that more peace
agreements include provisions that relate to the specific
needs of women and girls, including supporting their
human rights, as the 2016 report (S/2016/822) of the
Secretary-General on women and peace and security
highlights. The Network supports the Secretary-
General's call that initiatives to promote women's
participation and inclusive consultations should become
standard practice in the mediation ofpeace agreements.
Their important role as active agents of change in the
promotion and maintenance of peace and security in
all phases of conflict resolution and peacebuilding is
invaluable not just for women, but for society as a whole.

Despite the progress made and the recognition
of the facts that the women and peace and security
agenda is critical for conflict prevention and effective
responses to complex crises and that women are
important agents of progress in peace talks, they remain
unequally involved in those processes, particularly in
political dimensions. The positive role that women play
in all stages of conflict prevention and resolution is
often underestimated or even ignored, instead of being
recognized and utilized.

The Network calls upon Member States, United
Nations entities and regional and subregional
organizations to support Member States in their efforts
to implement resolution 1325 (2000) and all subsequent
resolutions, including resolution 2242 (2015). We call
for greater recognition of, and support for, women's
participation in all stages of conflict resolution and
post-conflict reconciliation processes so that peace
agreements can be more attainable and sustainable.

The Network expresses its profound concern
regarding the impact of the unprecedented wave of
forced displacement on women and girls. In that
regard, it calls for the engagement of women in the
design and implementation of humanitarian action
and early recovery, while taking into account the
increasing needs for sustained donor support to
host countries and communities to appropriately
support women's self-reliance and resilience, ensure
a strengthened humanitarian-developed nexus and
improve coordination with peacebuilding and human
rights efforts.

We also call for greater efforts to promote and
respect the human rights of women and girls as, well as
to strengthen all efforts to effectively address gender-
based violence, including conflict-related sexual
violence. For too long, sexual violence against women
and girls has been committed on a systematic and
widespread scale as a crime against humanity, or even
a weapon of war. We stress the importance of fighting
impunity and ensuring accountability under national
or international jurisdictions. The perpetrators of such
crimes must be brought to justice.

As a group of countries promoting human security,
the Human Security Network would like to emphasize
that the personal security of women is essential
for human security. Women's empowerment and
participation are the cornerstones of any prevention and
protection response.

The economic, political and social empowerment
of women and girls reduces their vulnerability and
enhances their ability to protect themselves and
exercise their rights. In that regard, we need to ensure
that women and girls' interests are fully respected
and systematically integrated in the context of peace
processes. Strategies for the effective integration of
gender perspectives should therefore be pursued to
promote women's empowerment and participation.

Allow me now to make some additional remarks in
my national capacity.

We align ourselves with the statement delivered
by the observer European Union and that made by the
representative of Liechtenstein on behalf of Slovenia,
Austria and Switzerland.

As was reiterated many times after last year's
review, it is high time to begin showing tangible
results and bring the women and peace and security
agenda closer to women who can make a difference.
All stakeholders have to cooperate and harmonize their
efforts in order to avoid duplication, on the one hand,
and gaps, on the other. In that regard, Slovenia welcomes
the establishment of the women and peace and security
focal points network and the Council's Informal Expert
Group on Women and Peace and Security.

Slovenia pays particular attention to awareness-

raising and training on women and peace and security,
including within our national armed forces. It is
important that everyone involved in peace and security
processes be aware of the roles women play and the
advantages they bring to peace-related activites. The
experience of the Slovenian armed gorces is that higher
numbers of women in crisis management processes and
peacekeeping missions ensure better quality mediation,
in particular in the context of local communities and
especially among socially underprivileged groups in
crisis areas, including local women. Raising awareness
and education on the comprehensive implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda has been
integrated into different educational programmes
and has become an important component of training
systems in the Slovenian armed forces.

To conclude, Slovenia agrees with the report of
the Secretary-General that prioritizing gender equality
and women's empowerment in peace and security
settings must remain a continued effort. We all must
strive to remove obstacles to women's participation,
in particular in efforts to prevent and combat sexual-
and gender-based violence and harmful practices that
impede women from enjoying human rights on an equal
footing with other members of society.

