The President: After consultations among
members of the Security Council, I have been
authorized to make the following statement on behalf
of the Council.

"The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to the full and effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
recalls the statements by its President of
31 October 2001 (S/PRST/2001/31), 31 October
2002 (S/PRST/2002/32), 28 October 2004
(S/PRST/2004/40) and 27 October 2005
(S/PRST/2005/52) as reiterating that commitment.

"The Security Council recalls the 2005
World Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1), the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action, the outcomes of the
Conference and of the twenty-third special
session of the General Assembly, and the
Declaration of the forty-ninth session of the
Commission on the Status of Women on the
occasion of the tenth anniversary of the Fourth
World Conference on Women (E/CN.6/2005/11).

"The Security Council recognizes the vital
roles of, and contributions by, women in
consolidating peace. The Council welcomes the
progress made in increasing participation of
women in decision-making in several countries
emerging from conflict and requests the
Secretary-General to collect and compile good
practices and lessons learned and identify
remaining gaps and challenges in order to further
promote the efficient and effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

"The Security Council recognizes that the
protection and empowerment of women and
support for their networks and initiatives are
essential in the consolidation of peace to promote
the equal and full participation of women and to
improve their human security, and encourages
Member States, donors and civil society to
provide support in this respect.

"The Security Council recognizes the
importance of integrating gender perspectives
into institutional reform in post-conflict countries
at both the national and local levels. The Security
Council encourages Member States in post-
conflict situations to ensure that gender
perspectives are mainstreamed in their
institutional reform, ensuring that the reforms, in
particular of the security sector, justice
institutions and restoration of the rule of law,
provide for the protection of women's rights and
safety. The Council also requests the Secretary-
General to ensure that United Nations assistance
in this context appropriately addresses the needs
and priorities of women in the post-conflict
process.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to ensure that disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes
take specific account of the situation of women
ex-combatants and women associated with
combatants, as well as their children, and provide
for their full access to these programmes.
"The Security Council welcomes the role
that the Peacebuilding Commission can play in
mainstreaming gender perspectives into the peace
consolidation process. In this context, the Council
welcomes in particular the Chairman's summaries
at its country-specific meetings on Sierra Leone
and Burundi on 12 and 13 October 2006.

"The Security Council remains deeply
concerned by the pervasiveness of all forms of
violence against women in armed conflicts,
including killing, maiming, grave sexual
violence, abductions and trafficking in persons.
The Council reiterates its utmost condemnation of
such practices and calls upon all parties to armed
conflict to ensure full and effective protection of
women, and emphasizes the necessity to end
impunity of those responsible for gender-based
violence.

"The Security Council reiterates its
condemnation, in the strongest terms, of all acts
of sexual misconduct by all categories of
personnel in United Nations peacekeeping
missions. The Council urges the Secretary-
General and troop-contributing countries to
ensure the full implementation of the
recommendations of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations (A/60/19). In this
connection, the Council expresses its support for
further efforts by the United Nations to fully
implement codes of conduct and disciplinary
procedures to prevent and respond to sexual
exploitation and abuse, and enhance monitoring
and enforcement mechanisms based on a zero-
tolerance policy.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to include in his reporting to
the Security Council progress in gender
mainstreaming throughout United Nations
peacekeeping missions as well as on other aspects
relating specifically to women and girls. The
Council emphasizes the need for the inclusion of
gender components in peacekeeping operations.
The Council further encourages Member States
and the Secretary-General to increase the
participation of women in all areas and all levels
of peacekeeping operations, civilian, police and
military, where possible.
"The Security Council reiterates its call to
Member States to continue to implement
resolution 1325 (2000), including through the
development and implementation of national
action plans or other national-level strategies.

"The Security Council recognizes the
important contribution of civil society to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
encourages Member States to continue to
collaborate with civil society, in particular with
local women's networks and organizations, in
order to strengthen implementation.

"The Security Council looks forward to the
report of the High-Level Panel on United Nations
System-wide Coherence in the Areas of
Development, Humanitarian Assistance and the
Environment and hopes this will play a role in
ensuring a coordinated United Nations approach
to women and peace and security.

"The Security Council welcomes the first
follow-up report of the Secretary-General
(S/2006/770) on the United Nations System-wide
Action Plan for the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000) across the United
Nations system. The Council requests the
Secretary-General to continue to update, monitor
and review the implementation and integration of
the Action Plan and report to the Security Council
as stipulated in the statement by the President of
the Security Council of 27 October 2005
(S/PRST/2005/52)."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2006/42.

I thank all Council members, all the delegations
that spoke under rule 37, the four speakers from the
Secretariat and agencies, and the two speakers from
civil society for their important contributions to the
debate this morning and this afternoon.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 6.15 pm.
