Mr. Grant (Canada) (spoke in French): Canada
thanks Spain for bringing the issue ofpeople trafficking
in situations of conflict to the attention of the Security
Council and for its leadership on the matter.

Trafficking in persons is a sordid crime that deprives
people of their freedom and exploits some of the most
vulnerable members of our societies. It has devastating
effects on the physical, mental and emotional health of
survivors, their families and communities. In situations
of conflict, civilians, particularly women and girls, are
extremely vulnerable to being trafficked and to sexual
violence. The international community must ensure
that the response to situations of conflict, including
those related to terrorist activities, takes into account
the need to prevent trafficking in persons, protect the
victims of that crime and prosecute perpetrators.

Canada has been working to keep the issue of
violence against women and girls, including the
appalling atrocities committed by Da'esh, at the top of
the global agenda. Furthermore, we are committed to
ensuring that Da'esh is held to account for its crimes. In
October, Canada's Parliament recognized the findings
of the Commission of Inquiry that atrocities committed
by Da'esh against the Yazidis of Sinjar constitute
genocide. Our Parliament unanimously adopted a
motion to provide asylum to the most vulnerable Yazidi
women and girls.

Sexual and gender-based violence is a serious
barrier to the recovery of communities after armed
conflict. In addition to the provision of services to
survivors, the international community must hold
perpetrators to account in order to break the culture
of impunity and provide justice to survivors. Canada
commends the comprehensive approach taken by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Bangura, as
well as the work oft the Team of Experts on Rule of
Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, and UN Action.
We also commend the partnership between UN-Women
and Justice Rapid Response and their work in deploying
experts to investigate and document such crimes with
a view to supporting prosecutions by national or
international tribunals.

Human trafficking creates extraordinary profits for
both terrorist and criminal organizations. By employing
the tools developed to combat financial crime, we can
deprive them of funding and access to the international
financial system, making it more difficult for them to
accomplish their destructive goals.

Canada strongly supports the work of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities to list the financial facilitators of Da'esh,
Al-Qaida and affiliated groups, and the work of
the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) to push all
countries to implement effective, risk-based anti-money
laundering and anti-terrorist financing regimes.
Canada is encouraged by the Security Council's close
cooperation with the FATF and its regional bodies in
that effort.

Canada is proud to have joined 60 Member States
in co-sponsoring resolution 2331 (2016), adopted earlier
today and we welcome the attention of the Security
Council on this important matter.

