Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me, first of all, to congratulate Rwanda on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of April. I would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Zainab
Hawa Bangura, and the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Rwanda, Ms. Louise Mushikiwabo, for their
presentations. This is also an opportunity to express our
greeting of solidarity with Rwanda, which this month
marks the nineteenth anniversary of the genocide. I also
want to mention our particular recognition of the work
that Ms. Bangura has been doing and of the progress in
implementing the provisions of resolution 1960 (2010).

Colombia supports the work of the Security
Council, which complements the results achieved on
the basis of various international agreements, such as
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women. Those agreements and
various forums and conferences recognize and promote
the human rights of women. However, we deplore the
fact that situations continue to occur in different parts
of the world.

With regard to the Secretary-General's report
on sexual violence in conflict (S/2013/l49), which
we are considering today, I would like to recall that,
in accordance to resolution 1960 (2010), information
collected on sexual violence should be timely, accurate,
reliable and impartial. Colombia believes that, in order
for our authorities to take the appropriate preventive and
corrective measures, the kind of information contained
in the report must be more accurate.

We are surprised that some examples of the
situation in Colombia mentioned in the report do not
include sufficient information on the incidents that
took place. While for Colombia it is critical to fight all
forms of sexual violence against women, children and
young people, we underscore that it is of great concern
that the report speaks generically about increasing the
pressure on perpetrators of sexual violence in conflict,
including the individuals, parties and States named in
the reports.

Iwould like to give a clear explanation here. It should
be understood that, in making that call, the report ofthe
Secretary-General is referring to the situations listed in
the annex to the report, that is, those situations that are
under consideration by both the Security Council and
the Sanctions Committees established in connection
with such situations, in accordance with the provisions
of the paragraph 3 of resolution 1960 (2010). That
would mean acting in accordance with the mandates
set out and endeavouring to establish clear distinctions
among those situations and the situations mentioned
in the body of the report that are not on the Security
Council's agenda.

We reiterate our position on the possible
establishment of talks with State and non-State parties
to obtain commitments. Such talks should always
respect national laws and policies. Allow me therefore
to reiterate that Colombia's policy is that any dialogue
between the United Nations and illegal armed groups
operating in the country can take place only with the
Government's prior and explicit consent. The Colombian
State attaches the greatest importance to the prevention,
investigation and prosecution of sexual violence in
armed conflict. It is therefore willing to address that
complex problem. We have launched a number of public
policies. We have taken specific steps to protect the
rights of victims of sexual violence in armed conflict,
such as Act No. 1257 of 2008, on the prevention and
punishment of acts of violence and discrimination
against women, Act No. 1146 of 2007, on the prevention
of sexual violence and the comprehensive care of
sexually abused children and adolescents, and Decree
No. 552 of 2012, which established the intersectoral
commission for the prevention of recruitment and use
of children, adolescents and young people by illegal
organized groups.

With regard to the justice sector and the armed
forces, as the report indicates, Colombia has adopted
a zero-tolerance policy. It is supplemented by a manual
and protocol that serve as a guide for members of the
armed forces in addressing sexual violence that may
occur as a result of armed conflict. That document is
widely disseminated among members of the armed
forces.

As can be seen, and as the Secretary-General
underscores in his report, Colombia has varying
policies and guarantees that mark a breakthrough in
the State's efforts to address that complex problem
comprehensively and consistently. Also, work is under
way, in coordination with the United Nations, the
Presidential High Commissioner for Women's Equality
and 22 Colombian State agencies, to outline additional
preventing measures, in line with the experience in the
field and international standards.

The establishment of provisions for monitoring,
analysing and reporting on sexual violence in
conflict situations should seek primarily, on the
basis of accurate, impartial objective and verifiable
information, to promote the adoption of measures
to prevent sexual violence in conflict situations
and to provide effective responses for the benefit
of victims. In that regard, it is imperative to assist
States in developing and implementing early-warning
mechanisms and procedures to facilitate the reporting,
collection and verification of data. To the same end, the
various agencies of the United Nations must continue to
strengthen coordination, decrease duplication of effort
and build a coherent approach in the field in order
to assist the Security Council in its consideration of
appropriate measures.

