Ms. Jovel Polanco (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
First, I would like to congratulate the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of South Africa for convening this
important debate and for the concept note prepared for
this meeting (8/2019/801, annex). It was a great honour
for me to have visited Pretoria last week for the opening
of the Guatemalan Embassy in that beautiful country. I
thank the Secretary-General and the Executive Director
of UN-Women for their introductory words. I would
also like to thank the African Union Special Envoy for
Women, Peace and Security and the representatives of
civil society.

As the second woman to serve as Foreign Minister
in the history of the Republic of Guatemala, it is an
honour to address the members of the Security Council
on this subject. Undoubtedly, being the leader of the
Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Guatemala demonstrates
Guatemala's increasing commitment on this issue.

Over the years, we have seen that the significant
participation of women quantifiably strengthens
protection efforts, accelerates economic recovery
and deepens the consolidation efforts for peace and
sustainability. That is why every year the Council has
been charting a path towards reducing vulnerability
among women and girls under the framework of the key
resolution 1325 (2000) and its subsequent resolutions.
This clearly demonstrates once again that there can be
no lasting peace without including women and girls,
and today's valuable debate aims to ensure the full
implementation of the agenda for peace and security.

It is regrettable that, in this day and age, women
continue to be denigrated simply for being women,
especially in the media. One could agree or disagree
with certain policies, but it is unacceptable for women
to continue to be vilified based on their physical
appearance, their beliefs, their wardrobe or their
personality. I call upon the United Nations to seriously
and resoundingly emphasize the human rights of
women to put an end to actions of that nature, which
incite violence. We are concerned that we continue to
see inequality, double standards and social injustices
even in the twenty-first century, largely because of the
erroneous interpretation of the freedom of thought.

Almost 20 years after the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), it is important that every Member of the
Organization evaluate the actions they will continue
to take so as to further the implementation of such
an important resolution. We must review and identify
the ongoing gaps in order to improve and achieve
the commitments we have undertaken, nationally,
regionally and internationally.

After signing the 1996 Guatemalan Peace
Accords, Guatemala acquired a series of commitments
under the global agenda for the human rights of
women - 28 concrete commitments for advancing
the rights of women, who constitute 51.5 per cent of
our country's population. In that regard, we have
worked towards the implementation of mechanisms,
programmes and plans for the advancement of women,
including our policy agenda for the period 2017 to 2026,
which are in line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. We have in place coordination advisory
entities that guarantee public policies integral to the
promotion of development for Guatemalan women and
the development of a culture of democracy, one that is a
product of women's demands, based on the commitment
undertaken by the country by virtue of the adoption and
ratification of international instruments.

My delegation wishes to reiterate that the proper
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) requires
the unwavering willingness of all the relevant bodies
in all States. Guatemala has its own national action
plan for the implementation of the resolution - PAN
1325 - which was developed with the participation of
all Government institutions representing the rights of
women. We are now in the second year of implementing
PAN 1325. We can say with satisfaction that we have
contributed to strengthening national legislation,
women's mechanisms and institutional initiatives that
generated internal change in public administration. An
initial report on progress made during the year 2018
was therefore drafted, which identifies key results from
more than 80 training processes on women's issues.
Guatemala is currently drafting the report for 2019,
which will be issued in 2020. At the international level,
we have participated in various meetings and forums at
which the Women, Peace and Security National Focal
Points Network has been very successful.

The leadership and participation of women in
conflict prevention and resolution is crucial. All
countries must take steps to boost the representation
of women at all decision-making levels in the various
relevant institutions and mechanisms. We have
seen first-hand that discrimination against women
represents a stumbling block for our development.
Gender equality is a fundamental right and means
providing opportunities for both women and men in
order to ensure their full human potential and true
sustainable development.

The Security Council has the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
To that end, we need to recognize that as women we
are agents of Change. We are aware that the challenge
of sustaining peace requires the creation of strategic
alliances among the United Nations, Governments
and civil society in order to complement efforts to
strengthen the role of women in decision-making
processes. Experience has shown that women working
in missions on the ground have been able to transform
their environment.
The State of Guatemala recognizes that all human
beings are free and equal in dignity and in rights. Men and
women have equal opportunities and responsibilities.
In that context, my delegation prioritizes the full
involvement of women in participatory processes at all
levels, taking into account the fact that women play a
Vital role in the promotion ofjustice and reconciliation
and in providing support for disarmament and social
reintegration processes.

On this nineteenth anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000), Guatemala stresses that efforts must be
redoubled to continue to achieve concrete results in
the implementation of the commitments of the global
agenda. This will make it possible for States and
the United Nations jointly to work to ensure the full
participation of women in peace processes. I urge the
Council to continue deploying efforts on an inclusive
agenda that will allow us to strengthen our role as
promoters of peace.

We believe that the Organization must go back to its
original purpose: the defence of human beings and their
dignity, as this represents the bedrock of fundamental
rights. In recent years the Organization has given less
importance to those values, focusing on other issues
that not only divide but also polarize our societies. This
has also included attempts to impose initiatives that run
counter to our own legislative frameworks.

