Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate France on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
June and to thank it for organizing this open debate on
sexual violence in conflict situations.

This debate has been organized at the right time,
as it coincides with a comprehensive overhauling
of peacekeeping operations and the peacebuilding
architecture. It is right that the consideration of those
reforms should take into account the aspect of sexual
violence, which often victimize civilians populations.

Regardless of who the victims are, violence has
always been condemned, but sexual violence in times
of conflict must be condemned even more because of
its social and cultural implications for a population
that is already very vulnerable. The Security Council
has been seized of this matter for more than 16
sixteen years through the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000) and related resolutions that followed it. Those
resolutions have allowed for a historic breakthrough in
more than one respect, as they unanimously condemn
sexual violence and call for greater efforts to protect
women and fight impunity. They also stress the need
to involve women in peace negotiation and national
reconciliation processes and in the political and
economic reconstruction of their societies.

Following the adoption of those resolutions,
international awareness on this issue has been raised
to the maximum and significant progress has been
made. Member States have shown themselves to be
united and committed to addressing sexual violence
and to supporting the United Nations zero-tolerance
policy with regard to any form of sexual exploitation
or violence. Similarly, the United Nations has tackled
the issue of the fight against trafficking with, inter
alia, the establishment in the Human Rights Council
of the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons,
especially women and children, and the Special
Rapporteur on contemporary forms of slavery, thereby
underscoring the need to carry out cooperation at the
international level in the fight against this transnational
and varied phenomenon.

Despite the progress made in the protection of
women and girls against sexual violence, we have not
reached the end of the road - far from it. The multiple
reoccurrences and persistence of sexual violence in
current conflicts remain alarming. Women and children
especially are deprived ofprotection and support during
conflict and face destructive forms of sexual violence.
They are systematically exploited to achieve military
or political objectives. They suffer the most from the
devastating consequences of conflicts and pay a heavy
price because of their great vulnerability.

Published reports on the issue of sexual violence
in conflict situations clearly show that the past few
years have been charachterized by an exacerbation on
an unprecedented scale of rape, sexual slavery, forced
marriage and human trafficking by extremist groups
as a terror tactic. Terrorist groups and non-State armed
groups are increasingly using sexual violence as a form
of persecution or to forcibly displace populations.

Women and children, in fleeing violence and
fighting, find themselves yet again exposed to the
risks of sexual exploitation, rape and prostitution.
Even worse, today they are sold in slave markets to
the highest bidder. Information obtained in the case of
thousands of women and children kidnapped and held
in captivity by terrorist movements, such as Da'esh and
Boko Haram, with the intent of selling them as slaves
or to meet the sexual needs of their fighters, remain
shocking and clearly show the barbarous and inhumane
practices experienced by those victims.

The majority of the victims of sexual violence
remain silent because they fear threats, reprisal or
intimidation. It is not just to the victims who talk who
face such risks, but also their families, witnesses,
human rights defenders and any other individual who
seeks to denounce this silence.

Sexual violence, as well as the threats of such
acts or the incitement to commit them, constitute a
serious violation of international humanitarian law
and of human rights law, and it is a serious violation
of the Geneva Conventions. Prevention and the fight
against sexual violence cannot be effective without
international political will and firm measures for
accountability against those who continue to act with
disregard for international law and the norms on the
protection of women and children. Judicial preceedings
and the fight against crime are insufficient to fight
human trafficking. It is imperative to prosecute it and
ensure the protection of the victims.

We should like today's debate to contribute to
enriching the reflection on ending to this global scourge.

