Mr. Grant (Canada): I am pleased to speak on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Women and Peace
and Security, an informal network of 53 Member States
chaired by Canada, representing all five regional
groups of the United Nations.

We thank Uruguay for organizing today's open
debate. We would also like to thank Ms. Zainab Bangura
for her exemplary service as Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
over the past five years. Furthermore, we welcome
Ms. Pramila Patten in her appointment as the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
where she can count on our full support in carrying out
her mandate.

We are outraged by the persistent and widespread
occurrence of sexual violence in armed conflict by
State and non-State actors, as documented in the
Secretary-General's latest report (S/2017/249). Sexual
violence is increasingly used as a tactic of warfare and
is a flagrant and unacceptable violation of international
humanitarian law and of international human rights
law. We are all too aware that the already staggering
numbers of reported cases of sexual violence in
conflict represent a mere fraction of their true number.
Furthermore, sexual violence in conflict has become
both a cause and a consequence of forced displacement.

We are appalled by acts of sexual violence,
including rape, child, early and forced marriage, and
enslavement, committed by terrorist groups. Moreover,
we are alarmed that such acts have become part of the
strategic objectives and ideology of certain terrorist
groups, including as a means of recruitment, financing,
intimidation and the destruction of communities, in
line with resolution 2331 (2016). Such heinous acts
must be put to an end, perpetrators must be brought to
justice and victims and survivors of such crimes must
be assisted in a comprehensive manner in order to fully
recover from such violations and be able to reintegrate
into their societies.

We underline that a climate of impunity discourages
reporting, undermines assistance and abets further
violations. Addressing sexual violence in conflict must
be seen as a means of conflict prevention. We therefore
call for accountability for crimes of sexual violence
in armed conflict, including those amounting to war
crimes, crimes against humanity or genocide. The
effective investigation and documentation of sexual
violence in armed conflict is instrumental in ensuring
access to justice for victims by holding perpetrators
to account. We have several important accountability
mechanisms in place. However, accountability also
depends on adequate legal and evidentiary frameworks
to prosecute such crimes. In that regard, we highlight
the international protocol on the documentation and
investigation of sexual violence in conflict, as well as
the work of the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and
Sexual Violence in Conflict.

Furthermore, we recommend that international
accountability mechanisms and the Security Council's
own sanctions regimes be mandated and resourced to
investigate sexual violence in conflict specifically.
We welcome efforts to bring Da'esh and other terrorist
groups tojustice for crimes its members have committed
in conflict, including sexual violence. But we must also
remember that the military defeat of perpetrators is not
a substitute for prosecuting crimes and recognizing the
suffering of victims.
Accountability and the prevention of sexual violence
should be included in peace agreements, including,
where appropriate, in transitional justice mechanisms
promoting justice, truth, reparations, and measures to
prevent their reoccurrence. Amnesties should not be
granted to perpetrators of sexual violence, and sexual
violence should be explicitly prohibited by the terms
of ceasefires and peace agreements. Within the United
Nations, Force Commanders should meet more often
with civil society, and troop- and police-contributing
countries should deploy more women as channels for
vital early warning information.

Accountability must be accompanied by effective
and multi-sectoral support to survivors, whose deep
trauma can persist long after the conflict has ended.
Greater efforts are needed at all levels to ensure that
survivors have access to the full range of livelihood,
legal, psychosocial and non-discriminatory medical
services. We must stand in solidarity with survivors
not just in words but also in actions. Additionally,
humanitarian assistance has to address sexual and
gender-based violence by preventive as well as
responsive measures, and should be based on a gender-
sensitive programmatic approach.

Furthermore, we must not allow the crime of sexual
violence to be compounded by the shame of stigma, the
consequences of which are all too real and often deadly.
Such Stigma only exacerbates the marginalization of
survivors and is a barrier to their full recovery and
reintegration in their societies. Societies, including
traditional and religious leaders, must rally to support
survivors. We must declare once and for all that shame
rests on the perpetrators, not on their victims.

Let me conclude by noting that inequalities give
rise to and exacerbate conflict-related sexual violence,
which will continue to occur so long as the inequalities
that give rise to such acts persist. For that, and so many
other reasons, it is incumbent upon Member States to
redouble their efforts to achieve gender equality, realize
women's and girls' full enjoyment of human rights and
empower all women and girls to become full and active
participants in their societies.

Let me now make five short additional points in my
capacity as the representative of Canada.

First and foremost, Canada is outraged by the scale
and scope of sexual violence in conflict situations. While
we have witnessed some progress in other areas of the
women and peace and security agenda, it appears that

the scourge of sexual violence in conflict is worsening
and becoming ever more cruel and widespread.
Secondly, the systematic use of sexual violence
as a weapon of war demands an effective and timely
response. Member States cannot simply denounce the
situation without taking actions within their power
to assist survivors. That is why Canada contributes
to Justice Rapid Response in order to help respond to
and investigate sexual violence. It is also why we have
committed to hosting approximately 1,200 survivors of
Da'esh this year, in particular vulnerable Yazidi women
and children and their families. We welcome the efforts
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and of the United Kingdom to address the stigma that
befalls the survivors.

Thirdly, we will also continue to work to prevent
such acts from occurring in the first place. In that regard,
it is essential to recall the importance of engaging men
and boys in prevention.

Fourthly, while men constitute the large majority
of perpetrators of sexual violence in conflict, we
should be mindful that men and boys are also victims.
It is therefore imperative that the States Members of
the United Nations ensure that any gender analysis
considers the impact of sexual violence in conflict on
men and boys as well as women and girls.

Finally, it is incumbent upon all States Members
of the United Nations to be part of the solution, not the
problem, of sexual violence in conflict. Canada remains
deeply concerned by all forms of sexual exploitation
and abuse by United Nations staff, peacekeepers and
non-United Nations forces. Member States, including
all members of the Security Council, must back their
pledges for zero tolerance with concrete and effective
action for their own personnel. Importantly, they must
not stand in the way of key initiatives proposed by the
Secretary-General to help rid the United Nations of this
cancer. The Security Council can count on Canada to
play its part in addressing this vital issue.

