Mr. Fathalla (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I
would like to extend my thanks to our friend, Spain,
for presiding over the Security Council for the month
of October. I thank you, Mr. President, for having
organized this open debate to review and assess the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on women
and peace and security. It comes at a time when Arab
countries are undergoing major transformations in
which women have been victimized, which represents
a threat to the progress that they had achieved in the
Arab region.

I take this opportunity to congratulate Tunisia on
the occasion of the award of the Nobel Peace Prize to
the Tunisian National Dialogue Quartet. I commend
the women of Tunisia, who have offered us a shining
example of resistance and played an active role in
the evolution and democratic transformation of their
country.

Having witnessed the exceptional circumstances in
the region and based on our concern over the situation
and our belief in the importance of eradicating all
forms of violence and discrimination against women,
the League of Arab States has taken steps to diversify
our actions. We have undertaken regional strategies
to reinforce community action to eliminate violence
directed against women, while conforming to all
international resolutions, in particular resolution 1325
(2000), advocating the protection and empowerment of
women in peace and war.

In 2011, the League of Arab States launched an
Arab strategy for combating violence against women,
aimed at enhancing the participation of Arab women at
all political levels and their participation in education,
public-awareness training and building a culture of
peace. The League of Arab States has always sought to
enhance the participation of civil society organizations
that address the development of women in general in
order to promote and support efforts made within the
framework of the collective actions of the League of
Arab States to raise awareness of issues concerning
women.

The League's 144th ministerial meeting, held in
September, adopted a regional strategy and executive
plan of action to protect Arab women and peace
and security. That represents an important step to
strengthen the awareness of officials and all other
stakeholders with respect to all international and
regional resolutions related to the issue of women and
peace and security. The strategy and the executive plan
of action are based on the participation, protection and
empowerment of women. The executive plan of action
on the protection of Arab women's security and peace
is the fruit of open dialogue between the League's
Department of Women, Family and Childhood and the
United Nations Development Fund for Women, which
met yesterday. We believe that it is very important to
shed light on the repercussions on women and girls in
the Arab countries of war and armed conflict, which
also lead to emigration. We therefore need to improve
the mechanisms for the exchange of dialogue and
experiences in that regard.

The League ofArab States intends to hold a regional
conference in December regarding the executive plan of
action. I would like, in that context, to refer to the Cairo
Declaration concerning the post-2015 Arab women's
agenda. On 23 February 2014, the Arab countries
reiterated their commitment to participating in the
march towards the increased participation of women in
political parties, trade unions and all elected councils, as
well as in civil society organizations, with opportunities
equal to those of men. We also have taken all necessary
measures to protect women from violence and to use
the media to raise awareness of women's human rights
and society's duty to protect them. To that end, the
Department of Information and Communications of
the League of Arab States cooperated with the regional
office of the United Nations Development Programme
in holding a high-level meeting at United Nations
headquarters on 14 October on the issue of gender and
conflict hot spots.

We believe that we must overcome all obstacles
facing people living under foreign occupation, in
particular marginalized groups. In that regard,
I stress the rights of the Palestinian people, who
require immediate protection. Arab women in the
occupied territories endure many different kinds of
suffering - psychological, social, economic, legal and
political - as a result of the practices of the Israeli
occupation, the violation of their human rights, the
deteriorating economic situation, the blockade, the
restrictions to their movement and, of course, poverty.
Last Sunday, Rahaf Hassan, who was only 4-years old,
and her mother were killed by an Israeli aeroplane and
their house was destroyed. On Wednesday, a Palestinian
girl on her way to prayer was shot in the head by an
Israeli soldier.

