Mrs. Carrion (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation would like to commend you, Madam
President, for convening this debate. We express our
appreciation to all those who work daily to promote
peace and security, especially women. I also wish
to thank the Executive Director of UN-Women,
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, and Mr. Edmond
Mulet, Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, for their presentations.

The focus of today's debate, "Displaced women
and girls: leaders and survivors", could not have be
more timely, now when we are seeing the number of
displaced persons rise to alarming proportions and
mass violence and humanitarian disasters continue
to get worse in various parts of the world. According
to the Global Trends report prepared annually by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the number of displaced people had reached
51.2 million by late 2013.

The Uruguayan Government has taken steps to
provide a humanitarian response in the crisis being
experienced by refugees from the conflict in Syria by
undertaking to host 120 Syrian refugees. Five families,
including 33 children, have already reached our country.

Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), the
women and peace and security agenda has noticeably
advanced in both breadth and depth. It now occupies
a recognized place among the set of legal instruments,
policies and concrete actions of the Organization,
championing the importance of the gender perspective
in all conflict situations, especially in rehabilitation
and post-conflict reconstruction. In that regard, the
Secretary-General's report (S/2014/693) lists a number
of accomplishments in 2013, such as the adoption of two
new Security Council resolutions, the declaration by
the Peacebuilding Commission on women's economic
empowerment for peacebuilding, and the inclusion of a
provision on gender-based violence in the Arms Trade
Treaty, among others.

We welcome that progress. Unfortunately, despite
the legal and policy developments, we as a troop-
contributing country can attest that in the areas of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, civilians, particularly
women and girls, remain the main victims in armed
conflicts and post-conflict situations. In particular,
we note with deep concern the violence against certain
groups of people and violations of the human rights of
women and girls arising from terrorism, transnational
organized crime and extremism. In that regard, we
agree with the Secretary-General when he notes the
challenge of implementing and sustaining progress
in all measures and standards relating to women and
peace and security.

Prevention is a cornerstone of the women and
peace and security agenda. In particular, the prevention
of sexual violence in conflicts is a priority to which
my country gives special attention. In the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, where Uruguay has deployed
some 1,000 troops to fulfil many tasks in the protection
of civilians, joint protection teams are used to monitor
and address violations of human rights in remote
areas. Our troops conduct patrols to prevent the rape of
women and girls in remote places, such as when they
go to fetch water, and have successfully prevented and
deterred potential aggression.

The vulnerability to sexual or gender-based
violence experienced by refugees, asylum-seekers,
returnees, stateless persons and the internally displaced
during conflict, flight and displacement is alarming.
The international community should give serious
consideration to effective ways to prevent that. We
also emphasize the need for greater attention to the
rehabilitation of victims of grave violations and the
reinstatement of their rights, particularly in cases
of sexual abuse or exploitation. We believe activities
to combat impunity are important, including the
appointment of specialists to investigate sexual and
gender-based crimes.

Finally, we think it is important to ensure
strict adherence to the code of conduct by all those
participating in United Nations contingents deployed
on ground, based on the zero-tolerance policy. The
participation of women in all aspects of the peace and
security agenda is also extremely important. It is clear
that there is a link between the participation of women
in decision-making and the enjoyment of their human
rights. Therefore it is fundamental to increase their
participation and leadership in the context of refugees
and internally displaced persons.

Although the Secretary-General notes in his
report (S/2014/693) the trend, particularly from 2010,
of increasing participation by women in all processes,
including the appointment of women as mediators and
envoys, we think that we are still far from achieving
the desired goal. Moreover, we share the idea expressed
in the report that improving the protection of women
and girls will require more women police and military
personnel.

Uruguay has been in the vanguard when it comes
to incorporating women into the armed forces, and
that is reflected in the number of women deployed
by the armed forces and the national police in the
Uruguayan contingents in the peacekeeping missions.
Women always participate on a volunteer basis and
have acquitted themselves in an outstanding manner,
with interesting repeat figures that demonstrate their
commitment to the objectives of those missions.
However, we note with concern the data published in
the report that indicates that as of March 2014, 97 per
cent of military personnel and 90 per cent of police in
peacekeeping operations were men. That percentage
has not changed since 2011.

Uruguay believes that the women and peace and
security agenda is a fundamental part of the broader
agenda linked with children in armed conflicts and the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts. It is therefore
fundamental to make progress in a coordinated way,
achieving synergies, avoiding duplication of efforts and
making the most effective use possible ofthe instruments
that this Organization has on the ground. We think that
many of the limitations can be corrected with clear,
predictable strategies, appropriate for each mission,
and with better coordination among the different actors
on ground - especially with the host country, which
has primary responsibility for protection.

