Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank Chile for
having organized this important debate and Assistant
Secretary-General Kyung-wha Kang for her insightful
statement earlier today. The briefings by Ms. Helen
Durham, of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, and Ms. Ilwad Elman, of the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security, were very
informative and useful.

The protection of civilians in armed conflicts is
one of the core functions of the Security Council in its
mandated peacekeeping missions. Civilians continue
to be targeted in conflict. Women and girls, being the
most vulnerable, bear the brunt of the devastation of
conflicts disproportionately. Last year, the combined
caseload of refugees, asylum seekers and internally
displaced persons around the world crossed the mark
of 50 million people; the majority of them are women
and girls.

More worrying still is the fact that women and girls
are being attacked by directly by parties to conflicts as
part of their tactics. Violence against women is being
used as an instrument of war. The plight of women
and girls in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Mali, South Sudan, the Central African Republic,
Syria and Iraq has mobilized the Security Council in
the recent past to generate sufficient momentum for
decision-making to protect women and girls in armed
conflicts.

There is an increasing understanding of the need
to enhance women's participation in all aspects of
the prevention and resolution of conflict. The gender
perspective has been integrated into the Council's
protection-of-civilians agenda. Monitoring and
reporting arrangements have also been made to prevent
sexual violence. We agree with you, Sir, that gender
equality and women's empowerment are essential
to reinforce the protection environment, which is an
integral part of the protection of civilians. Parties to
conflicts are bound under international humanitarian
law to protect women and girls. Women must sit at
peace negotiating tables to ensure that women's rights
are protected during and after conflicts and during
recovery, reconstruction and peacebuilding.

The present debate is timely because the Secretary-
General's High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations is focusing on the protection of civilians.
First and foremost, the Security Council should continue
to curtail and end impunity for perpetrators of violence
against women in conflicts and bring non-State actors
under the ambit of international humanitarian law.

As peacekeepers face non-traditional threats,
such as terrorism, extremism and transnational crime,
existing measures and tools should be refined and
strengthened to choke financing resources and bring
criminals to justice. In this regard, we would like to
make the following suggestions.

The command-and-control of peacekeeping
missions should be streamlined and harmonized to
pay particular attention to the protection of civilians,
especially women and girls. The doctrinal differences
regarding the protection of civilians and protection-of-
civilian mandates should be resolved so as to enhance the
protection of women and girls. Barriers to humanitarian
access should be removed so that peacekeepers and
the international humanitarian community can reach
women and girls trapped in conflicts. The Council
should continue constantly to ensure that peacekeeping
and political missions institute monitoring mechanisms
to enhance the protection of women and girls on the
ground. The protection of civilians agenda should be
broadly linked to the Secretary-General's Human
Rights up Front initiative. Finally, the Council should
devote a special session to dealing with the threats
posed by violent extremism to the safety and security
of civilians, especially women and girls.

United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant
missions must be properly mandated and geared
towards protecting women and girls caught in conflicts.
As a leading participant in peacekeeping, Pakistan has
regularly contributed to this effort. Gender sensitization
as a core cultural value has been a mandatory part of
our training for peacekeepers. Pakistani women have
served as police officers, doctors and nurses in various
missions in Asia, Africa and the Balkans. Our feedback
about the work of the police officers is very positive.
Women police officers instinctively, and because
of their special training, show empathy to women
suffering in conflict situations. These women in turn
relate instantly to these police officers.

