Mr. Nyago (Uganda): I shall begin by expressing
Uganda's condolences to the Permanent Missions of
Russia and Germany for the tragedies that befell their
nationals yesterday.

Furthermore, I bring warm greetings from His
Excellency President Museveni of Uganda, who has
sent his apologies for not being able to come and
participate personally in this important debate due
to other, previously planned duties. He extends his
greatest appreciation to you, Sir, for the honourable
invitation extended to him to participate in this debate
on a topic that is so critical to Uganda.

My delegation also appreciates the briefings
delivered by the Secretary General, Mr. Ban Ki-Moon,
and other briefers.
Trafficking in persons in conflict is perhaps one of
the most challenging evils that the world is currently
confronted with, and the organization of this debate
is very timely in providing an opportunity to Member
States to share insights into how the challenges
being encountered in countering this scourge can be
effectively addressed.

Uganda happens to be in a region that has
experienced a lot of conflict, which has exacerbated
the problem of human trafficking in our region. The
conflicts in our region have made the majority of our
people, particularly women and children, vulnerable to
organized criminal networks that take advantage of our
weak institutions in immigration and the judiciary to
engage in the trafficking mainly of women, children
and other vulnerable people across borders to far
distant places. The conflicts in the Central African
Republic, the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Somalia and, more recently, South Sudan
continue to expose the most vulnerable sections of our
population to the criminal networks that traffic in them
for mainly cheap labour, sexual exploitation and, in
other cases, slavery.

A number of reports have recently revealed some
of the most horrific experiences that the children and
women who have been trafficked go through in some
of the countries where they end up being sold as
objects. Uganda itself has been a victim ofthis scourge,
whereby some our children, particularly girls and young
women, who have been trafficked have endured torture
and sexual abuse at the hands of their tormentors.
Our Government recently set up an interministerial
committee, coordinated by the Ministry of Gender,
Labour and Social Development, to investigate these
abuses and to devise appropriate measures that can
be undertaken to effectively address the problem.
This is in addition to various other interventions
that the Government has made in the past to address
this challenge.

One of the major steps that needs to be undertaken
by Member States, with the support of the international
community, is the harmonization of legislation that
comprehensively provides for judicial mechanisms
to harshly punish and deter offenders and would-be
offenders, and for there to be a coordination mechanism
for their enforcement. Such efforts will require the
strong support of this organ.

Given the transnational nature of this crime, it
requires the combined efforts of the international
community to decisively address this problem. As ably
amplified in the concept note provided by the Spanish
presidency for this debate (S/2016/1031, annex),
trafficking in persons in conflict is closely intertwined
with other transnational organized crimes, such as
money-laundering and international terrorism. The
financial resources that accrue from human trafficking
enable money-laundering to thrive and in turn largely
contribute to funding terrorist activities. And the
cycle continues.

It is therefore evident that this requires a holistic
approach that addresses the interconnectedness of
these vices in our societies. Working together through
the Security Council by adopting a resolution with
effective measures that address the vices of human
trafficking, money-laundering and terrorism in a
holistic manner would help to send a strong message
to the perpetrators of these crimes and to undermine
and curtail the capabilities of their networks to execute
these criminal activities.

In the same vein, the efforts of the international
community aimed at addressing the root causes
of conflict would help to deny these networks the
conducive environment in which they thrive. That is
why Uganda continues to play a key role in the region in
fighting terrorism in Somalia and the Central African
Republic, and in engaging with partners to address the
conflicts in our neighborhood. Uganda continues to be a
champion of pan-Africanism, with a strategic objective
of eliminating conflicts and associated vices in our
region so that we can embark on the road to peace,
peaceful transformation and prosperity for our people.

Uganda associates itself with the efforts of this
organ to address the problem of trafficking in persons
in conflict, and pledges to work together with our
international partners in supporting measures aimed at
eradicating it.

