Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka: The Secretary-General is
regrettably not in a position to join us today. He has
asked me to deliver the following message on his behalf.

"I thank the Security Council, under the
presidency of Argentina, for convening this
important debate. The Council's consistent focus
on women and peace and security has enabled the
international community to move beyond Viewing
women as only victims of conflict to seeing them
as agents of peace and progress. The Security
Council is now increasingly addressing the
particular concerns of women and involving them
in mediation, peacekeeping and peacebuilding.

"The immense human and financial cost
of conflict is starkly evident in the situation of
refugees, asylum-seekers and internally displaced
persons. Unprecedented levels of displacement are
testing global commitments to addressing the needs
of women and girls, ensuring their protection and
engaging their participation in conflict prevention,
resolution and peacebuilding.

"The confluence of crises we face, rather than
distracting from the imperative of gender equality,
should drive us to do even more to live up to the
principles in the Charter of the United Nations and
global norms. Squandering the potential dividends
of gender equality for peace and development
has never been so costly. We must urgently stand
against abuses. I am outraged by targeted attacks
and human rights violations committed against
women and girls, as well as those who defend their
rights. I call for immediate action to end impunity
in such cases.

"I am also concerned by continued
discrimination against women and girls. I call
for greater investment in measures to address
this problem. Resolution 1325 (2000) set out a
bold agenda for achieving gender equality as a
prerequisite for peaceful and inclusive societies.
Led by UN-Women, the United Nations is striving
to realize this vision. Next year's convergence of
major global policy events will offer an opportunity
to advance this. The United Nations counts on the
active participation of all countries in the upcoming
strategic high-level reviews on issues ranging from
sanctions to peace operations, peacebuilding and
gender equality.

"I also count on broad participation in my
upcoming global study on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security, which will include targeted
recommendations to accelerate results. I also
commend the lead author of the study, Radhika
Coomaraswamy, former Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, who is well known to the Council for her
energey and excellence. Ms. Coomaraswamy, the
Advisory Group and the study's secretariat will
be undertaking broad-based consultations with
Governments, academia, civil society and, most
importantly, women who have experienced the
direct impact of conflict. I encourage all Member
States to support that effort. This wide spectrum of
challenges provides an undeniable spur to action. I
urge the Council to join in responding with urgency
and resolve."

I shall now continue with my own remarks.

It is an honour to address the Security Council,
and to present the Secretary-General's report on
women and peace and security (8/2014/693). I thank the
presidency of Argentina for hosting this debate and for
highlighting the challenges faced by displaced women.
This is especially timely as we are witnessing the worst
levels of displacement since the end of the Second
World War.

In my first year as Executive Director of
UN-Women, I have travelled to displacement camps
in South Sudan and the Central African Republic, and
to the Syrian refugee camps in Jordan. Without fail, at
every stop I was inspired - albeit in sadness - by
women peacebuilders working so hard in dangerous
conditions. Ms. Suaad Allami, a leading women's
rights advocate from Iraq, will speak on their behalf
today and on behalf of displaced and refugee women
everywhere.

As we look around at a world in crisis, there
is a sense that we are experiencing not simply an
increase in Violence and insecurity, but a shift in the
nature of conflict itself. In more and more parts of
the world - Iraq, northern Nigeria, Syria, Somalia
and Mali, to name just a few - violent extremists are
taking control of territory, and directly threatening
and targeting women, girls, and their communities.
This is the terror that contributes to the high levels
of displacement we are discussing today. Women and
girls are forced to marry their abductors and rapists or
sold as slaves. Human rights defenders are threatened
and killed for speaking out against abuse. Courageous
journalists are silenced by Violence and death. Teachers,
students and front-line service providers are targeted.

And key decisions are still being made behind closed
doors, deaf to the voices of those directly affected. Last
week, we greeted with cautious hope reports ofpossible
progress regarding the abducted Chibok girls. This
week, our hopes were devastated by news that they are
not yet to be released. This again highlights the fact
that, even after this horrendous event, more women and
girls have been abducted.

We must not forget the reasons why they are
abducted. We must not forget the horrifying nightmare
they face and that so many others continue to endure.
During and after conflict, more women die during
childbirth, and more girls are forcibly married. Fewer
women work and participate in the economy, and fewer
girls go to school. Of primary school-age children that
are out of school, halflive in conflict areas. Only 35 per
cent of girls are enrolled in secondary education in
these settings. This prompts me to say that, if we did
not have so much conflict, we would have made a lot of
progress in gender equality. That puts the whole world
in danger.

The report of the Secretary-General, which I
have the privilege to present to the Council today on
his behalf, recognizes advancements made at the
normative level over the past year. The Council adopted
new resolutions to strengthen women's protection from
sexual violence. It reaffirmed the critical importance
of women's empowerment and gender equality to
international peace and security. Through regional or
national action plans, over 80 countries have committed
to the women and peace and security agenda. Regional
organizations are increasingly appointing high-
level envoys dedicated to this issue. In this respect, I
particularly want to welcome the appointment of long-
time champion for women Bineta Diop as the African
Union's first Special Envoy for Women, Peace and
Security.

The report shows that women's participation
and representation in conflict resolution and peace
processes have improved. Of the 11 active negotiations
co-led by the United Nations last year, eight included at
least one senior woman among negotiating delegates.
The percentage of peace agreements that commit to
advancing the security and status of women and girls
has more than doubled since 2011. In the ongoing
Colombian peace talks, more than one third of the
negotiators are women, and a committee dedicated to
gender has been established. Today, an unprecedented
six women Ambassadors sit here in the Security
Council. All of this indicates progress.

The gains are remarkable. However, we all have to
agree that it still leaves us with nearly half of all peace
agreements that say nothing about women's rights or
needs, and a majority ofpeace processes where women's
minimal presence is an afterthought.

The report of the Secretary-General highlights new
initiatives to protect women's rights, new measures to
increase women's representation in military and police
forces and the milestone appointment of the first female
Force Commander of a United Nations peacekeeping
mission. But 97 per cent of military peacekeepers are
still men.

There is now broad understanding ofthe importance
of women's economic empowerment in post-conflict
settings, but peacebuilding and recovery funding still
largely ignore women's economic role and under-
invests in their livelihoods.

The report also features a recently launched
Secretary-General's guidance note on reparations for
survivors of sexual violence. That has been a neglected
area in our agenda. Reparations are notjust aboutjustice,
they are about empowerment. Empowered women and
girls are the best hope for sustainable development
following conflict. They are the best drivers of growth,
the best hope for reconciliation and the best buffer
against the radicalization of youth and the repetition
of cycles of violence. We see that clearly, and with
appreciation, in the honour bestowed on Malala as this
year's recipient ofthe Nobel Peace Prize: it is important
to affirm girls' role in peacemaking.

The year 2015 marks the twentieth anniversary
of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action,
which laid the foundations for the women and peace
and security agenda; the fifteenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000); and the beginning
of the new sustainable development agenda. That
combination of events is an unmissable opportunity
to integrate the women and peace and security agenda
into broader development efforts. Next October, the
Security Council will conduct a high-level review of
the women and peace and security agenda, which will
be informed by the Secretary-General's global study
on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). UN-
Women is proud to be its secretariat. In fact, I am pleased
to recognize the study's distinguished lead author,
Radhika Coomaraswamy. She is here with us today,
as as are several members of the high-level advisory
group, who are here for the week. We are grateful for
their time and dedication.They will together examine
progress and challenges in implementing resolution
1325 (2000).

Today's debate provides an opportunity for the
members of the Security Council and others to share
their assessment, which I am sure the advisory group
will listen to attentively. It is also a chance to renew
our commitments to the women and peace and security
agenda as the global security context shifts, and to
adapt accordingly. Before I conclude, let me touch
again on today's topic.

Crises in Afghanistan, Syria and Somalia created
more than half of the 10.7 million persons newly
displaced by conflict or persecution in 2013. The total
displaced population now exceeds 51 million people.
During the height of the violence in Gaza earlier this
year, almost one third of the population was internally
displaced. Nearly 2 million people have been displaced
by ongoing crises in the Central African Republic and
South Sudan. New displacements have been caused by
protracted conflicts, such as the one in the Democratic
Republic of Congo, and by new ones, such as the one
in Ukraine.

The rights, needs, protection and participation of
displaced women and girls have been a Security Council
matter since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). In
subsequent resolutions and in international and regional
human rights and humanitarian law it is stated over and
over again: the meaningful participation of women in
decisions that affect their lives is essential to creating
resilient communities. As Nobel Peace Laureate and
Liberian peace activist Leymah Gbowee said during
the General Assembly's high-level week last month,

"If we exclude women from peacebuilding and post-
conflict reconstruction, we will build unbalanced
structures, and they will fall."

Yet efforts to empower women with leadership,
training and education and access to land and other
productive assets are still marginal. Displaced
women are often excluded from justice systems, and
investments to fix this are still insufficient. Time and
time again, women refugees and internally displaced
persons suffer disproportionately from gender-based
violence, including sexual violence, forced marriages
and trafficking.

In resolution 2122 (2013), the Council notes that
unequal citizenship rights and asylum processes and
a lack of access to identification increase women's
risk of statelessness. They suffer exclusion from
decision-making and unequal access to education,
health, housing, land and property rights. It is time to
dramatically improve the situation of women refugees
and displaced persons around the world. It is time to
renew our commitments and see them through. As we
review policies and strategies over the coming months,
we should be clear about what sustainable peace and
development require in these changed circumstances.

The Security Council faces extraordinary challenges,
from the Ebola outbreak - which also has a gender
dimension - to the rise of violent extremism and the
unprecedented levels of displacement that come with
it. We will not overcome those challenges without
putting gender equality front and centre in our efforts
to maintain peace and security. That is this Council's
obligation. It is also our collective test for 2015.

On behalf of UN-Women, I welcome today's debate
and look forward to keeping our promises to all women
and girls threatened by conflict and violence all over
the world.

