Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): At the outset,
Mr. President, I would like to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
this month and on arranging this open debate on the
issue of women and peace and security.

Today, I proudly recollect our sweet memory of the
Security Council's adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
during the Bangladesh's presidency ofthe Council, when
we worked to improve justice, ensuring that rape was
listed as a crime against humanity under Bangladesh's
1973 International Crimes (Tribunals) Act, leading the
drive for a zero-tolerance approach to sexual abuse in
United Nations peacekeeping, and nurturing a culture
of peace. This was the first resolution on social issues
that incorporated a broad narrative for Victims of
violence, trauma, stigmatization and rape, as well as
the illegitimate children of rape victims.
The main pillars of resolution 1325 (2000)
are ensuring women's increased participation in
decision-making; their involvement in mechanisms
aimed at preventing, managing and resolving conflicts;
their engagement in peace negotiations and their
mainstreaming into peacekeeping and peacebuilding
operations, with an emphasis on training and raising
awareness about sexually transmitted diseases such as
HIV/AIDS.

Fifteen years later, many credible reports state
that violence against women and girls is on the rise.
Women and girls continue to suffer most as victims
of conflicts, while they generally do not benefit from
the dividends of peace processes. Women and girls
are viewed as bearers of cultural and ethnic identities
and thus become prime targets for the perpetrators of
violence. The onus therefore lies on us to ensure that
the oppression of women and girls, particularly through
gender-related acts, is stopped forever.

It is our firm conviction that our deliberations today
will result in concrete proposals and specific guidelines
that will have an important bearing on our continued
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We are
all aware that poverty, deprivation, marginalization,
discrimination, socioeconomic injustices and, even more
importantly, the politics of subjugation and supremacy
lie at the heart ofconflicts and violence, and that women,
unfortunately, are always at the receiving end of the
consequences of such social inequities, political games
and exhibitions of leadership ego. I therefore call on
my colleagues to make specific proposals and propose
concrete measures that will require us to take stock,
nationally and internationally, of ways to end violence
against women and the proliferation of the conflicts
that may haunt us all, create uncertainty and chaos and
have the potential to sweep away our achievements and
our sense of stability and security.

We recognize that empowering women means
ensuring that they command resources and a leadership
capability adequate to efficient management of those
resources. We therefore emphasize the importance of
meeting women's economic needs and engaging them
at all levels and in all forms of the decision-making
process. The former can be achieved by ensuring
women's access to and participation in areas related
to income generation and entrepreneurship, such as
microfinancing, education, vocational training and
public health; the latter through their engagement in
positions of influence, and particularly, for example, in
senior United Nations positions, including those at the
level of assistant secretary-general, under-secretary-
general, special representative and so forth.

For a proper understanding of the issues, and
sensitivity to cultural, ethnic and religious needs,
recruits from countries of the South should be
considered for such positions. Secondly, for effective
coordination with staff working in the field, we should
ensure that troop- and police-contributing countries are
fairly represented, as has previously been discussed in
the General Assembly.

The principal responsibility for protecting women
falls within the purview of national Governments.
Any action taken by the international community
must therefore be consistent with national policies,
guidelines and action plans. In that context, I deem it
a privilege to make a few remarks concerning women's
empowerment based on my national perspective.

The education of girls is a vehicle for their
advancement, and the Government of Bangladesh
has therefore waived tuition fees for female students
up to grade 12. By providing women with improved
health care, the child mortality rate at birth has been
reduced by 72 per cent and the maternal mortality
rate by two-thirds. Women have also been provided
with a door-to-door family-planning service, which
continues to guide women on sexual and various social
issues, including converting one's house into a farm by
producing household vegetables and poultry, and on
other family welfare social benefits. It was envisaged
as a development package.

The Government is implementing a number
of projects to develop women's capabilities. They
include a vulnerable group development programme,
collateral-free loans, micro-credit, skills training,
including computer skills, product display centres,
and so on. Women registered for a vulnerable group
development programme and hired for rural works
receive skills training and credit, or some simple
capital machinery, such as a sewing machine, so that
they can set up their own small enterprise. Many
affirmative actions have been taken that help women
in distress and old age. In order to include women in
decision-making, the Government has adopted a quota
system for women in the national legislative assembly
and in the recruitment process of all civil and police
services.

To assist women in distress, the Government has
established one-stop crisis cells in 40 districts and
one-stop crisis centres in all divisional medical college
hospitals. The Government has also set up a DNA-
profiling lab and a national trauma counseling centre.
In the legal field, several laws have been enacted
to protect women. This includes the Domestic Violence
Act, 2010; the Domestic Violence Prevention and
Protection Rules, 2013; and DNA Rules, 2014. A draft
is being prepared to enact a child marriage control act.
We have also enacted the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1980.
I note that, in order to implement the Prevention of
Oppression against Women and Children Act, 2000, a
Women and Children Oppression Prevention Tribunal
has been set up in each district so that cases can be
tried rapidly.

Today, women occupy the top political leadership
in Bangladesh. Our Prime Minister, Speaker of the
National Parliament, Deputy Leader of the House,
Minister of Agriculture, the State Minister for Women
and Children Affairs are all female leaders. In addition,
the leader of the opposition is also a woman. More
importantly, for the quarter-century since 1991, both
leaders of the House and the opposition have been
women. In addition, there is a silent and comprehensive
women's empowerment ongoing throughout the country,
especially in the rural areas. Nearby 14,000 women
have been elected in local elections and the female
participation rate in the labour market has jumped
from 7 per cent to 36 per cent. They are becoming
economically independent and the surge is helping
them to be empowered and engaged in nation-building.

The Constitution of Bangladesh guarantees equality
of men and women within the broad framework of
non-discrimination on the grounds of religion, race or
gender. The father of the nation, Bangabandhu Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman, the founder of sovereign Bangladesh,
grounded gender equality in the basic principles of
democracy.

With regard to the maintenance of international
peace and security, we take pride in our modest
contribution of troops and police to United Nations
peacekeeping missions. Our policy decision to recruit
women in police and military amply demonstrates
our commitment to women's empowerment nationally
and in the United Nations maintenance of peace and
security. We are pleased that we have deployed two
full contingents of an all-female formed police unit to
Haiti and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I am
pleased to inform the Council that our all-male troop
contingents are fully briefed on the gender issue. The
good news is that none of our peacekeepers have been
involved in sexual exploitation and abuse.

We place special emphasis on promoting
and supporting women's active and meaningful
participation in all peace processes, as well as on their
representation in formal and informal decision-making;
improving partnerships and networking with local and
international groups working in the field; and recruiting
and appointing women to senior positions. We commit
to putting forward as many female candidates as we
can in the future to serve the international community
under the United Nations system.

In conclusion, I would reiterate that we have made
our best efforts to ensure women's empowerment and
participation in all spheres of life. We know that much
more needs to be done. We are open to replicate any
good practices in our national policy, and we are ready
to suitably share our experience with others. I hope that
the Council's deliberations will help develop specific
proposals, a clear message and concrete suggestions
that would demonstrate its commitment to women's
empowerment and challenge us all to achieve our goals
of gender parity and women's engagement to create a
peaceful world for all of us.

Almost 95 years ago, our national poet, Kazi
Nazrul Islam, wrote that whatever great or benevolent
achievements there are in the world, half of them were
by women, the other half by man. Therefore, we must
be fully engaged for the good of humankind.

