Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): This
year marks the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) and the
fifteenth anniversary of the Fourth World Conference
on Women, held in Beijing. Today's open Security
Council debate on women and peace and security has
special significance.

Resolution 1325 (2000) focused the international
community's attention on women in conflict and
provides the basis for the international community to
cooperate in helping countries in post-conflict
situations to protect women's rights and interests. The
international community has much to do for the
comprehensive implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). Here, I wish to emphasize the following four
points.

First, to ensure that women are protected from
harm in armed conflict, efforts must be made to
remove the root causes of conflict. Enabling women to
play a full role in the peace and security sphere will
make a positive contribution to the prevention and
reduction of conflicts. Also, preventing the outbreak of
conflicts and protecting the rights and interests of
women depend on efforts by the international
community to engage in preventive diplomacy and
peaceful settlement of disputes through dialogue and
consultation and through the elimination of the root
causes of conflict.

Secondly, Governments in conflict or
post-conflict situations bear primary responsibility for
the protection of women in their own countries. The
international community should provide assistance to
the countries concerned and obtain their understanding
and cooperation in order to help them in capacity-
building, including promotion of security sector
reform, strengthening the rule of law and improving
judicial and relief mechanisms. China supports the
Secretary-General appointing more women as special
representatives to provide good offices and political
mediation.

China condemns the use of sexual violence as a
means of war. The international community shares a
common responsibility to prevent sexual violence in
conflicts. China supports the relevant United Nations
agencies in their active efforts to provide the needed
support to the victims of sexual violence.

Thirdly, ensuring women's participation in
political processes, recovery and reconstruction is an
important part of the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). The effective participation of women in
political processes, national reconstruction and national
reconciliation will contribute to the maintenance of
social stability and the consolidation of peace in
post-conflict countries. In the process of post-conflict
reconstruction, women should be given a greater voice
and a larger role in decision-making. Their special
needs and concerns should be taken care of and
employment should be provided to ensure a livelihood
for them.

Fourthly, there should be a division of labour
among the relevant United Nations organs; they should
work together on the basis of their respective mandates
to address the question of women and peace and
security. While the Security Council should be
concerned with situations that constitute a threat to
international peace and security, other United Nations
entities, such as the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council, the Human Rights Council and UN
Women, should all have a full role to play so as to
achieve synergy.

