Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, Under-Secretary-
General Mlambo-Ngcuka and Ms. Lopidia for their
briefings and reality checks from the real world. I have
two impressions from this debate so far.

First, the energy in the Chamber is palpable - it is
not an energy we often feel here - and it is very fair
to say that this agenda would not be before the Security
Council if not for the work of non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), civil society and women's
groups. This is something I think that States Members
of the United Nations need to bear in mind, especially
those that are increasingly trying to keep NGOs, civil
society groups and others from participating in United
Nations meetings.

Secondly, after listening to Council speakers, I am
struck that we are all drawing from the same handful of
examples. It is sad that we have only a limited roster of
very inspiring examples to draw from. I think another
true measure of our progress would be if each of us
spoke without repeating the same examples of Liberia,
Yemen et cetera. You will hear me draw upon the very
same examples that my colleagues have drawn upon;
we have got to do better. It is incredible that women
are fighting out in the world in the way that they are
and giving us these great sources of inspiration and
learning, but it should not be so exceptional and there
should not be so few.

Do not get me wrong: of course there has been
genuine progress since resolution 1325 (2000) was
adopted, 16 long years ago, and some of that progress
is apparent on paper. In 2015, 70 per cent of peace
agreements signed had gender-specific provisions, as
compared to just 22 per cent of agreements in 2010.
That is a big leap in a short period. Over the past year
alone, 11 new countries completed national action plans
explaining how they are going to empower women to
resolve conflict and promote development. As we have
heard, that brings the total number to 64 countries.
Some progress has been made in representation, if
not on the Security Council, as there was at least one
woman present in the delegations for 9 of 11 active
negotiation processes in 2015, as compared to 4 of 14 in
2011. That is not nothing.

The United States continues to support that
progress. President Obama released our second national
action plan in June and, in addition to contributing
$31 million to new initiatives launched over the past
year, we are also looking through our plan at how to
address new challenges. That includes how women can
more effectively contribute to strategies on countering
violent extremism.

Unfortunately, what the statistics miss is the
persistent gap between how men and women actually
contribute to peace processes. Even ifwomen are present
at the table, which is still too rare, men are the ones who
almost always decide when and how to make peace.
Therefore, today I would like to talk briefly about why
we need to do more to promote not mere participation
but meaningful and effective participation, with a stress
on the word "effective".

Let me start by describing the benefits of women's
participation. As we have heard - and, again, these
are the same studies all of us cite - peace processes
are more likely to succeed when women are involved.
One study of 40 peace processes since 1989 found that,
the more women influenced a negotiation, the higher
the likelihood that an agreement would be reached.
Another study found that the likelihood of a peace
agreement lasting more than two years increased
by 20 per cent when women were involved. Why
is that? In part, it is because women often demand
results. When negotiations stall, as they inevitably do,
women's groups can help push for talks to resume and
press the parties to reach consensus. Women tend to
demand more than what is politically expedient or in
their narrow self-interest. Again, this is on the basis
of limited data, because of the limited participation,
but women's groups are known for lobbying for causes
that do go beyond gender, including for human rights,
transitional justice and reconciliation to be addressed
in peace agreements. Those are causes that are all too
often deferred or ignored when women are not there.

Here I will turn to the example of the Philippines.
In negotiations between the Government and the Moro
Islamic Liberation Front, a group seeking greater
autonomy for the country's south, women were active
at every level, from working groups to serving as lead
negotiators. After negotiators reached an impasse
in 2010, the women participants called for a national
dialogue that generated new ideas to get the parties
talking again. When violence broke out after the
signing of the 2012 framework agreement, women
helped organize protests calling for the parties to get
back to the table.

Or let us consider the Colombia peace process,
where up to one-third of the participants at the table
were women. Those female representatives lobbied
relentlessly so that those who committed sexual violence
in the conflict would not be eligible for pardons. And
they advocated for economic support to help women
access new development opportunities in rural areas.

But these examples are still the exceptions. In
Syria, South Sudan and Yemen, men are the ones
making decisions, even as we sit here in negotiations.
Maybe it is time to heed the famous aphorism that the
definition of insanity is to do the same thing over and
over again and expect a different result. Too often, what
gets labelled as women's participation is just checking
a box - a perfunctory meeting of male negotiators
with female members of civil society. This matters not
just for the content of a peace agreement itself; when
children see peace accords signed by groups of men,
the message received is that the men are the ones who
matter in affairs of State and who are empowered to end
conflicts. We do not want young girls internalizing that
message. We members of the Security Council need to
demand that women have the ability to influence the
course of negotiations, not just because women deserve
it - which ofcourse they do - but because when women
are effective and meaningful participants, we have a
better chance at achieving the mission of the Security
Council, which is preserving peace and security.

That brings me to my second and final point. In
places where sexual violence is used as a weapon of
war, the Council needs to address more fundamental
needs - the protection of women and accountability
for those who commit abuses. Let us consider South
Sudan, which has already been mentioned. In South
Sudan's Unity state, Government soldiers killed and
raped civilians, pillaged homes and destroyed livestock,
forcing families to flee into swamps to hide. Anyone
who left the swamps risked sexual assault, so when
women had to start venturing out to find food, these
communities reportedly nominated the oldest women
to go first to protect the children and teenagers from
being raped. When the first ones grew too weak or had
been raped too many times, these communities moved
to the next oldest woman. Let us just imagine for a
moment what the impact of these choices must be on
the women of Unity state in South Sudan - imagine
that was our own mother or grandmother going out to
shield our daughter.

Extremist groups are using medieval tactics
elsewhere to subjugate women. We see this with Boko
Haram, when the organization kidnapped schoolgirls
to be forcibly married to fighters or brainwashed to
be suicide bombers. We see this with Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant, when Yazidi women and girls
are sold as sex slaves in markets. So building peace
in those conflicts must start by stopping the attacks
against women and making sure that women will not be
attacked with impunity. That means ending impunity
generally, which we are not doing a goodjob of.

Those women, however, are not just victims of
violence. Their experiences need to be part of the long
process of healing and rebuilding from a conflict.
Recognizing their dignity means not just inviting
them to negotiations but making sure that they are not
relegated to waiting in a side room for the men to break
from the real negotiations and to deign to come in and
receive their petition or hear their views. That may sound
simple, but frequently Member States treat violence
against women as a tragic by-product of conflict, left to
resolve itself once the men stop fighting.

Protecting women from attacks and holding
accountable those who commit these abuses need
to be essential components of brokering peace,
whether in our resolutions, in mediation processes or
in peace operations. We have seen and we live every
day how challenging this is. One place for members
of the Security Council to start is to make certain
that all components of the United Nations system do
their utmost to keep women in conflicts safe. That
is why the United States will continue to demand
that peacekeeping missions carry out their mandates
to protect civilians and why the Secretary-General
must ensure, as he recommitted to again today and as
stipulated in resolution 2272 (2016), that when there is
credible evidence of widespread or systematic sexual
exploitation and abuse by a peacekeeping unit, that
unit is swiftly repatriated. Zero tolerance must come to
mean zero tolerance.

Let me conclude with Liberia. Nobel Laureate
Leymah Gbowee organized women who were fed up
with the violence of Liberia's civil war. When the
negotiators went to Ghana, Leymah and her growing
movement went too, surrounding the negotiators in
their hall to make sure that they did not come out until
peace was reached. As she told a reporter at the time,
the protest was
"a signal to the world that we the Liberian women
in Ghana at this conference are fed up with the war
and tired of fighting the killing of our people".

Leymah added, "We can do it again if we want to".

Let us imagine where we would be if every conflict
had groups of women like this. Now let us imagine our
world if people like Leymah were not just calling for
peace from outside conference centres, but if she and
others like her were sitting at the table on the inside.
Before a conflict, during a conflict and after a conflict,
women must have an effective, meaningful and impactful
voice. We on the Council must not rest until paper
progress becomes tangible progress and check-the-box
participation becomes meaningful participation.

