Mr. Okamura (Japan): I would like to begin by
expressing my sincere gratitude for Angola's initiative
in organizing this open debate on this very important
issue. I also appreciate the informative briefings
delivered by previous speakers.

I lived in Africa for three years, and I was able
to observe at first-hand that the mobilization of the
power of women was the key to addressing challenges
in Africa. In my statement, I would like to share my
experience about the power of women and the important
roles that African women are playing, and then to refer
to Japan's efforts in unleashing the power of African
women in preventing and resolving conflicts. I am
talking about the power of women. What exactly is the
power of women in Africa?

First, women are managers. Japanese Embassies
finance many grass-roots projects and, as an
ambassador, I have found that the most successful
and best implemented projects have always been
those proposed by women. It is women who are
managers in daily lives. Many women engage in
household management. Rearing children requires
supervising. Cooking requires planning. Shopping
requires calculation. If there is money, women use it
for education and health care, instead of wasting it.
Therefore, women are managers.

Secondly, women are entrepreneurs. Japan once
provided financial support for a school canteen project
in a village in Cote d'Ivoire. The idea was to support
mothers who would cultivate a plot of land to produce
rice and corn for their children's school lunches. Several
years later, I made a visit to that village. The project
was successfully realized. A school lunch was now
assured, and more children were attending school than
before. To my surprise, I also found a big chicken cage
beside the rice and corn field. I asked if the chickens
inside were also for lunch. But the answer was no. The
mothers became aware of their powers of production,
and they decided to start a chicken farm to earn more
money. The chickens sold quite well at the local market,
which allowed the mothers to buy pencils and notebooks
for their children. Therefore, women are entrepreneurs.

Lastly, women are brave. They stand up for peace.
I am very much impressed by the story of Ms. Paleki
Ayang in South Sudan, where women of both the Nuer
and Dinka tribes get together to bridge the antagonism of
the men. But I had the same experience in cote d'Ivoire.
On the eve of the C6te d'Ivoire crisis in 2011, everyone
could feel the looming tension. Demonstrations of any
kind might lead to a terrible crackdown. Then one day,
the women of Abidjan started marching in the streets,
banging their pans with kitchen utensils, shouting
"no!" to violence. They demonstrated their courage by
demanding peace in spite ofthe danger. To my surprise,
the security forces did not touch the women who were
demonstrating. They did not shoot at each other, because
in Africa, I understand, attacking women might be seen
as an act of dishonour.

My point is that, when it comes to the role of
women in Africa, we talk about empowering and
protecting women. Yes, that is true. But it is not merely
a matter of empowering or protecting women; it is a
matter of mobilizing the power of women. It must
be acknowledged that African women themselves
have great potential, and they are active players who
contribute to peace and stability. Furthermore, when it
comes to peace and stability, we should think of how to
best mobilize women's power.

Japan places great importance on the women and
peace and security agenda in Africa, and so we will
continue to cooperate in protecting the rights and
interests of women and girls during armed conflict.
That involves focusing our efforts to make the best
use of, which means to mobilize, the power of women,
particularly concerning the following aspects.

First, Japan underpins African efforts to establish
national action plans on women and peace and security.
Projects in Somalia and with the League of Arab States
are now taking place through our financial assistance.

Secondly, as a member of the Security Council,
Japan wishes to contribute to the work of the informal
expert group on women and peace and security. We are
pleased to see that the group made effective inputs before
the Council's visit to Mali earlier this month. Also, as
an active member of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), we welcome its efforts, led by Ambassador
Macharia Kamau, to introduce the PBC gender strategy
aligned with women and peace and security efforts.

Last but not least, this year we will make a
contribution of $14 million to UN-Women, as well
as to the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict. The
contribution is being made with the aim to mobilize the
inherent power of African women.

In conclusion, I would like to say once again that
Japan has traditionally stressed the great importance
of its relationship with Africa through the Tokyo
International Conference on African Development
(TICAD) process. TICAD will be held in Kenya this
year, for the first time on the African continent. The role
of women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts
is one of the key elements to be discussed at this year's
session. Japan wishes to build up its cooperation with
the international community to that end.

