Mr. Pratomo (Indonesia): Let me first express
my appreciation to the delegation of Ghana for
convening this debate on women and peace and
security. My delegation is certain that, under the able
stewardship of Foreign Minister Akwesi Osei-Adjei,
the Council will arrive at a successful outcome.

We have come some distance since the adoption
of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), in 2000.
The plight of women in armed conflict has been
publicized, and new paths of leadership have been
forged by women in the political environment, in
peacekeeping and in peacebuilding. However, action
on behalf of women is needed to close the gap between
our political pledges and the current reality of
empowering women in situations of armed conflict, in
order to attain peace and security.

While war is a great equalizer in terms of
suffering, the plight of women in conflict situations is
compounded by the physical displacement experienced
in war, the environmental hazards of war and sexual
crimes such as rape, which are attendant to war. In
many situations of armed conflict, women are already
marginalized in the political process, and the conflict
situation makes that reality even more apparent.

We need to ensure that fair treatment and
protection of women are incorporated into all phases of
peace processes. A negotiation that satisfies the needs
of the parties requires that all relevant actors be
involved, irrespective of their gender. Women are
habitually underrepresented and bring additional
interests and roles to bear, including as victims and
witnesses, which need to be integrated into any peace
process. Including women may have the added benefit
of expanding the palette of options for successful
negotiation by increasing the number of issues at stake
and the subsequent bargaining leverage. A key issue is

the identification and selection of women who can
participate in peace negotiations. Like their male
counterparts, female participants should be linked to
the greater community and should have a
representative stake in the outcome.

In addition to considering the phases of conflict
and ceasefire agreements, we need to consider how the
interests and needs of women can be addressed in the
post-conflict peace process and in the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission. Political leaders need to
become sensitized to existing problems by listening
directly to victims and witnesses and by giving them an
opportunity to share their difficulties. We should also
envisage how the United Nations system might be able
to engage in remediation efforts in conjunction with
relevant civil society organizations.

Grass-roots efforts can be employed. In many
countries and communities, there are local conflict
resolution procedures and women's peace initiatives
that might be utilized in order to gain a peace that is
most compatible with the situation in a given country.
We should seek to utilize mechanisms that have
worked for the community and have worked in the past
in efforts to achieve a peaceful resolution. Resolution
1325 (2000) provides a strong impetus, but it is really
only a guideline for further strengthening our efforts to
implement the Beijing Declaration and Platform for
Action. We need to consider homegrown initiatives that
develop within national and regional contexts and to
utilize local wisdom and capacity.

To encourage the development and dissemination
of best practices, regional organizations can be
involved in conducting workshops on issues relative to
women in armed conflict, peace processes and
peacebuilding. Moreover, we support the development
of a database of good practices to further our efforts.
This undertaking can be accelerated in the form of a
comprehensive knowledge and information
management system that can be instituted. Such a
method could include a demographic database of
shifting gender distribution and political involvement.

Concomitant with the role of national strategies
and regional initiatives, civil society organizations can
play an important role in helping to enable women in
conflict environments. Their efforts have benefited
women in the population and have contributed to
peace. They can play an invaluable role in campaigns
to raise awareness about women's issues, including the
participation of women in peacekeeping.

Women represent over half the world's
population today, and their presence in political
processes in many parts of the world is growing. But
they are underrepresented in the phases of conflict
resolution and peace and security in places where
conflict persists. Men still are dominant in these
processes, with the result that women are often
disenfranchised.

Resolution 1325 (2000) charts a course to
improving the lot of women in armed conflict
situations. It is only the beginning of a journey. It
should not discourage continued thinking regarding
new and creative ways to empower women and raise
their voices to a higher plane. Lastly, we consider it
pertinent that the Council should continue to cooperate
more closely with other relevant United Nations organs
in this endeavour.

