Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (Spoke in Spanish): The Plurinational State of
Bolivia thanks the Egyptian presidency for convening
and organizing this meeting. We also welcome the
presence among us ofDeputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed and the Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations, Ambassador Tete Antonio.
Bolivia should like to acknowledge in particular the
Deputy Secretary-General, not only for the briefing,
but also for realizing the initiative to carry out the first
joint United Nations-African Union high-level visit
focused on the importance of women's participation in
the processes of peace, security and development, in
addition to the fight against sexual violence in armed
conflict. We believe that this trip can become a model
and that visits of this nature can take place not only
in Africa, but in other regions of the world. Both are
necessary to raise societal awareness of the role that
women should play in all areas - economic, political
and social - with respect to international humanitarian
law and international human rights law.

Concerning sexual violence in conflict, Bolivia is
of the view that this crime is one of the most inhuman
acts, the emotional and physical consequences ofwhich
permanently affect the personal development of the
survivors. The international community now needs to
address this problem, pooling its efforts to implement
measures at the national, regional and international
levels. We believe that sexual violence in conflict
represents a threat to international peace and security.
That is why the Security Council decided to adopt the
implementation of the agenda on women and peace
and security.

In that connection, we highlight United Nations
efforts to implement Security Council resolutions,
in particular resolution 2242 (2015), and the relevant
General Assembly resolutions in order to integrate

the gender perspective effectively. However, and in
spite of those efforts, women's participation remains
marginal. The Security Council alone has adopted eight
resolutions related to sexual violence against women
and the strong correlation between peace processes and
the participation of women therein. We must continue to
work to ensure that the situation of women in conflict is
treated as a matter of priority within the agenda of the
Security Council. Seventeen years ago, resolution 1325
(2000), highlighted the crucial link between gender
equality and international peace and security.

Sexual violence in conflict does not distinguish
between genders; however, it does mostly affect
women and girls, who are victims of rape, sexual
slavery, forced prostitution, forced marriage, forced
sterilization and other forms of violence. One example
is the case ofNigeria, where since 2014, Boko Haram, a
violent extremist group, has kidnapped approximately
7,000 women and girls who are victims ofthese crimes,
leaving deep wounds in the female population of
that country.

Terrorist groups also use sexual violence not only
as a weapon of war, but also as a means of financing
their activities. It is therefore necessary to fight
attempts to legitimize illicit profits derived from
sexual exploitation and forced prostitution that have
entered the global financial system through money
laundering and so-called tax havens, which tend to
reduce or eliminate controls in place in various areas of
investment. In this context, it is necessary to investigate
whether these terrorist groups gain access to these so-
called tax havens.

Similarly, we are concerned at the ongoing
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. According to data
from the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, in the Kasai region, one of the most affected
by violence, more than 500 boys and girls have been
recruited into armed groups. There have been more than
600 cases ofsexual violence since August 2016, and there
are numerous cases of victims of human trafficking and
smuggling, summary executions, arbitrary detentions
and arrests. Furthermore, according to UNICEF data,
in the Kasai region, violent clashes between the Armed
Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Kamuina Nsapu militia have had devastating effects
on children.

In addition to the foregoing, one of the most
difficult consequences of sexual violence that survivors
have to overcome is the stigma they and their children
face, together with the related discrimination and the
socioeconomic marginalization that relegates them
to second-class status. Accordingly, the international
community should contribute to lending support to
national initiatives aimed at reintegrating the survivors
of these traumas and their children into society, so that
they can fully enjoy their rights.

To this end, Bolivia supports the Secretary-
General's four-pronged strategy to prevent sexual
exploitation and abuse and respond to existing cases,
including giving priority to victims and listening
to their needs and experiences; putting an end to the
impunity that triggers stigmatization; promoting the
participation of civil society and foreign partners; and
improving strategic communication in order to raise
awareness. In addition, measures needed to prevent
armed conflicts and promote the participation of
women in peace, security and development processes
should be implemented.

We acknowledge that there remain structural
challenges, such as the patriarchal mindset of
appropriation and ownership of women's bodies,
including control over their sexuality and even their
reproductive capacity. Violence against women is the
expression of the patriarchal system rooted in society,
which is made even more radical when women and girls
are used, among other things, as military shields.

Bolivia emphasizes the need to strengthen
cooperation between the United Nations, the
African Union and other regional organizations in
the fight against sexual Violence in conflict. Close
communication between the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the
Special Envoy of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission is vital if we are to implement the women
and peace and security agenda on the African continent
and thereby strengthen existing mechanisms.

The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, as
well as the African Union's 2063 Agenda, hold gender
equality and women's empowerment among their most
important goals. Without women taking their full place
as key actors, it will be impossible to make progress in
terms of social development. Gender equality is not just
a human right, but it also provides a basis for achieving
sustainable peace and development.

In our experience, the Bolivian experience, the
sovereign administration of natural resources is
paramount for the socioeconomic development of
a State. Indeed, it is through it, together with proper
leadership and political will, that a structural shift can
be made in the key areas of development.

Since the promulgation of its new political State
Constitution in 2009, Bolivia has drawn up and
implemented legislation designed to build a fair society
with equal opportunities for women, emphasizing
their political empowerment by establishing parity and
alternation in the lists of candidates for representative
office, making ours the country with the second-highest
number of female parliamentarians in the world. In the
economic sphere, the law on the community renewal of
agrarian reform ensures the right of women to own land.

In conclusion, Bolivia proposes drawing up, in
addition to the Secretary-General's four-point plan, a
pact that guarantees the empowerment and inclusion
of women in the light of Goal 5 of the 2030 Agenda,
which calls for the Security Council and other United
Nations entities in the United Nations system to address
this issue. This pact should ensure, first, the political
empowerment of women through laws that guarantee
parity and alternation in elected representation posts.
Secondly, it should ensure and promote women's
participation in peace processes by carving out an
active role for them in prevention, mediation and
dialogue in order to find solutions on an equal footing.
Thirdly, in this pact, we should ensure that women are
engaged in post-conflict reconstruction through their
economic, social and cultural reintegration. Fourthly,
the economic empowerment of women should be
ensured through laws and public policies that allow,
inter alia, for access to land ownership and credit to
facilitate their attainment of economic independence.
Of course, all peace and development processes must
include women if we truly want a fair, stable and
lasting peace.

