Mr. Lainez: Let me begin by thanking you,
Mr. President, on behalf of the Organization of
American States (OAS) and its Inter-American
Commission of Women, for the opportunity to address
this historic celebration of the fifteenth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) - a watershed
moment for the women of the world in terms of how
they are affected by, and participate in, all types of
conflict and crisis.

The Americas are passing through an age of
democratic consolidation that has been marked, on the
one hand, by moments of progress, broader levels of
participation in politics and decision-making, relatively
stable levels of economic growth and unprecedented
levels of connectivity and access to information. On the
other hand, those changes have also been accompanied
by growing levels of income inequality, persistent
corruption, growing dissatisfaction with the quality of
representative democracy and, above all, rising levels
of crime and violence.

Security has a central role to play in the success
of our new democracies. While the Americas do not
have any countries that are formally defined as being in
conflict, our region is plagued by high levels of citizen
insecurity, a reality that is regularly cited in public
opinion surveys as one of the main concerns of our
citizens. We face many of the issues that also confront
countries in conflict, including weak rule of law,
security institutions that are incapable of or unwilling
to respect human rights, the proliferation of small
arms and high levels of all types of violence, including
violence against women, particularly the gender-based
killing of women, known in our region as femicide.

Although the lack of citizen security is a problem
affecting the entire population, women experience
violence, robbery, trafficking and other security issues
differently from men as a result of their differential
relationship to public spaces. In addition, as a number
of authors have pointed out, public debates on security
issues and public policies and programmes that attempt
to address those issues are often based on indicators
that reduce violence to criminal activities, which
usually excludes the violence against women, which is
most often exercised within the home.

In this forum, the OAS commits to undertaking

advocacy efforts to promote the relevance of resolution
1325 (2000), in addition to the other resolutions on
women and peace and security, particularly those that
address sexual violence in times of conflict and crisis.
Our own Inter-American Convention on the Prevention,
Punishment and Eradication of Violence against
Women provides a strong legal framework to support
the full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
and the Follow-Up Mechanism to the Convention has
placed particular emphasis on violence against women
perpetrated by the State or people acting on behalf of
the State.

Failure to consider the security situation of women,
on the one hand, and their absence from structures
where decisions are made and action taken in the area
of security, on the other, is tantamount to the security
policy in most of the region's countries ignoring more
than 50 per cent of the population. Incorporating
differentiating criteria for analysing existing threats
strengthens the ability of the security sector to provide
appropriate responses according to the rights and
priorities of each population group.

To that end, the OAS offers its full cooperation to
help incorporate women's rights and gender equality
into regional and international security policies and
programmes, in particular with regard to strengthening
civilian oversight of the security sector and effectively
addressing and preventing violence against women.

