Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to thank South
Africa for convening this meeting, focusing on the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda towards the twentieth anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000) next year. Japan welcomes the adoption of
the new resolution 2493 (2019), which we co-sponsored.
Under the leadership of Prime Minister Abe, Japan
attaches great importance to promoting the women
and peace and security agenda as one of the three core
pillars of its efforts to create a society where women
shine. Resolution 1325 (2000) was a historic resolution,
which recognizes women not as passive and vulnerable
victims but rather as proactive participants who
contribute to conflict prevention and resolution and
peace processes.

Today, I would like to reiterate Japan's commitment
to strengthening the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda, building on the outcome
of our efforts based on the landmark resolution 1325
(2000) and subsequent resolutions.

Japan strongly supports the international fund for
survivors of conflict-related sexual Violence, which
will be launched at the event to commemorate the tenth
anniversary of the establishment of the mandate on
sexual violence in conflict tomorrow. Japan wishes to be
a proactive contributor and a board member of the fund.
We are currently making the necessary arrangements to
make an appropriate financial contribution to the fund.

Sexual violence in conflict is a great obstacle to
sustaining peace. The United Nations Team of Experts
on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict
provides crucial assistance to relevant Governments,
particularly in the areas of criminal investigation
and prosecution, legislative reform and the capacity-
building of judicial and security authorities. As a
leading donor, Japan will continue to support the efforts
of the Team of Experts.

Gender equality and the economic and political
empowerment of women are necessary to promote
meaningful participation by women in peace and
security. From that standpoint, Japan has supported
women affected by conflict in the Middle East and
Africa regions through gender-based Violence related
services and vocational training in collaboration with
UN-Women, the United Nations Population Fund and
other United Nations agencies.
From next January, Japan will support the UN-
Women project in Sri Lanka under the women and
peace and security partnership initiative of the
Group of Seven. The project will include support to
empowering women and their participation in national
reconciliation processes.

On the issue of comfort women mentioned by
the representative of the Republic of Korea, Japan
has been dealing with that issue for a long period of
time, including through the December 2015 agreement
between Japan and the Republic of Korea.

In conclusion, the women and peace and security
agenda is one ofthe most important issues discussed in
the Security Council. Ibelieve that strong commitments
from Member States and concrete actions will push
forward the women and peace and security agenda
during the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000) next year and beyond.

