Mr. Mukerji (India): My delegation would like
to thank you, Madam President, for having organized
this debate. We have read the concept note (S/2015/243, annex) circulated by your delegation and reviewed the
progress made in the implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions on the subject before us.
We would also like to thank our briefers this morning.

Going by what we have just heard from the
delegations of Iraq and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, we are in strong agreement with the View
that sexual violence in armed conflict is not incidental,
but is integrally linked with the strategic objectives,
ideology and funding of extremist groups. That is
equally worrisome when the list of perpetrators of
armed conflict mentioned in the Secretary General's
report (S/2015/203) has increased to include 45 parties
that commit egregious and heinous crimes, including
sexual violence against women, girls, men and boys,
and use sexual violence as a tactic of terror.

We also take note of the fact that the list of
perpetrators of sexual violence in armed conflict
includes mainly non-State actors who act beyond
the pale of law. That strengthens our view that we
should extend more support to national Governments
in their efforts to deal with such challenges. Those
efforts include ownership and capacity-building
aimed at adopting progressive legal frameworks and
legislation to implement zero tolerance for sexual
violence. National Governments should be encouraged
to realize their primary responsibility for leadership
and response in dealing with sexual Violence through
social-sector reforms and the establishment of rule-of-
law-based systems. The reintegration of the survivors
of sexual violence needs to be facilitated by providing
a safe, secure and enabling environment, free from
fear of stigmatization and reprisals. Recourse by the
Council to international punitive mechanisms should
be considered only as a matter of last resort.

The impact of armed conflict on women and girls
and the role of women in peace operations remain
central issues in conflict situations, as outlined in the
landmark resolution 1325 (2000). The mainstreaming
of a gender perspective in peace operations is a
prerequisite for achieving the ultimate goal of
gender equality, women's empowerment, sustainable
development and sustainable peace and security. We
concur with the Secretary-General's report, which calls
on us to take cognizance of, and reinforce the need for,
the deployment of more women peacekeepers, women
protection advisers and gender advisers in peace
operations. We support the development of a gender-
resource package and training materials. More women
in high decision-making positions in multidimensional
peace operations is undoubtedly essential.

For our part, India is proud to be committed to
assisting the United Nations in the maintenance of
international peace and security with nearly 180,000
troops having served under the blue flag so far,
the largest contribution by any Member State. That
includes the fully formed Indian female police unit in
the United Nations Mission in Liberia, which has been
commended both by the Government of Liberia and by
world leaders. Our women peacekeepers have helped
to reduce conflict and confrontation by imparting
a greater sense of security to local populations and
inspiring women and girls to push for their own rights
and participation in the peace process. We continue
to lay emphasis on gender-sensitive predeployment
training, and we are willing to increase our contribution
to peace operations.

We would like to reiterate our principled position
that Security Council reports should focus on issues
related to the mandate specifically given by the Council.
We would urge caution in going beyond those mandates
in reports submitted to the Council and to not stray
into sweeping generalizations about "other settings of
concern", including counter-terrorism, with regard to
sexual Violence being perpetrated in the context of an
increase in Violent extremism. It is useful to remind
ourselves here that the women-and-peace-and-security
agenda evolved from the imperative to address the
disproportionate impact of armed conflict on women,
including the abhorrent practice of sexual Violence
against women as an instrument of war.

The international community should address
that emergent and worrisome challenge in a spirit of
compassion, solidarity and burden-sharing. I would like
to reaffirm my country's commitment to our collective
efforts to find durable solutions to the issues of women
and peace and security, within the overall framework
of international peace, security and stability. We look
forward to the global review on sexual violence to
take place in October on the occasion of the fifteenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000)
and the seventieth anniversary of the United Nations.

