Mr. Germanas (Lithuania): 1 would like to start by
congratulating the United Kingdom presidency of the
Security Council for the month of June for holding this
important debate.

Lithuania associates itself with the statement to be
made later by the observer of the European Union.

In my national capacity, let me express Lithuania's
full support for the recommendations contained in the
latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/149).
Let me also commend the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Zainab Bangura, for her personal dedication and
commitment.

To tackle impunity, sustained comprehensive
efforts are needed at the national level to guarantee
the prosecution of conflict-related sexual violence and
support for survivors. The Council could make a major
difference by supporting the early establishment of
national reparations programmes as well as developing
a more robust monitoring and reporting system.

National action plans on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) are an important tool that
should be fully utilized. Lithuania's national action
plan, adopted in December 2011, contains a variety
of measures aimed at women's empowerment through
literacy, education, networking and the development
of skills. It has direct linkages with Lithuania's
development cooperation programmes, which include a
strong gender element.

All pre-departure training for Lithuanian military
and police personnel participating in international
missions includes specific training on gender issues.
Lithuania strongly supports the inclusion of gender-
based violence and violence against women and
children among the mandatory assessment criteria for
arms exports in the international Arms Trade Treaty.
The disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
and security sector reform processes, including
stringent vetting of personnel, provide an important
window of opportunity for effective justice for victims
of sexual violence in conflict. Security sector reforms
must include provisions on the personal accountability
of the police and the military, all the way up to the
leadership.

Establishing effective oversight, transparency,
and human rights and gender training for security
sector personnel is instrumental in countering the
culture of impunity. My delegation welcomes the
Secretary General's recommendation that blanket
amnesties should not be applied where conflict-related
sexual violence is in question. My delegation strongly
supports the implementation of the zero-tolerance
policy towards sexual misconduct in the United
Nations peacekeeping ranks, including the relevant
provisions in all peacekeeping mandates. We call on
the Security Council to use the tools at its disposal
in a more systematic way, including the setting-up of
commissions of inquiry, individual targeted sanctions
and referrals to the International Criminal Court.

We must show iron-clad determination and political
will to stamp out impunity for sexual crimes as a tool of
war. Statesmen, political and religious leaders, women's
groups, community elders and human rights defenders
must join forces to generate global consensus on the
need to end impunity and pursue accountability at all
levels. By doing so, we shall give restore the voices of
the victims of sexual violence in conflict and create a
powerful deterrent for all those who may be tempted to
resort to sexual crimes as a tactic of war.

