Mr. Menon (Singapore): I should like to express
my warmest congratulations to you, Mr. President, and
to Viet Nam on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of October and for
having organized this important debate on women and
peace and security. As a fellow member of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations, we wish you
every success and are confident that you will do an
excellent job as President of the Council for this
month. Our warmest congratulations also go to the
delegation of the United States for the exemplary
manner in which it handled the presidency of the
Security Council last month.

One of the most famous symbols of the global
search for peace is the Nobel Peace Prize, which is
awarded every year to the person who has done the
most to promote peace in the world. What is less well
known is the fact that Alfred Nobel, the Swedish
inventor who created the prize, was actually inspired
by a woman - the Baroness Bertha von Suttner, a
peace activist who campaigned tirelessly against the
wars in Europe in the late nineteenth century. Alfred
Nobel had her in mind when he wrote in his will that
the Peace Prize should be given to the most deserving
person, a Swede or a foreigner, a man or a woman.

The adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) by the
Council was an acknowledgement of the truth borne
out by most of human history that women play a
powerful role in the promotion of peace and security.
This is evident when women are allowed to participate
fully, equally and effectively in all stages of the peace
process - peacekeeping, peace negotiations and
peacebuilding - and are similarly involved in the
development and implementation of post-conflict
strategies, reconstruction and consolidation. As my
colleagues have already spoken with great eloquence
on these issues, I simply wish to emphasize a few key
points.

There remains a serious gap in the translation of
commitments made on paper into reality. It is a sad fact
that the impact of conflict is borne disproportionately
by women. For instance, over 70 per cent of the
casualties in recent conflicts have been
non-combatants, most of them women and children.
Moreover, conflicts have profound implications for
women's basic health and survival. Of the countries
that have the highest lifetime risks of maternal death
today, most are at war or in a post-conflict situation. In
addition, as a country begins to emerge from conflict,
women and girls have specific priorities and needs in
such areas as physical security, socio-economic
conditions, education, income generation, access to
basic services, as well as gender-responsive law
enforcement and access to justice.

Unfortunately, these needs and priorities are often
not recognized or met. Studies have shown that there is
a substantial gap in financing for women's needs in
post-conflict situations. This cripples the ability of
women to contribute meaningfully to their societies
and communities. Moreover, efforts to include women
in peacebuilding and reconstruction processes are often
limited. Women make up 52 per cent of the world
population but comprise only 7 per cent of negotiators
on official negotiating delegations. In addition, women
often lack the organizational force to make their voices
heard in political and economic decision-making. As a
result, women are prevented from making the
contributions that they would like to make to post-
conflict governance and the consolidation of peace.
It is vital that the international community
redouble its efforts to empower women, especially
ahead of the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) next year. We look forward to
the report of the Secretary-General, as requested by the
resolution that the Council has just adopted, which will
provide important recommendations on how to address

women's participation and their inclusion in
peacebuilding and planning in the aftermath of
conflict. Singapore was pleased to co-sponsor this
resolution, as well as resolution 1888 (2009) last week,
ably led by the Vietnamese and United States
delegations, respectively. What these two texts show is
that the United Nations must lead by example to
address gender issues in United Nations mandates,
including the greater participation of women in
political, peacebuilding and peacekeeping missions.

The simple presence of women military, police
and civilian peacekeepers on the ground has a
tremendous positive effect on local communities by
reaching out to and serving as powerful role models for
local women. Women currently constitute just 2 per
cent of military personnel and 8 per cent of police
personnel in United Nations peacekeeping missions,
and more should be done to encourage greater female
participation. During the INTERPOL General
Assembly to be held in Singapore later this week,
Singapore will be working with the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) to promote DPKO's
"Women in Peacekeeping: the Power to Empower"
global campaign to recruit more women police for
peacekeeping operations. The continuing need for the
increased participation of female officers in United
Nations peacekeeping operations will also be
highlighted in the outcome declaration of the
INTERPOL-United Nations ministerial meeting.

I should like to end where I began, with the
Nobel Peace Prize. When Alfred Nobel created the
Nobel Peace Prize, he intended for Baroness von
Suttner to become the first recipient. However, it took
five more years before she was honoured in 1905 and
became the first woman to receive the Peace Prize. At
her presentation ceremony, Jorgen Lovland, then
Chairman of the Nobel Committee, said:

"History constantly demonstrates the great
influence of women. Women have encouraged the
ideas of war, the attitude to life, and the causes
for which men have fought, for which their sons
were brought up, and of which they have
dreamed. Any change or reformation of these
ideas must be brought about chiefly by women."

It is up to us to ensure that all women around the
world have the opportunity to exercise their profound
power to do so.
