Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Today
we celebrate the fifteenth anniversary of a resolution
whose legacy has been of incredible richness.
Resolution 1325 (2000) was the response ofthe Security
Council to a decade of unprecedented violations and
violence against women. But resolution 1325 (2000)
was also the starting point of many developments both
normative and operational. This dual orientation is at
the heart of resolution 1325 (2000): it aims not only
at protecting women in times of conflict, but also at
enabling them to fulfil their role as agents of change.
We welcome the adoption of resolution 2242 (2015) and
the presentation to be made tomorrow on the global
study on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
which Luxembourg financially supported.

Luxembourg fully supports the statement of
the European Union and will contribute to the
implementation of the European commitments made at
this meeting.

During its recent term on the Security Council,
Luxembourg made the women and peace and security
agenda one of its priorities. I would like to reiterate
our commitment to the cause of women in times of
conflict and in times of peace. The importance of
role of women in the development of their countries
is no longer in doubt. Luxembourg is also pursuing a
strategy of taking into account the conditions, priorities
and needs of women as part of our official development
assistance, which amounts to 1 per cent of our gross
national income.

We are convinced of the value of the contribution
of women in peacebuilding efforts. Since 2010,
Luxembourg has supported a project of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations designed to strengthen the
role of women in peacekeeping and peacebuilding, in
close consultation with national authorities and civil
society organizations. In this regard, I would like
to thank the women's organizations of civil society
for their commitment, without which it would not be
possible to make progress on the women and peace and
security agenda.

We support the partnership between Justice Rapid
Response, UN-Women and the Institute for International
Criminal Investigations, which allows experts to be
deployed to investigate and provide assistance to
victims. We also support the team of experts on the rule
of law and issues related to sexual violence in times
of conflict with a view to strengthening the capacity
of national stakeholders in the rule of law and justice.
Indeed, the fight against impunity is essential: there
can be no peace without the restoration of justice. In
this regard, I would like to reiterate the full support
of my country for the International Criminal Court,
which, since its creation, has strengthened the fight
against impunity.

Luxembourg is and will remain a strong and
reliable partner of UN-Women, to which it is one of
the top 20 contributors. In addition, we will maintain
our high level of financial contribution in the area of
gender mainstreaming in the budgets of United Nations
agencies.

Each State and each international or regional
organization has a role to play in advancing the role
of women in the interest of peace and security. But
the Security Council must also fulfil the role it has
taken on in adopting this historic resolution 15 years
ago. It must show political will and courage. We hope
that the new resolution, of which Luxembourg is one
of the sponsors, can contribute to that outcome, in
particular through the creation of the informal group
of experts that will assist the Council to integrate more
systematically the questions of women and peace and
security in its work. The call to action we are launching
today can succeed only if we are all willing to hear the
appeal and if everyone is ready to act.

