Mr. Tuy (Cambodia): Allow me to congratulate the
Russian Federation on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of October. We thank
you for organizing this open debate on women and
peace and security.

Cambodia aligns itselfwith the statement delivered
by the representative of Thailand on behalf of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations this morning.

In the twenty-first century, it is more evident than
ever that women play an integral part in our global
efforts in the prevention and resolution of conflicts,
peace negotiations, peacebuilding and providing
humanitarian response. This is reflected in the resolution
1325 (2000), supported by the reports of the Secretary-
General and other United Nations resolutions.

Women are an integral part of global society and
therefore should be no longer overlooked. We are
currently witnessing changes in how peace is defined.
Peace does not mean only the absence ofwar, but can also
be sustained through a more inclusive political process
that includes the upholding of justice, reconciliation
and the promotion of human rights. In this regard, it
is worth looking at the analysis and recommendations
in the global study on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000).

Women represent a strong link in the chain that
supports the most vulnerable members of society.
Women's perseverance and kind virtues take their
role beyond the home as they play an important role in
peacebuilding processes. It is unfortunate that women
and girls have been recent targets in many areas of
conflict. The more we lack key female participation,
the more our chances to sustain peace are diminished.
Therefore, it is mandatory for the United Nations to
look into the overall aspects ofpeacebuilding, including
female key players. The significance of these criteria
mean that their adoption should be a prerequisite for the
implementation of the common agenda on women and
peace and security.

In the President's conceptpaper (S/2016/871, annex),
we are asked to share experiences and information
regarding the efforts of Member States and relevant
entities in response to the 2015 high-level review and
global study. In light of this, I wish to highlight the
following points from the perspective of Cambodia.

Member States with women having suffered from
violence must be given the right support for their basic
needs so that women and their dependent children can
be reintegrated into the society, with consideration for
increased investment in the educational needs of girls
and women. Health-wise, specific physical, mental and
psychological health services should be provided to
Violence-stricken women so as to restore their dignity
and establish a collective memory.

In recognizing women as the backbone of the
country, it is important to build and strengthen
international norms conducive to giving women equal
rights in order to encourage their full participation in
all spheres of activities, including political, economic,
social and cultural pursuits through the integration
of international legal instruments by the respective
Member States.

In order to enhance our efforts to end gender-based
discrimination, stronger national and regional legal
instruments should be strengthened so as to provide
a greater number of high-level posts for women.
Empowering and protection are not only in the interests
of women themselves, but also in the interests of the
common good. Cambodia has therefore ensured a
greater number of women are employed in positions
of influence, particularly in the civil service and State
institutions, with a shift from 20 to 50 per cent in
female employment in those areas in 2016. Cambodia
has also pursued ways to increase its female recruits, as
we recognize that their professional skills and talents
can benefit peace processes in the world, and we are
increasing their participation, thereby advocating equal
participation, in international forums. Since 2006 we
have deployed 142 women out of our 3,800 Cambodian
United Nations peacekeepers.

In conclusion, Cambodia strongly commits to
increasing momentum in the area of gender equality,
empowering women and realizing their rights. We are
continuing to work closely with the relevant ministries,
civil society organizations and the private sector, as
well as with our development partners.

The meeting rose at 6.30pm.
