Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like first to commend the Spanish Presidency of
the Security Council for convening this open debate on
women and peace and security on the occasion of the
high-level review of resolution 1325 (2000). Despite the
advances and good practices that have been developed
with respect to that resolution, obstacles to its effective
implementation remain. In that regard and with a view
to preventing violence against women, Peru enacted
a law to equalize gender opportunities between men
and women and adopted a national gender-equity plan,
as well as a national plan to combat violence against
women.

Similarly, the Ministry of Women and Vulnerable
Populations has developed a registry of internally
displaced persons, which has made it possible to protect
the rights of women and girls in conflict and post-
conflict situations. Likewise, through a law enacted
in 2005, my country established a comprehensive
reparations plan for the victims of acts of violence that
occurred between 1980 and 2000. The national plan to
combat violence against women incorporated the topic
of sexual violence in the context of armed conflict,
calling for its inclusion in regional policies throughout
the country. The plan calls for the inclusion of all forms
of sexual violence within the ambit of the comprehensive
reparations plan, in particular that inflicted on women
victimized during the period of terrorist violence.

At the international level, Peru supports the
Secretary-General's zero-tolerance policy, which
strongly condemns the participation ofpersons working
under the flag of the United Nations in any form of
inappropriate or immoral behaviour, especially in cases
of sexual exploitation and abuse against civilians, in
particular women and girls.

Moreover, my country welcomes the trend towards
the systematic incorporation of a gender perspective
in the mandates of peacekeeping operations, as well as
the integration of women as actors in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts. For that reason, Peru
has increased the participation of women in each of
the eight missions in which we participate. Women
currently represent 10 per cent of our staff deployed
on the ground, a figure that we hope to increase in the
future.

Peru looks favourably on the inclusion in the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/ 1) of a Goal designed to achieve
gender parity and the empowerment of women and
girls. In that regard, we believe that the challenge that
we most urgently need to address is the implementation
of measures to achieve full respect for women and girls
in line with resolution 1325 (2000), through which the
international community recognized the pressing need
to offer specialized training on the protection, special
needs and human rights of women and children in
situations of conflict around the world.

In that regard and in the light of the current high-
level review to assess progress in the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) at the national, regional and
international levels, Peru commits to work with other
States to address the remaining problems in that area,
with the goal of achieving a peaceful environment in
which all women, without exception, are able to lead
full lives free of any form of abuse, in particular in
contexts of violence and conflict, where they are
most vulnerable. Similarly, by way of reaffirming my
country's commitment to supporting this important
topic and agenda, Peru sponsored the resolution
adopted this morning (resolution 2242 (2015)), which
paves the way for the path to be followed in the coming
years with regard to the agenda of women and peace
and security.

