The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Ghana.

It is a great pleasure for me join the Council at
this meeting, which, in my view, has provided fresh
and welcome insights into how we can work together
to meet what we all agree is one of the foremost
challenges facing the world community in this century.
The vital role of women in building and maintaining
international peace and security has already been
forcefully brought home to us. Our shared goal remains
securing women's full and meaningful involvement in
that enterprise. Therefore, I commend the Security
Council on its leadership and its determination to bring
to fruition the goals set out in resolution 1325 (2000)
of October 2000.

I further acknowledge the important steps that
have been taken by the Secretary-General to ensure
that not only does the United Nations remain a
pacesetter in gender-mainstreaming, but that it also
extends vital support to Member States in order for
them to fulfil their obligations under resolution 1325
(2000).

Ghana welcomes the commitment shown by the
Office of the Special Adviser on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women (OSAGI), the United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM), the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO), and
the various non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
and advocacy groups that are actively promoting the
objectives enshrined in the resolution.

Like other delegations, we also attach great
importance to the issues of coordination,
accountability, monitoring and evaluation, both within
the United Nations system and in the context of
national action plans, in accordance with the
resolution. Therefore, we consider worthy of emulation
the example shown by those Governments that are far
advanced in developing national action plans aimed at
mainstreaming a gender perspective in the training of
military personnel, especially those sent on
peacekeeping missions.

Significantly, a gender perspective is also
increasingly being integrated into aid packages
designed for countries that have recently emerged from
conflict. These positive trends, in themselves,
demonstrate what could be achieved if Member States
were to commit themselves fully to the effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). As has been
repeatedly stated, the resolution provides a workable
framework for action by all stakeholders.

Much as we are encouraged by the steady
progress that has been made since the adoption of the
resolution, we believe nevertheless that the challenges
and gaps that have been highlighted during this debate
deserve serious attention.

The apparent lack of political will on the part of
some Governments, coupled with genuine financial and
human resource constraints, has contributed to the
inadequate institutional response to resolution 1325
(2000) that has been observed by various speakers.

The Secretary-General has put forward several
concrete proposals in his latest progress report on
resolution 1325 (2000) touching on a number of
priority areas. Member States, the United Nations
system and civil society actors are all called upon to
intensify their efforts towards achieving tangible
results that would be reflected in the increased
participation of women in decision-making and peace
processes, and in the protection of women and girls in
conflict situations, inter alia.

Ghana has made considerable progress in
developing the necessary legal and institutional
frameworks that can facilitate the implementation of
the resolution, including the establishment of a
Ministry for Women and Children's Affairs. Our
objective is to give due prominence and practical
meaning to the issues that remain at the heart of our
concerns. In the coming years, we shall be seeking
closer collaboration between Government and
Ghanaian civil society groups and with our respective
counterparts abroad. That is in recognition of the
benefits of global networking.

For its part, the Security Council should similarly
explore the feasibility of a follow-up mechanism that
would, in addition to the annual open debates, enable it
to monitor closely the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) in a more coordinated and systematic
fashion. As the organ with primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security, the
Council has more than a functional interest in ensuring
the equal participation and full involvement of women
in all aspects of peace and security.

The preponderance of women and girls among
the victims of human rights abuses and gender-based
violence, both during and after conflicts, poses a direct
challenge to the authority of the Security Council, but
the situation also imbues the Council's mandate with a
profound meaning. Indeed, the Secretary-General
eloquently summed it up in his 2004 report, entitled
"Women and peace and security" when he observed
that,

"Resolution 1325 (2000) holds out a promise to
women across the globe that their rights will be
protected and that barriers to their equal
participation and full involvement in the
maintenance and promotion of sustainable peace
will be removed. We must uphold this promise."
(S/2004/814, para. 121)

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Bert
Koenders, Minister for Development Cooperation of
the Kingdom of the Netherlands.

