Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Deputy Secretary-
General for her briefing and initiative to lead the joint
United Nations-African Union solidarity mission to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Nigeria and
for being personally involved in combating violence
against women. It is a daily struggle that calls for
commitment and initiative, and France will support all
ongoing efforts in that area.

I would also like to commend the efforts and
commitment of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and
of the Executive Director of UN-Women, and reiterate
our full support.

I also commend the enhanced cooperation between
the Security Council and the African Union's Peace and
Security Council, which is the focus oftoday's meeting.
In that regard, I would like to thank Ambassador Tete
Antonio for his briefing.

Today's meeting is in keeping with the Secretary-
General's cross-cutting and comprehensive approach,
which we support as it seeks to avoid the silo mentality.
We have stated on several occasions that, if we want the
United Nations to fulfil the mandate that its Member
States and peoples have conferred upon it, we must
not address issues relating to peace and security,
development and human rights separately. In that regard,
we reiterate our support for the full implementation of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and, in
particular, the goals and targets aimed at empowering
women and achieving gender equality.

Today's discussions attest in particular to the
need for the Council to take at least three issues into
more regular and systematic consideration: upholding
women's rights, combating violence against women
and, above all, encouraging their full participation in
the process to achieve sustainable peace. The consensus
today is that when we neglect half of humankind,
we are sure to see ongoing conflict. That principle
must be understood but it is also an urgent call for
greater effectiveness. Through detailed accounts by
Deputy Secretary-General's and the various missions
undertaken by the Security Council, we are well aware
that the plight of many women is closely linked to our
attempts to address threats to peace and security.

The next open debate on women and peace and
security, which will be held in October, should enable
us to offer and adopt concrete and operational solutions
in that area and to again examine the specific ways to
fully implement the eight resolutions on this agenda
that have been adopted by the Council. More must
be done to ensure that the rhetoric and commitments
so often repeated are translated into action and bring
about veritable change so that women are no longer
victims, but rather actors in their own right in their
respective societies. With regard to sexual abuse and
sexual violence, France reiterates its full support for
the Secretary-General's strategy and the zero-tolerance
policy towards those responsible for perpetrating
such abuses.

I shall now turn my attention to the two countries
the Deputy Secretary-General visited.

The situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo must capture the Council's full attention.
All efforts must be made to ensure that elections
are held and that the crucial measures to ease the
political tension outlined in the agreement reached on
31 December 2016 are implemented. Women must be
fully involved in that process. France is particularly
concerned by the violence in the Kasais, which has
reached an unsustainable level. The crisis in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will not be resolved
unless justice is served for all those who were victims
of violations of international humanitarian law and
human rights law and, in particular, women and girls.

We call on the Congolese authorities to cooperate
fully with the team of international experts set up by the
Human Rights Council in June. Those experts must have
unhindered access to the places and people concerned in
order to find those responsible for the violence. This is
a crucial step so that those responsible for the violence
can be brought to justice. We also reiterate our call for
the Secretary-General to establish a special board of
inquiry to shed light on the death of two experts who
were working with the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

Finally, we are also concerned about the
humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, which affects women in particular, as
Ms. Amina Mohammed just underscored. Long-term
solutions must be developed and implemented to
address the situation of displaced women.

Given the extent of the crimes committed by Boko
Haram against civilians in the Lake Chad basin region,
which the Council visited last year and was the subject
of discussion surrounding the issue of violence against
women, the Council recalled that it was crucial for the
security response to the terrorist group to be tethered
to a judicial response, and that it be coordinated with
neighbouring countries. Combating impunity must also
be a priority, along with respect for human rights and
international humanitarian law.

The Deputy Secretary-General can count on
France's full support for her efforts. I would like to take
this opportunity as she is here with us today to inquire
about future missions to address the plight of women
and the issue of sexual violence.

