Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka: I wish once again to
express our great appreciation to Spain for having
convened this very rich and informative dialogue. I
also wish to express my gratitude for the contribution
of the United Kingdom, which also made it possible for
resolution 2242 (2015) to be adopted unanimously. We
thank members profusely for that achievement. We also
thank the individual Member States that have presented
their efforts and initiatives to us here and who were
not shy about highlighting many of the problems they
face, while emphasizing the fact that a paradigm shift is
needed and that, as the representative of the Netherlands
said, there should be more action and less talk.

We want to emphasize, with respect to regional
organizations, whose presence is highly appreciated,
that in resolution 2242 (2015) the role of regional
organizations is mentioned at least seven times, further
pointing out the important role of such organizations.
Mass displacements caused by conflict frequently
spill across borders and have prompted an increase
in the need for regional approaches to the prevention
of conflict and to peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. We therefore welcome the collaboration
within the United Nations that we have experienced
with regional and subregional organizations, including
the African Union (AU), the European Union (EU),
NATO and the Pacific Island Forum and such
subregional organizations as the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD).
I hope that this greater collaboration will strengthen
ourjoint efforts in relation to the women and peace and
security agenda and the recommendations that have
come out of the global study.

The adoption of regional policies and action plans
on women and peace and security by ECOWAS, the
EU, IGAD, NATO and the Pacific Islands Forum
have a knock-on effect in encouraging an even greater
number of national action plans, which improves the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We also
see that the knock-on effect means that countries can
depend on each other for support.

We have seen that regional plans are effectively
implemented when there is widespread consultation
with civil society, when there is political will, when
there are adequate financial, human and technical
resources and when there is a strong framework for
monitoring and evaluation. We are also encouraged
by the appointment of high-level envoys, some of
whom were mentioned today by speakers from
various countries and regions, and we welcome the
appointment of women envoys within NATO and the
AU, whose collaboration we are already fully enjoying.
We also welcome the appointment of senior agenda
advisers by the EU and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and others, and we
encourage that trend.

The global study tells us that it can have a positive
impact when we appoint envoys who are able to assist
in driving the implementation of regional plans. Both
the NATO Special Representative for Women, Peace
and Security and the AU Special Envoy played a key
role in facilitating regional consultations for the global
study. We thank NATO, the EU, the AU and OSCE for
their support in organizing such regional consultations.

We look forward to our ongoing work in partnership
with the EU. And we look forward to our discussion
as we pursue our three-year review and as we work to
ensure that our way forward on the women and peace
and security agenda will assist us in taking collective
actions that will have an impact in all areas that we all
feel strongly about.

I also want to highlight the importance of
appointing mediators. Many countries are already
doing that, appointing and supporting networks of core
women mediators, whose numbers are increasing, and
the participation of women in tackling conflicts and in
peacemaking is increasing.

I would like to conclude by highlighting the fact
that today, as we continue this discussion, has to be seen
as a day of a paradigm shift. There was a time before
the 15-year study and there will be a time after the 15-
year study. That means that we are changing gears in
the manner in which we are doing our work, and we
support the work of the women and peace and security
agenda. We need strong, decisive, united action in order
to make sure that 16 years after the adoption of the
resolution, 17 years after the adoption of the resolution,
but long before we have reached 30 years after the
adoption of the resolution, we will be able to talk about
having achieved a great impact in the implementation of
the resolution and the active participation of both men
and women in peacemaking and in conflict prevention.

