Ms. King: It is a great pleasure and honour for
me to address this open debate of the Security Council
on conflict, peacekeeping and gender and to present
some findings, challenges and recommendations from
the Secretary-General's study on women, peace and
security mandated by the historic Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000).

I would like to pay special tribute to the President
of the Security Council for taking the initiative to
organize this debate. The linkage between gender and
peace is not new. The Mexico First World Conference
on Women - Equality, Development and Peace in
1975, through the Nairobi Forward-Looking Strategies
in 1985, the Beijing Fourth World Conference on
Women in 1995 and the Windhoek Declaration and
Plan of Action in 2000 are all historic milestones on
our way to Security Council resolution 1325 (2000).

How is this particular study unique? Its main
strength is that it is based on input from all United
Nations entities participating in the Inter-agency Task
Force on Women, Peace and Security. It benefits from a
coordinated wealth of wisdom and experience of the
United Nations system, both at Headquarters and in the
field as well as from the International Organization for
Migration (IOM), the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC), the Non-Governmental Group
(NGO) Working Group on Women, Peace and Security,
and from the distinguished former Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General (SRSG),
scholars, practitioners and women grass-roots leaders.

The study is unique as it provides the first
systematic overview of gender-related activities in the
peace and security field. It reveals the impact of armed
conflict on women and girls at every stage and
highlights the corrosive and pervasive violence against
women and girls that still exists, and often persists
after the conflict, as domestic violence and trafficking.
It spells out the role of women, and the obstacles they
face in contributing to all aspects of sustainable peace.
It also sets out concrete gender perspectives at every
phase of conflict and peace-building.

If Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) is a
blueprint for the integration of a gender perspective in
peace and security, then the study is a tool from which
practical recommendations can be drawn.

Its main conclusion is that sustainable peace and
lasting security cannot be achieved without women's
empowerment and full involvement. It unequivocally
demonstrates that women do make a difference.

The findings of two wider issues are, first, that a
mere cessation of hostilities does not bring an end to
today's intra-state conflict. Women are beginning to
transform societies by changing social institutions,
traditional gender roles, and influencing warring
parties. Secondly, lasting peace must be home-grown
and based on indigenous processes. Local women who
hold communities together during conflict bring these
experiences into peace processes and into rebuilding
their societies.

The study shows that women and girls can also be
combatants and perpetrators and, where that occurs,
they must equally be brought into the process of
disarmament, demobilization, resettlement and
capacity-building after conflict.

The challenges shown by the study are the lack of
political will to recognize women as equal partners and
insufficient understanding of how to translate gender
equality into our policies or adapt best practices.

It is surprising, on one hand, to learn how much
United Nations entities have done to develop gender
sensitive guidelines and policies, some of which you
have just heard from Mr. Guehenno. On the other hand,
it is disappointing to learn how little monitoring and
self-evaluation is carried out, even when dealing with

training, which is usually extensive but lacks follow-
up.

Among the many recommendations of the study
are that the incorporation of a gender perspective in
peace and humanitarian operations must, at all times,
have the full support of the Security Council in Council
mandates and reporting.

The Security Council and the Secretary-General
should ensure that all peace agreements and even
informal understandings include the issue of the
protection of women and children and establish
efficient mechanisms for holding parties accountable.

States in conflict, mediating States and United
Nations negotiating teams should ensure the
participation of women at all stages and at all levels of
peace processes.

All missions should have gender advisers visibly
supported by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, adequately supported and
backstopped by Headquarters in the person of a senior
gender adviser in the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO). As we have heard, where these
exist the mission has a far greater chance of being
successful. The necessary financial resources for
gender-related programmes must be part of the
mission's approved budget. The Secretariat should
maintain a database of civil society organizations, to
serve as a resource for consultations by the United
Nations.

Greater efforts should be made to increase the
percentage of women overall in policy and decision-
making positions, such as SRSGs in peace operations.

Existing inter-agency mechanisms should
promote a principled approach to gender equality,
including the sharing of effective guidelines, codes of
conduct and policies, to ensure that those violators
under the United Nations flag are brought promptly to
justice.

The Security Council should review the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) by Member
States, the United Nations system and civil society
annually.

Many other recommendations on protection
issues, humanitarian law, girl-child soldiers,
disarmament, demobilization, resettlement and
rebuilding are included in the study.

Thank you for the opportunity of addressing the
Council. I look forward to your views and guidance.

