Mr. Park In-kook (Republic of Korea): I
appreciate your special effort, Mr. President, to
09-44986
convene this open debate on women and peace and
security, focusing on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1820 (2008), which was adopted
unanimously and enjoyed a large number of sponsors,
including the Republic of Korea.

My delegation appreciates the comprehensive
report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/362) pursuant
to Security Council resolution 1820 (2008). We concur
with the analysis contained in the Secretary-General's
report and support its recommendations.

The Republic of Korea welcomes some progress
made by the States and parties concerned in their
efforts to prevent and respond to sexual violence,
especially in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Burundi, the Sudan, Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire.

Despite that progress, the overall situation with
regard to sexual violence in armed conflict remains of
serious concern. In many parts of the world, State and
non-State actors alike continue to commit violations
with impunity. As the Secretary-General's report points
out, mainly three factors, among others, have
contributed to and exacerbated sexual violence.

My delegation would like to lend a strong voice
to urging civilian and military leaders to demonstrate
the commitment and political willingness to combat
sexual violence. All commitments and pledges must be
matched by action. In most situations of armed
conflict, access to key medical, psychological and
socio-economic reintegration services is inadequate
and limited. Parties to conflict have a legal obligation
under international humanitarian law to protect and
meet the basic needs of persons within their control. In
situations where they are unwilling or unable to do so,
they must allow and facilitate the work of
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations
in providing critical life-saving humanitarian
assistance, including to victims of sexual violence.

The United Nations has a critical role to play in
assisting States in preventing sexual violence,
protecting individuals from such violence, and
punishing perpetrators while providing remedy to
victims. Currently, the United Nations system is taking
action across its main areas of work. Among these
various activities, my delegation particularly
appreciates and supports the strong advocacy campaign
and deliver-as-one efforts made under the robust
leadership of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon. We also
recognize that many efforts have been made at
09-44986

Headquarters and the field level, such as the adoption
by the United Nations Action against Sexual Violence
in Conflict of its strategic framework for the period
2009-2010; the cluster approach to humanitarian
assistance led by the United Nations Population Fund
(UNFPA) and UNICEF; and the Peacebuilding
Commission's support to States in responding to sexual
violence.

My delegation would like to highlight some areas
in which the United Nations system should redouble its
efforts in order to adequately address sexual violence
in armed conflict.

First, there should be more coherence between
peacekeeping missions and United Nations country
teams to ensure joint priorities in preventing and
responding to sexual violence. Furthermore,
peacekeeping missions, country teams and
Governments should actively explore developing a
joint Government-United Nations programme on
sexual violence, as has been done in Liberia.

Secondly, in the humanitarian field, further
coordinated action is required. The cluster approach on
a cross-sectoral basis is the right approach. Under
protection clusters, UNFPA and UNICEF are
co-leading the gender-based violence area of
responsibility. The key is the capacity of each
sub-cluster and whether it has enough expertise and
capacity to deal with sexual violence and coordinate
within the sub-cluster, as well as with other clusters. As
such, the strengthening and consolidation of cluster
capacity are urgently needed.

Thirdly, the importance of the determined role of
peacekeeping missions in addressing sexual violence
cannot be overstated. In this regard, we encourage
special envoys and representatives to pay greater
attention to the issue of sexual violence. Gender
guidelines should be provided as soon as possible to
military personnel in peacekeeping operations in order
to effectively implement resolution 1820 (2008).

Fourthly, there is gross underreporting of cases
due to fear, shame or stigma, while gathering
comprehensive information is complex in and of itself.
In order to improve data collection, clear guidance and
support should be given to peacekeeping missions and
United Nations country teams. In fact, United Nations
agencies and organizations providing services to
survivors could be an effective tool for gathering data.
United Nations actors engaged in data collection
11
should be familiar with and respect the ethical and
safety standards of the World Health Organization for
data collection on sexual violence. An additional
contribution to data collection could be made by the
Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflicts, who has benefited from the recently
strengthened mechanism of resolution 1612 (2005) on
children and armed conflict. This type of close
cooperation is to be encouraged in order to ensure that
resolutions 1612 (2005) and 1820 (2008) are
implemented in a mutually reinforcing manner.

Fifthly, the United Nations system needs a driver
dedicated to the issue of women in armed conflict,
taking responsibility across the United Nations system
to reinforce, support and help drive existing United
Nations efforts forward to address the needs and
interests of women in conflict-affected situations. This
is particularly necessary to prevent and respond to the
use of sexual violence, as well as to streamline
organizational initiatives. Of course, we will have a
strong driver on women's issues that can play such a
role once we establish a stronger gender architecture,
such as the composite entity. We sincerely hope that
such an agreement is made at the current session in
order to honour our commitment to women throughout
the world. However, even if we successfully reach a
consensus on this issue, it will take time to move the
agreement into full operational mode. We simply
cannot wait until then to have a senior figure who can
attend, with authority and focus across the United
Nations system, to the urgent issue of sexual violence.

Finally, we support the suggestion that the
Secretary-General request a follow-up report with a
proposal for a mechanism to act against parties to
armed conflict who do not comply with their
obligations under international law and against the
perpetrators of sexual violence.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to urge
the General Assembly to take a substantive decision on
the establishment of a new, strong composite entity on
gender that can guide and assist the United Nations
system and Member States in effectively implementing
their commitment to women, including their
obligations under Security Council resolutions on
women, peace and security.

The Republic of Korea looks forward to a
concrete outcome based on our discussion today and in
the future with a view to ending grave sexual violence
12
in armed conflict. We are fully committed to ensuring
the realization of the United Nations promise to women
in armed conflict.

