Mr. Kolga (Estonia): First of all, I would like
to thank the Deputy Secretary-General, Executive
Director of UN-Women Michelle Bachelet, Under-
Secretary-General Ladsous and Ms. Bineta Diop, the
representative of the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security, for their presentations.
Estonia aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union.

Women have always played a unique role in
preventing and in solving conflicts. However, it was
only 12 years ago that a resolution adopted at the
international level was dedicated solely to that issue.
Today, 12 years after the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), further implementing the principles enshrined
in the resolution remains a challenge in many parts of
the world.

We welcome the focus of today's debate on the role
of women's civil society organizations in contributing
to the prevention and resolution of armed conflict
and peacebuilding. As expressed in many statements
made here today, Estonia, too, is of the firm opinion
that the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
requires cooperation among all stakeholders: Member
States, regional and international organizations
and civil society. The role of non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) cannot be overestimated. What
could international organizations or States accomplish
if there were no support for such work on the ground?
Not much, I assume. Nevertheless, in reality, the role of
civil society organizations remains too often, if not for
the most part, unrecognized.

We find it particularly pertinent to stress the
value of engaging women's organizations and female
community leaders in all aspects of conflicts, from
prevention to post-conflict engagement. They are a
crucial factor in securing the credibility and legitimacy
of international efforts. We therefore deplore the
fact that women human rights defenders so often
become targets in conflicts. Ensuring their safety and
opportunity to be heard is of the utmost importance.

Promoting the rights of women is one of the
priorities of Estonia's foreign policy. In all aspects of
that work, special attention is paid to the participation
of women's NGOs in policymaking and peace
processes. Estonia contributes to international military
and civilian missions in countries where conflict
resolution and peacebuilding are directly linked to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and where
the inclusion of a gender dimension in the planning and
implementation of missions will enhance the efficiency
of international efforts. Estonia intends to take on even
greater responsibilities, and my country is proud to have
been elected a member of the Human Rights Council
for the next term, 2013-2015. I can guarantee that one
of our top priorities as a member of that Council will
be the promotion of women's rights and participation.
There is a growing understanding that women and
children are impacted uniquely and disproportionately
by the effects of conflicts and their aftermath. Estonia
has focused its development cooperation as well as its
humanitarian assistance and human rights activities
on supporting those vulnerable groups. We therefore
regularly contribute to international programmes
and funds, including UN-Women, the United Nations
Population Fund, UNICEF, the United Nations Girls'
Education Initiative and the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs. In fact, Estonia is proud to
announce that it is significantly increasing all of its
voluntary contributions to United Nations agencies in
2013.

We welcome the fact that, at the national level, the
number of countries that have given priority to women
and peace and security through national action plans
has continued to grow, and that 37 Member States
have already adopted national action plans. Estonia
adopted its national action plan for the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) in 2010 and has since shared
its process of preparing an action plan with other
countries. One of the most important conclusions of our
2011 implementation report is that NGOs play a crucial
role in furthering the agenda of resolution 1325 (2000).
The cooperation between the public sector and NGOs is
crucial in that regard.

Estonia welcomes the important steps taken in that
area within the framework of the United Nations in the
past two years. However, the fact that, according to
the Secretary-General's report entitled "Strengthening
the role of mediation in the peaceful settlement of
disputes, conflict prevention and resolution" (A/66/81),
only four of the United Nations negotiating party
delegations out of the 14 peace processes under way
in 2011 included a woman delegate, which shows that
there is still a lot of room for improvement. We would
therefore encourage taking steps to ensure the inclusion
of women in the ongoing peace processes. In a similar
vein, it is regrettable that, in 2011, out of the nine peace
agreements signed only two contained women and
peace and security provisions.

We fully agree with the Secretary-General that
the gender dimensions of mediation should be clearly
and consistently articulated. Indeed, it is important
to raise gender-specific issues from the onset of the
conflict analysis phase and during the earliest moments
of the peace negotiations. That can help ensure that
provisions dealing with gender equality are included in
peace accords.
We are deeply concerned that, according to the
Secretary-General's most recent report (S/2012/732),
sexual violence and the threat of sexual violence
continue to be employed as weapons of war in a range of
conflicts. In some cases, even an increase of incidents
was reported in 2011. Sexual and gender-based violence
are gross human rights violations that are present in
every armed conflict. It cannot be overemphasized how
important it is to educate and engage men and boys to
be active participants in preventing sexual violence.

Estonia remains concerned about the lack of
accountability for those who have committed gross
violations of human rights. In that context, we would
like to stress the role of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), a significant actor in the fight against
impunity for the most serious crimes of international
concern committed against women and girls. We
welcome the principles set out in the ICC's first-ever
decision on reparations, in particular the confirmation
that the needs of vulnerable victims - including
women, children and victims of sexual and gender-
based violence - must be addressed as a priority.
Reparations can be used as a vehicle to empower
women and girls and to address gender inequality, one
of the root causes of violence against women.

As a member of the UN-Women Executive
Board - which plays a significant role in contributing
to the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) - and
of the Commission on the Status of Women, we support
the objective of empowering women in society. We
fully agree with the Secretary-General that translating
norms into practice must, in the end, be measured
against real change in the lives of women, girls, boys
and men across the continuum from conflict to peace.

Finally, we have noted that, according to the
data published in the Secretary-General's report,
the information flow to the Security Council and the
Council's response to women and peace and security
concerns continue to be uneven, and we would like to
encourage the Council to pay greater attention to the
matter. In that regard, today's debate is a very good
example of affording the question of women and peace
and security the consideration it deserves.

