Ms. Jaquez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I am
grateful to France for convening this important annual
debate, which offers us a very good opportunity to
evaluate the progress and challenges of the agenda on
women and peace and security.

Mexico aligns itself with the statement made
earlier by the representative of Turkey on behalf of the
group made up of Mexico, Indonesia, the Republic of
Korea, Turkey and Australia.

It has been 17 years since the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), which represented indisputable progress
in the way in which we understand the disproportionate
consequences of armed conflicts on women and girls,
as well as the way in which we conceive women's
participation in the reconstruction of societies and
promoting the gender dimensions of peace processes.

Today we confirm that women are a central piece
in attaining sustainable peace. Women are key to
preventing conflict and maintaining inclusive societies
with a healthy social fabric. Women and girls, who
represent more than half the world's population, have
a central role to play in the prevention of conflict and
building peace. Mexico fully agrees with the findings of
the Secretary-General in his report (see S/2017/861). The
effective and cross-cutting application of that agenda
throughout the system contributes to implementing the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, preventing
conflicts and achieving sustainable peace. We support
the Secretary-General's commitment to integrate the
gender equality component as a central part of his
approach to conflict prevention, as well as the United
Nations management reform initiatives.

Mexico is convinced that the international
community must continue to promote a greater presence
ofwomen in peace negotiations, more female candidates
for high-level positions in political and peacekeeping
operations, the establishment of gender agendas for
those negotiations and the design of peacebuilding
processes with a gender perspective.

At the national level, Mexico supports and
encourages the full participation of women in all areas
of public life. There is no doubt that gender equality
and the empowerment of women are necessary to
achieve societies that are more peaceful, fair, equitable
and inclusive. The participation and empowerment of
women allows us to strengthen sustainable peace.

Through its bodies and agencies the Government
of Mexico promotes equitable representation of women
in all sectors and levels. The participation and the
involvement of a pluralistic civil society, including
feminist organizations and defenders of women's
rights, are essential to guarantee the fulfilment of those
commitments and advance our agenda on the progress
and empowerment of women and girls.

The eight resolutions adopted by the Security
Council in this area have contributed to strengthening
the norms of this agenda, but the challenge lies in
achieving its effective, coherent and cross-cutting
application throughout the Organization's system in
order to eliminate the marginalization of women that
still exists in decision-making on peace and security.
The Security Council must continue to promote efforts
to mainstream that agenda in its work, particularly in
other thematic agendas, as well as including gender and
women's protection advisers in peace operations.

In line with my country's commitment to make
progress in the fulfilment of this agenda, Mexico
deployed, in 2016, the first four Mexican military women
to United Nations peace operations. We will continue
to expand the participation of female personnel in the
near future. Likewise, given the escalation of violence
currently occurring on the international scene - and
in recognizing that crises are not neutral from the
gender perspective and that armed conflicts affect
particularly women and girls - Mexico joined the
Secretary-General's initiative on the voluntary compact
on preventing and addressing sexual exploitation and
abuse committed by United Nations personnel on
the ground.

Sustainable peace has a woman's face. Let us
make the necessary efforts to empower women and
girls, and pay special attention to the women in those
societies with deep problems in which conflicts can be
unleashed. Let us invest in women and girls as essential
promoters of peace and security.

