Ms. Azucena (Philippines): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this open debate as we mark one year since the
high-level review on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security. The
Philippines takes this opportunity once again to renew
its commitment to effectively implement this initiative
and its support for the Security Council's important
work on this matter. I also wish to thank the Secretary-
General, the Executive Director of UN-Women and our
civil society partners for their informative briefings.

The Philippines aligns itself with the statement
made on behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations, delivered earlier today by my colleague from
Thailand, and with the statement made on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Women and Peace and Security.

As the first country in Asia to develop a national
action plan, in 2010, the Philippines has been steadily
implementing the provisions of its plan on a national
scale. Our six-year national action plan has four
interrelated and complementary purposes, with
corresponding outcomes, indicators, time frames
and key implementers. The Philippines national
action plan rests on four pillars; first, protection and
prevention to ensure the protection of women's human
rights; secondly, empowerment and participation
to empower women and ensure their active and
meaningful participation in the areas of peacebuilding,
peacekeeping, conflict prevention, conflict resolution
and post-conflict reconstructio; thirdly, promotion and
mainstreaming to promote and mainstream gender
perspectives in all aspects of conflict prevention,
conflict resolution and peacebuilding; and, fourthly,
capacity development and monitoring and reporting
to institutionalize a system to monitor, evaluate and
report on the implementation of the national action plan
in order to enhance accountability for the successful
implementation and achievement of its goals.

Since the Philippines formulated the national action
plan it has focused on the localization of the four pillars
of the plan. There are now 41 provinces within conflict
zones that have developed their ow local action plans.
Identifying their own specific concerns and prioritizing
them has made the national action plan relevant to such
local areas. The Office ofthe Presidential Adviser on the
Peace Process, the co-Chair of the steering committee
of the national action plan, is committed to engaging
more local Government units to formulate their own
local action plans. The Philippines believes that States
can benefit from each other's national experiences in
enriching their own programmes. It is in that context
that the Philippines was happy to sign up to the women

and peace and security focal points network, which
was launched here in New York last September. We
thank the Government of Spain for that initiative. We
discovered that some States found our experience in
the partnership between Government and civil society
particularly useful. We believe that the focal point
network will make this sharing of experiences more
efficient and timely, and we look forward to taking
advantage of this tool.

I am also proud to announce that the Philippines is
represented in the roster of Justice Rapid Response by
three Filipino professionals, who can be requested by
the international community to investigate, analyse and
report on situations where serious human rights and
international criminal violations have been reported.
The Philippines is happy for the opportunity to
contribute its talents to the work of the women and peace
and security agenda through Justice Rapid Response.

As we now go forward in the process of negotiating
a peace agreement with the Communist Party of the
Philippines and its Front and armed group and in
implementing the peace agreement signed with two Moro
Liberation Fronts, the Philippines is committed, more
than ever, to working towards the full implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). Our Government recognizes
that that landmark international instrument is there for
Governments like ours to adhere to. Certainly, there
is a need for women to be protected as the victims
of violence and war but, as stated in resolution 1325
(2000), we further recognize that women's leadership is
critical to finding enduring solutions to destructive and
dehumanizing conflicts.

