Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like at the outset to express my heartfelt condolences
to the delegation of the Russian Federation for the
horrific terrorist act that claimed the life of the Russian
ambassador in Ankara.

I would like to congratulate the Spanish delegation
on its capable presidency of the Security Council this
month, during which it has made valuable contributions
to the work of the Council, the latest of which is
resolution 2331 (2016), adopted today, on trafficking in
persons in conflict situations. I take this opportunity to
express my gratitude to the briefers on their strong and
poignant statements this morning.

Human trafficking is a form of contemporary
slavery and constitutes a grave violation of human
rights. Countering human trafficking is one of the
priorities of the Egyptian Government, owing to the
challenges posed by Egypt's strategic location as a
transit State. These challenges have been exacerbated
by the armed conflicts that are taking place in the
region and which constitute a environment conducive
to human trafficking and exploitation, especially by
terrorist groups. The situation is further exacerbated by
the fact that Egypt is one of the countries of the region
to receive the largest number of refugees. Egypt was
therefore one of the first countries to endorse the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and the Palermo Protocol, in 2004. Egypt has
also acceded to an initiative for the establishment ofthe
Group of Friends United against Human Trafficking.

At the national level, Egypt has established
an institutional and legal framework that serves
as a mainstay for the country's undertaking of its
international obligations. In 2007, Egypt established
a national coordinating committee for preventing and
countering human trafficking, enacted in 2010 a law
designed to counter human trafficking, and this year
launched its national strategy to this end.

At the regional level, Egypt hosted in Sharm El-
Sheikh the second African Union Regional Conference
on Human Trafficking and Smuggling in the Horn
of Africa and joined the Arab Guiding Law on
Human Trafficking. We would like to commend the
constructive cooperation between Egypt and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) with
regard to capacity-building in relation to preventing
and countering of human trafficking.

The adoption by the Security Council today of a
resolution on human trafficking in conflict situations is
a landmark in the history of the Security Council. We
would like to shed light on the following points.

First of all, the resolution should be limited to
trafficking in persons related to conflicts, since the
issue of human trafficking falls within the purview of
the General Assembly.

Second, the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and the Palermo
Protocol should serve as the basis for the implementation
of the commitments set forth in the resolution, including
the definition of human trafficking and its key element
of exploitation.

Third, the international community should redouble
its efforts to shut down all sources of financing for
terrorist groups, including human trafficking, and use
all international mechanisms available.

Fourth, we have to distinguish between the crime
of sexual exploitation, which is one of the objectives of
human trafficking, and sexual violence.

Fifth, human trafficking crimes, especially in
women and girls, are not associated with any religion,
nationality or civilization. We have to shed light on the
important role that could be played by men of religion
and traditional leaders.

Sixth, we must abide by the provisions of the
Convention relating to the Status of Refugees of 1951
and its Additional Protocol, which is the governing
framework for implementing the provisions of the
resolution that has been adopted today.

Seventh, UNODC has pivotal role to play in the
General Assembly when it comes to human trafficking,
given the experience it has accumulated in this area.
In the meantime, it is very important to provide it with
the financial resources it needs to fulfil its mandate.
In addition, we underline the important role played by
the United Nations Office of the High Commissioner
for Refugees in preventing and fighting human
trafficking as well as by the International Organization
for Migration.

Eighth, we underscore the important role that
should be played by the United Nations and the private
sector to break the link between procurement and the
consumption of human trafficking.
Egypt reiterates its full support for the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking
in Persons which is considered to be the governing
framework for international cooperation in countering
human trafficking. Egypt is providing all forms of
support for the success of the second review of the plan
that will be undertaken next year.

