Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): Mr. President, we
would like to thank you for organizing today's debate
on women and peace and security, an important topic
on which we have seen significant institutional
progress in recent years. Nevertheless, the relevant
country-specific reports of the Secretary-General draw
09-44986

a grim picture of the realities on the ground. We
continue to witness the increasing victimization of
civilians in armed conflicts and sexual violence since
the adoption of resolution 1820 (2008). The number of
such incidents has increased in countries such as the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Sudan, Chad
and the Central African Republic.

We are therefore engaged in a timely debate, and
we welcome the Secretary-General's report
(S/2009/362) and the recommendations contained
therein. We hope that this debate will take us a step
further towards the implementation of resolution 1820
(2008) within the United Nations system. We would
also like to take this opportunity to emphasize that the
use of sexual violence as a method of warfare to
achieve military ends must be considered a matter of
international peace and security.

The implementation of resolutions 1820 (2008)
and 1325 (2000) is a complex and multisectoral
undertaking. We must build on the lessons learned in
connection with resolution 1325 (2000), with regard to
both the participation and the protection agendas.
Consequently, we support the creation of a specific
capacity within the Secretariat to effectively contribute
to the implementation of resolution 1820 (2008) by
coordinating the respective activities of the various
actors in the United Nations system.

It is clear that acts of sexual violence cannot
effectively be prevented without obtaining and
analyzing the relevant data. Given the complex nature
and sensitivity of data collection, we strongly support
the Secretary-General's call for all United Nations
actors to respect the ethical and safety standards of the
World Health Organization for researching, measuring
and collecting data on sexual violence. Such data
should be systematically collected and analysed by
highly qualified and trained United Nations staff.
United Nations experts should work in close
cooperation with other relevant bodies to develop
better prevention strategies and support services for
survivors.

Resolution 1820 (2008) also requires the
Secretary-General to present proposals for the effective
collection of information pertaining to the use of
sexual violence in situations of armed conflict. We also
support the Secretary-General's recommendation on
the immediate establishment of a commission of
inquiry to investigate violations of international
09-44986

humanitarian and human rights law in certain ongoing
conflicts. The proposed commission would report to
the Security Council and be supported by the Office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights.

The goal would be to ensure accountability, bring
the perpetrators of such crimes to justice and prevent
the commission of similar crimes. The primary
responsibility in this respect must lie with the State
concerned, and the involvement of international
mechanisms and institutions must occur only where
national judiciaries are not available or unable to
effectively combat impunity.

In this respect, the central role of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) must also be taken
into account. The ICC, which has already proven to
have a preventive effect on the ground, plays a key role
in the fight against impunity, in particular where States
are unable or unwilling to prosecute acts of sexual
violence that can also qualify as war crimes or as
crimes against humanity.

Finally, we would like to add that we support the
idea of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
initiating a pilot project, based on its successful child
protection adviser system, to improve the United
Nations response to sexual violence. Such advisers
have proven to be extremely productive and effective.

The Department of Peacekeeping Operations
could consider deploying women protection advisers
who would document sexual violence and help
survivors get better access to assistance and follow-up
support and protection. These advisers would report
back to the Department, as well as to other relevant
United Nations and non-United Nations partners on the
ground, and they would serve as focal points for
information-sharing and coordination among all
sectors. We believe that such a mechanism would be an
important step towards implementation of resolution
1820 (2008).

