Mr. Seruhere (United Republic of Tanzania): We
welcome this open debate of the Security Council on
women and peace and security. We thank the Secretary-
General for his briefing and for his annual report
entitled "Sexual violence in conflict" ( S/2013/l49).

We also thank Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, for her presentation, as well as
Ms. Saran Keita Diakite.

The international community has made considerable
strides since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).
Through it and subsequent resolutions adopted by this
body, the international community has committed itself
to ending the pain and distress affecting women and
girls who are subjected to sexual violence in conflict
and post-conflict situations.

It is a matter of concern that, despite our determined
efforts, women and girls continue to suffer from the
abhorrent crimes perpetrated by armed groups and by
national authorities whose duty is to shield civilians
from harm.

Instead of diminishing, conflict-related sexual
violence is on the rise, and it increasingly involves men
and boys as perpetrators employ sexual violence as a
tactic of war and as a punishment and interrogation
technique.

Impunity of that nature is a great challenge to
our collective resolve. It is in clear contempt of the
values we have committed to uphold. We must do more
at national, regional and international levels to end
impunity, by demonstrating to perpetrators that such
crimes will not go unpunished.

Perpetrators of sexual-based violence must be
prosecuted and tried by competent national courts or
tribunals. Where that is not feasible - as is often the
case in conflict and most post-conflict situations - the
States concerned should be willing to surrender suspects
to international criminal courts and tribunals to face
trial.

The international criminal justice system, despite its
shortcomings, has had its merits, including offering an
elaboration of sexual violence as capable of constituting
a crime against humanity, a war crime and an act of
genocide. The indictment of leaders of armed groups
by the International Criminal Court (ICC) - such
as those of Joseph Kony, Bosco Ntaganda, Sylvestre
Mudacumura and others - is a step towards ending
impunity, however moderate it is.

We encourage supporting and strengthening
the ICC, with the View to broadening its reach and
acceptability, for it has been of immense value to the
international community. Needless to say, it is the
only international criminal justice mechanism that we
have at our disposal for fighting pervasive impunity. It
deserves to be commended, not to be maligned.

While prosecution is critical in ending impunity,
we must also continue to address its root causes. We
must resolve conflicts by reconciling warring parties
and encouraging dialogue, rather than by employing
military solutions. Ifnecessary, negative forces must be
neutralized, demobilized and reintegrated into society.

The reconstruction of post-conflict countries must
be undertaken in an inclusive manner so that the process
is owned by all parties to a conflict. We have witnessed
the consequences of excluding some armed groups
from disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
and security sector reform programmes.

We must do more to empower women and girls
to participate in peace and security processes, as well
as decision-making roles in conflict prevention and
conflict resolution. We are encouraged by the increasing
number of female military and police peacekeepers.
The United Republic of Tanzania contributes more than
200 such courageous women to such missions. It is our
goal to contribute more in the future, in the spirit of
resolution 1325 (2000).

We must find effective ways to respond to the needs
of the survivors of sexual violence. The United Nations
Action multi-partner trust fund is pivotal in that regard.
We encourage Member States and other partners to
contribute to the fund.

Let me conclude by underscoring the unswerving
commitment of the United Republic of Tanzania to
ending violence against women, men and children
wherever and by whosoever committed. We renew
our commitment to the regional and international
instruments to which we are parties in order to achieve
that noble objective. We will continue to support the
United Nations Action against Sexual Violence in
Conflict.

