Mr. Bermudez Alvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I wish to thank Germany for
organizing this open debate. Uruguay aligns itself with
the statements to be delivered by the representatives of
Canada, on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women,
Peace and Security, and of the State of Qatar, on behalf
of the Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect.

Today's speakers have depicted a tragic and
devastating state of affairs. Sexual violence, which
is perpetrated by non-State armed groups and
Government forces, continues to prevail in conflict
situations and is often systematically used as a tactic
of war and terrorism. Sadly, despite efforts, it has not
been possible to stamp out that crime, which violates
the most basic principles of human dignity. We must
therefore undertake effective action to combat such
activity. Resolution 2467 (2019), proposed by Germany,
covers a wide range of provisions that will allow for
progress against sexual violence and breath a new lease
of life into the women and peace and security agenda.
That is why Uruguay chose to co-sponsor the resolution.

The most effective way to combat sexual violence
in conflict is through prevention. The common
denominator of sexual violence is that it finds fertile
ground where there are pre-existing patterns of
inequality and discrimination. States must therefore
take measures to promote respect for Victims' rights and
foster access to education, work and decision-making
processes for women.

Uruguay believes that that requires ongoing efforts
to strengthen progress, including by peaceful countries.
With that in mind, laws relating to human trafficking,
sexual violence and other violations of human rights,
as well as the care and reparation of Victims, were
recently adopted in Uruguay. All of those issues will
be included in the next national action plan on women
and peace and security, which will also establish new
future goals. Moreover, Uruguay will present its tenth
periodic report to the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women in 2020.

When prevention fails, it is essential that States
equip themselves with effective mechanisms that allow
for victim recovery. In particular, they must provide
medical assistance that includes comprehensive sexual
and reproductive health services, such as access to
emergency contraception, the safe termination of
pregnancy and the prevention and treatment of HIV, as
well as psychological care that allows victims to cope
with trauma. Programmes for effective reintegration
into society must also be provided.

All of those measures need to be victim-centred
and address the specific needs of different groups,
such as women and girls and men and boys who have
been victims of sexual violence, children born out
of war, refugees and stigmatized and marginalized
communities, including lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender and intersex individuals - a group that
is especially susceptible to that type of violence.
Accountability is another priority. Governments must
exert efforts to strengthen their justice systems and
ensure the prosecution of perpetrators, both nationally
and internationally, and must promote the reporting of
such crimes.

There are very few weapons with the same
destructive capacity and devastating effect on social
structures as sexual violence. We must therefore
address the issue together. States have the primary
responsibility to prevent sexual violence, but the
seriousness of such crimes, their complex causes and
serious and persistent consequences require the support
of the international community.

Uruguay values the fundamental role of civil
society organizations that help victims and emphatically
condemns the threats and attacks perpetrated against
them. My country also wishes to express its support
for the work of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and
her dedicated team.

The Security Council, for its part, has a fundamental
role to play. It must use all the tools at its disposal to
eradicate sexual violence in conflict, ensuring that
the topic is examined in its sanctions committees
and that they systematically include the names of the
perpetrators of such crimes on their lists. It must also
refer such cases to the International Criminal Court and
include the prevention of those crimes in the mandates
of its peace missions.

Uruguay has set an imperative to collaborate with
the Security Council as much as possible in order to
ensure the proper functioning of peace operations,
including troop training before deployment in the areas
of human rights and international humanitarian law,
with an emphasis on protecting children and on sexual
and gender-based violence.

Uruguay is ofthe view that further concerted action
among the various bodies, agencies and mechanisms
of the United Nations would be beneficial, within the
framework of their respective powers to strengthen
research initiatives and ensure accountability.

To conclude, the moving stories of Ms. Nadia
Murad and Dr. Denis Mukwege are vivid and first-
hand reminders of the reason why we must all fulfil our
responsibility to combat sexual violence in all its forms.
For every survivor's shocking story, there are many
silent stories of anonymous victims who are waiting for
us to put an end to those crimes. The time has come to
show them that they are not waiting in vain.

