Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka: It is an honour for me
to address the Security Council and speak on the
Secretary-General's report on women and peace and
security (S/2018/900).
I thank Bolivia for all the support it has given us in
preparing for today's debate.

The Secretary-Genera's report sounds a loud
alarm bell on systemic failures to bring women into
peacemaking in a meaningful manner. Trends show
that women are being excluded from peace processes.
Those who do not wage war seem to be disqualified
from making peace, while those who may be implicated
in making war tend to find it easy to be at the peace table.

I, together with representatives from the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, have just
come back from a joint United Nations/African Union
mission to South Sudan. The women we met there told
us that they long for peace and to resume their lives.
Their nearly five years of suffering from a civil war,
which they kept on repeating they were not responsible
for waging, was taking a toll on them, and they said,
"we are here because we want to reconcile even though
we have never quarrelled."

While they still fear for the future, they appreciated
the Revitalized Agreement on the resolution of the
conflict, which offers new hope for the country and an
unmissable opportunity to build peace, with a 35 per
cent quota for the representation of women. Their fears
are bolstered, however, by the fact that, in these early
days of the Revitalized Agreement, there is just one
woman among the 10 persons nominated to be members
of the National Pre-Transitional Committee, which is
not the agreed 35 per cent.

The report today inescapably details how that is not
an exception but the rule. How there is at the same time
hope for progress, and how we are failing to make this
hope a reality. Nevertheless, we can never and must not
lose hope. It shows us an undeniable possibility with
undeniable failures, which are costing the lives of
women and girls, who, as we have said, suffer and die
from a war they are not waging.

A year ago, in this Chamber, I raised the alarm at
the numbers shown by the indicators we track year on
year with regard to peace processes and mediation (see S/PV.8079). Today, I want to raise the alarm once more,
with the hope that it will jolt us into greater action.
Indicators show that we have stagnated or dropped
again. For that reason, we have focused this year's report
on the need for women's meaningful contribution to
peace. We call on all of us to make sure that we take the
much-needed concrete actions. We need the Security
Council to be vigilant about the ending of superficial
efforts to include women that do not genuinely extend
the opportunity to influence outcomes. We also want
to show that the extreme political marginalization at
peace tables is often worse in the institutions set up to
implement these agreements.

And we wanted to spotlight the many ways in
which women keep on being active and resilient.
Women in the front lines are negotiating ceasefires,
civilian safe zones, the demobilization of fighters and
humanitarian access at the local level. In Syria, Yemen,
Afghanistan and the Central African Republic, they are
drawing up protection plans at the community level.
We want the States Members of the United Nations to
pay due attention to these dynamics, make them visible
in forums like the Security Council, and use them to
support women's political agency, provide financial
resources and enable women to do even more. The
continued tolerance for the limited recognition of
women's expertise and lived experience is a setback for
all of us.

Statistics on women's involvement speak for
themselves. Onthis issue, the report offers more numbers:
between 1990 and 2017, under our watch, women
constituted only 2 per cent of mediators, 8 per cent of
negotiators and 5 per cent of witnesses and signatories
in major peace processes. Only three of 11 agreements
signed in 2017 contained provisions on gender equality,
continuing last year's worrisome downward trend. Of
the 1,500 agreements signed between 2000 and 2016,
only 25 elevate the role of women in terms of their
engagement in the implementation phase.

In Yemen, current efforts at resuming dialogue do
not include women, beyond setting up observer bodies
to advise the United Nations Special Envoy. Even in a
consultative meeting in London this summer organized
by the United Nations and convening 22 prominent
Yemeni leaders to discuss the peace talks, only three
Yemeni women were invited.

In Mali, women average a dismal 3 per cent of the
membership of the multiple national committees set up
to monitor and implement the Peace Agreement.

In the Central African Republic, mediation efforts
are focused on the presidency and the 14 armed groups.
They, too, exclude women altogether.

In Afghanistan, the Government and its international
partners invest efforts in including women in the High
Peace Council and provincial peace councils, but when
it comes to actual talks with the Taliban, the absence of
women is noticeable. Undeniably, there are possibilities,
but there are also undeniable failures, and there are also
determined women. In the 23 rounds of Afghanistan-
Taliban peace talks held between 2005 and 2014, women
were at the table just twice. Now that there are offers
to resume peace talks without preconditions, Afghan
women peacebuilders want to be at the table, and they
want to make a difference.

Finally, a positive number: Security Council
decisions about country-specific or regional situations
that contain language on women and peace and security
increased from 50 to 75 per cent. This must lead to
increased action on the front lines. The number of
women leaders and civil-society representatives who
briefed the Security Council also increased significantly.
I thank Council members for these efforts and their
continued participation in the Informal Expert Group
on Women, Peace and Security, currently co-chaired
by Sweden and Peru, in collaboration with the United
Kingdom. But we need to use all available diplomatic
channels and political influence to ensure that these
decisions in New York are making a difference on the
ground, because this is simply not happening in the
most meaningful way.

The bigger picture of gender inequality in conflict
and post-conflict countries is something we need to
continue to watch. Today's report gives us a broad
picture of the many remaining areas where challenges
remain to reaching equal representation of women in
the vital processes of our nations. For example, only
16 per cent of parliamentarians in conflict-affected and
post-conflict countries are women, the same percentage
as last year and the year before. There is 20 per cent
representation in countries that use quotas and just
12 per cent in countries that do not. It is for that reason
that we appreciate the fact that our Secretary-General is
leading from the front, and we call for special measures

to be taken regarding the manner in which we are
driving the parity process within the United Nations.

The Council just visited the Democratic Republic
of the Congo ahead of crucial elections. Only 12 per
cent of registered candidates are women, just as in the
previous elections seven years ago, and women are
suffering from intimidation. Of the 17 countries that
have elected a woman Head of State or Government,
none are post-conflict countries at this point. I will say
this again, as I did last year: we need to heed the call
and address the patterns that these numbers show us.

On our part, we will continue to follow up with the
Council on how we can together address the situation
with greater vigilance and make a significant difference.

It is not only women whose opportunities are being
limited. In many conflict settings, girls are one and a
half times more likely to be out of primary school, and
whole communities therefore experience setbacks. The
number of children lacking education in conflict areas
calls for a concentrated response and solution involving
schools and second-chance education.

Child marriage rates are also affected by war. In
Yemen, the rate of child marriage was 66 per cent in
2017, 52 per cent last year and 32 per cent before the
recent conflict erupted.

Unsurprisingly but tragically, in conflict and
post-conflict countries maternal mortality rates are
almost twice the global rate. Of the 830 women and
adolescent girls who die every day from causes related
to pregnancy and childbirth, 507 die in countries that
are considered fragile because of conflict and disaster.
To address these issues and support the regeneration of
families and communities, we need strong and targeted
investments in women in conflict areas. This is just not
happening enough, despite the undeniable goodwill
towards the women and peace and security agendas in
conflict-affected countries.

This clear gender inequality in women's access
to resources is not caused simply by the presence of
conflict. It is also a reflection of the non-prioritization
of women's needs and the relegation of women to small-
scale and local peripheral initiatives. In the Sahel,
where we visited with the Deputy Secretary-General,
African Union representatives and Minister Wallstrom,
we saw the dire poverty of the women and community
in the Lake Chad basin. We saw households with no
electricity in the part of the world that has the highest
penetration of the sun on Earth and is more suitable
than anywhere else in the world for sustainable-energy
generation from solar power. Yet clinics lack power and
women have no cold storage for their fish or for the
fresh produce needed for food security, which in some
cases contributes to peace and security more than the
efforts of the military.

In conflict-affected countries, only 11.5 per cent
of landholders are women. Although bilateral aid to
promote gender equality in fragile country situations
rose by 17 per cent compared with the previous year,
it still amounts to only 5 per cent of the total bilateral
aid spent on programmes with gender equality as the
primary objective. In the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, for example, aid from the Development
Assistance Committee of the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development allocated
to the promotion of gender equality was only $8 per
capita last year. The same year, the United Nations
documented a 56 per cent increase in sexual violence.

The share of the aid channeled through
non-governmental women's organizations has
stagnated. Our financial commitments just do not
match the extent to which we rely on these groups. Yet
there has been undeniable progress because the number
of actions to be taken and the collaboration intended
with civil society continue to be favoured as a way to
operate; however, this must also translate into concrete
action and better investment in such groups.

Civil-society and women's organizations have been
failed in the midst of record-breaking numbers of side
events at intergovernmental meetings. Our plea is to
refocus our energies and resources. I believe that there
is goodwill, and we all want what is best for women
and girls. Even as we have disappointing indicators on
women and girls, global military spending has reached
$1.74 trillion, a 57 per cent increase since 2000. Some
countries allocate more public money to the military
than to education or health. Ninety per cent of grass-
roots women's organizations working in areas directly
impacted by terrorism and violent extremism state that
current counter-terrorism measures have an adverse
impact on the work for peace, women's rights and
gender equality.

We must respond to the many violations against
the human rights of women and girls within violent
groups and to the social stigma, economic hardship
and discrimination that women and girls experience
when returning to their homes and communities when
they have been part of such a group. These challenges
are best addressed by actions that protect and promote
the rights of victims and are fundamentally based in
human rights law. Women human rights defenders
are on the front lines and are fighting a lonely battle.
Many die a lonely death from weapons that are meant
to protect them.

Let us look ahead with hope and the knowledge of
what we are capable of doing together. This includes
what we can do with women, such as the African
Women Leaders Network, which has been given a
boost by the support of the German Government, and
the focal points have already been established in 30
African countries.

We are already gearing up for the twentieth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), which will be
an opportunity to shape the agenda for the next decade
with new commitments and priorities. We have to start
now to gear up for better results. We need more positive
signs, such as those I saw in Somalia, where we need
to help to accelerate the positive change. There will be
opportunities for everyone to weigh in, including at
next year's meeting of the Women, Peace and Security
Focal Points Network in Windhoek, which will carry a
special symbolism for those who have been part of this
movement for a while.

For now, I want to share three priorities for 2020.
This August, we mourned the loss of Kofi Annan.
Part of his legacy was that the United Nations debated
and decided to stop supporting peace agreements that
included blanket amnesties. I think that, two decades
later, it is time for the United Nations to have a similar
conversation about supporting, brokering and paying
for peace negotiations that exclude women. This issue
is in the Council's hands. It was raised by women from
civil society at the forum the Council was invited to
earlier this week, at the initiative of Sweden.

Secondly, one of the many positive examples in the
report is the Peacebuilding Fund's steadily growing
support to projects advancing gender equality and
women's empowerment. Finding ways to make the
15 per cent minimum target a reality across all relevant
entities and other peace and security funds is another
important take that we can focus on going forward. Of
course, joint programming on the rule oflaw in conflict
and post-conflict areas, addressing the educational and
economic resilience of women and multi-partner trust
funds in fragile settings should be at the start of all
conversations about financing.

Finally, we need to do much more to protect women
activists, peacebuilders and human rights defenders in
conflict-affected countries. We applaud the historic
participation of Palestinian women, representing
civil society, in addressing the Security Council for
the first time. We commend the Nobel Peace Prize
Committee for recognizing Dr. Denis Mukwege and
Ms. Nadia Murad for their advocacy on behalf of
victims of wartime sexual violence. It is an example
of the importance of this issue, to which my colleague
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Pramila Patten, devotes all her time and energy.

I have met many exceptionally courageous women
in my many recent travels to Somalia, South Sudan and
the Sahel, and my visit with Rohingya women refugees
was no exception. Many of them are here today, but
many could not be here.

In 2017, half of the women honoured in the annual
tribute of the Association for Women in Development
were murdered in conflict-affected countries, but the
list is much longer when we include women political
leaders, journalists, justice actors, security sector
personnel, those perceived to be lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender and intersex persons or who challenge
traditional gender roles by simply being involved in
public life. It is my strong wish that we will find the
political will to do much more about the epidemic of the
killing of women, which we have seen over this decade
as it comes to a close.

Change is in our hands. Let us work for positive
indicators for the next report, and let us make sure that
the next report of the Secretary-General will be able to
show that we are turning the corner.

