Ms. Pulido Santana (Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I wish at the outset to express our gratitude
to the members of the Council for allowing us to take
the floor at this important meeting. I congratulate the
President of the Council, Ambassador Martin Belinga-
Eboutou, for his very positive work in conducting the
proceedings of this important organ. I also wish to
express our appreciation to the Secretary-General, to
Ms. Angela King, Special Advisor on Gender Issues
and the Advancement of Women, and to the Secretariat
staff who have worked on the development of this
important report.

We are pleased with the holding of this meeting,
given the great importance Venezuela attaches to the
item on women and the inclusion of the gender
perspective in all activities aimed at contributing to the
pursuit of peace and security, particularly those that
relate to women's participation and their contribution
to achieving sustainable development through equal
opportunity, based on the understanding that those
activities should also be viewed as conditions for the
achievement of peace and security.

While we note that considerable time has elapsed
between the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) and the
recent submission of this important report, we must
also acknowledge that during that time there have been
new developments, and incorporation of the gender
perspective has been opening up new avenues. At a
time when peacekeeping operations and the treatment
of armed conflict are giving greater attention to the role
of women, the publication of this report is most timely
and welcome. We note today that the Organization has
provided more space for the gender perspective in most
of the priorities reflected in the Millennium
Declaration. That is an important step forward.

Venezuela believes that gender equality and the
advancement of women are topics whose treatment is
the task of the General Assembly and the Commission
on the Status of Women of the Economic and Social
Council. However, we welcome this initiative of the
Security Council to take up, pursuant to resolution
1325 (2000), the specific item of women, peace and
security, because we understand that this initiative falls
within the spirit of cooperation among the main organs
of this Organization and that it is part of the broad
implementation process of one of the 12 critical action
areas identified in the Beijing Platform for Action,
adopted by the international community in the
specialized conferences on women.

The report before us today is concise and specific
in its recommendations. It is a valuable and important
source of guidance for understanding the present
position of women and girls as persons particularly
affected by situations of armed conflict, and to identify
areas that require special attention, given their status as
women and girls. The report is a useful listing of the
various areas in which the United Nations should
expand and adopt specific measures.

In this regard, we believe that the implementation
of some of these recommendations will undoubtedly
make it possible to discourage the culture of violence
and discrimination against women and girls as they are
gradually incorporated into the process of planning,
policy-making and implementation of all peacekeeping
operations, humanitarian activities and post-conflict
reconstruction activities.

In this context, and in the framework of the
process of increased awareness of and greater respect
for human rights, we attach particular importance to
the need to provide a legal basis for offenses related to
violence against women, and to the possibility of
providing compensation to women and girls affected by
sexual violence. We value highly the recommendations
pertaining to the role of women in the reconstruction
and rehabilitation stages, as well as in the processes of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, in the
light of the fact that women, as active players in post-
armed-conflict situations, can increase their
contribution to such processes.

Clearly, the implementation of all of these
recommendations implies the strengthening of
coordination and greater integration among the organs
involved in all of these initiatives relating to the
consolidation and maintenance of peace, humanitarian
operations and reconstruction processes.

We should also strengthen and pay due attention
to the structures and mechanisms provided for in the
framework of the United Nations that aim to ensure
that the gender perspective is systematically
incorporated in all activities relating to peace and
security. This should include, as the Secretary-
General's report repeatedly stresses, the compilation of
data on various situations involving violations of the
rights of women and girls, which would make possible
an analysis that closely reflects the real situation,
identifying those areas in which training and better
preparation are needed in order to achieve the goals of
the report.

Against that backdrop, we regret that the
International Research and Training Institute for the
Advancement of Women (INSTRAW), despite its being
the only United Nations organ that has a specific
mandate to address gender issues and the training of
women, was not consulted in the elaboration of the
report of the Secretary-General. We believe that,
because INSTRAW has a specific mandate in these
areas, its valuable work should be taken into account
and it should be strengthened, given adequate resources
and enabled fully to reach its goals with respect to the
role of women in the achievement of the broader goal
of peace and security.

