Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia): I welcome the adoption
of resolution 2242 (2015), of which Estonia was a
sponsor. I align myself with the statement made by the
observer of the European Union.

Resolution 1325 (2000) was a game-changer for
women and peace and security. I want to thank you,
Mr. President, and the Secretary-General for organizing
today's debate to underline the importance of the issue.

The year 2015 has given the international
community an unparalleled opportunity to reiterate
the importance of the implementation of women's and
girls' rights. We are celebrating today 15 years since
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) and, recently,
20 years since the adoption of the Beijing Declaration
and Platform of Action. In addition newly adopted
Sustainable Development Goals (resolution 70/1)
encourage us to take a look at how women are affected
by each of the 17 Goals.

The parallel review of resolution 1325 (2000)
and United Nations peacekeeping operations and
peacebuilding efforts has led to an invaluable
opportunity to create a more holistic approach to
conflict prevention. Paired with more focused attention
on the role of women in society as well as in peace and
security, the international community has a unique
opportunity to effectively address the challenges the
agenda faces.

Much has changed in the world during past 15 years.
The number of conflicts has increased significantly,
and we face new threats. One of the key challenges we
face is the implementation gap. The Security Council
should strengthen its own commitment to the effective
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda. However, it is the primary responsibility of each
Member State to make sure that women are included
from the very beginning in conflict prevention, peace
operations planning and conflict resolution.

Estonia is committed to implementing resolution
1325 (2000) and is currently in the process of adopting
its second national action plan. Changes do not happen
overnight. We therefore have to focus on raising
awareness on the women and peace and security agenda
from the grass-roots level to that of international
cooperation. We strongly support the inclusion of the
gender perspective in the mandates of the operations
and missions, and their implementation and evaluation,
in the international organizations of which we are
members. In parallel, we must continue to fight
against impunity, especially against sexual violence in
conflicts.

Estonia continues to support the rights ofwomen and
girls within the framework of development cooperation,
with special attention being paid to women's access to
education and health care. Empowered educated women
are more likely to be active in local communities and
participate in peace processes and conflict prevention.
This year provides us with a unique opportunity to give
an additional impetus to realizing our previously set
goals - let us not lose the momentum.

