Ms. Oehri (Liechtenstein): We reiterate our strong
support for the women and peace and security agenda.
The adoption of eight resolutions on the topic by the
Securit Council reflects the important progress we
have made in this area. However, we are still very far
from achieving the goals we set for ourselves, and have
to tackle a significant gap between decisions on paper
and the reality on the ground.

The data in the latest report (S/2017/861) of
the Secretary-General point to significant barriers
in women's meaningful participation in mediation
processes. The full participation of women in
mediation is essential to achieving sustainable peace.
Root causes to conflicts cannot be fully addressed, and
societal traumas cannot be overcome, when half of the
population is excluded from peace processes. In addition,
women often shoulder a large share of responsibility
in communities during conflict and recovery, which
makes their participation even more important.

Access to justice is a crucial component of
peaceful, just and inclusive societies, as reflected in
Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 16. But structural
inequalities, poverty and discrimination often hinder
women's access to justice and security, as well as
transitional justice processes. Gender-responsive legal
and judicial systems are fundamental for building and
sustaining resilient societies. Liechtenstein is proud to
be a member of the pathfinders for peaceful, just and
inclusive societies, which lead on the implementation
of SDG 16 and provide a basis for exchange of best
practices in that area.

The latest report (S/2017/249) of the Secretary-
General on conflict-related sexual violence documents
19 situations, involving 46 parties to conflict, of
committing or instigating patterns of rape and other
forms of sexual violence. While women and girls are
particularly vulnerable to becoming victims of such
violence in conflict situations, men and boys are also
targeted. It is well documented that, among other
purposes, armed forces or groups, including groups
involved in violent extremism, recruit both girls and
boys for sexual purposes. Moreover, men and boys
often represent the majority of detainees during armed
conflict and are highly vulnerable to sexual violence.
A prevailing culture of silence and harmful stereotypes
oftens prevent male victims from coming forward,
which further reduces the prospects for accountability.

Transitional justice mechanisms often adopt
a gender-binary interpretation of sexual violence,
identifying women as victims and men as perpetrators.
As a consequence, male survivors face limited or no
access to important reparations and psychosocial
and medical services. At the same time, stereotyping
women as victims can hinder them in fully using their
potential to live life in dignity.

Sexual and gender-based violence can constitute
crimes against humanity and war crimes and, in
specific circumstances, elements of genocide. Those
are the core crimes under the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court, which is the centrepiece
of our common fight against impunity for serious crimes
under international law. The most efficient protection
against conflict-related sexual violence is ensuring that
it does not happen in the first place.

Liechtenstein commends the Secretary-General
for his focus on prevention and would like to recall
that 114 States have signed the code of conduct of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency Group
on Security Council action against genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes - pledging to
support timely and decisive action to prevent and end
such crimes. We call on the remaining States to join
the code of conduct, and thereby help ensure that the
Council delivers on its mandate to protect civilians
from mass atrocities.

