Mr. Puri (India): I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for organizing this debate.

There is a saying that all that is necessary for evil
to continue is for good men to do nothing. My
delegation believes that the community of nations must
ensure that the human rights of all are respected.
Universal respect for human rights is, in our view, the
basis of the common and better future that we seek to
build.

The weakest are the biggest victims of conflict
and, as the Secretary-General points out in his report
(S/2010/604), women continue to suffer appallingly in
conflicts. Sexual violence is, according to the report,
not merely a consequence of conflict but a driver. It
perpetuates conflict and locks its victims into a vicious
cycle of violence and oppression. The international
community has not just the responsibility, but also the
obligation to do its utmost to ensure the security of
women and children.

Two important strands of international concern
converge in this debate. These are the struggle to
empower women and the constant endeavour of the
United Nations to preserve peace and international
security.

The struggle to empower women has moved
forward from declaratory resolutions. The Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action, the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women and the Commission on the Status of
Women have been milestones in that journey.

I was myself proactively involved in the creation
of UN Women. We have very high expectations from
that entity.

No country can be absolved from the
responsibility of acting against sexual violence, one of

the more abhorrent forms of violence against women.
My delegation is committed to international regimes
that further those objectives.

The proceedings of the Council today will add to
the edifice created by resolutions 1325 (2000), 1612
(2005), 1820 (2008), 1882 (2009) and 1888 (2009).
Those and other decisions of the Security Council on,
inter alia, sexual violence, children and the protection
of civilians have led to a significant addition to the
corpus of international law.

We welcome the appointment of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Margot Wallstrom.

Thanks to the resolve of the international
community the operational and peacekeeping activities
of the United Nations has been oriented towards
recognizing the plight of women and children in
conflict areas and being proactive in working towards
preventing violence against them. India supports those
developments.

The resolution that was adopted yesterday
(resolution 1960 (2010)) and which we sponsored, will
add a number of new dimensions to the ongoing work.
While the objectives of that framework are laudable, its
implementation remains a work in progress. We will,
during our term on the Council, remain seriously
engaged with both the evolution of the normative side
and its implementation.

The monitoring and reporting mechanism, which
is to provide the data on the basis of which the system
is to operate, needs close supervision by Member States
to ensure its veracity and credibility. Data collection
and analysis, as well as listing and de-listing, should be
carried out in a transparent and judicious manner under
the close supervision of Member States.

The Security Council must ensure that the
resources needed to implement its mandates are
available. United Nations missions are being asked to
do more with less. For example, the resolution that was
just adopted will expand the mandate without
expanding already inadequate resources.

Being the largest troop-contributing country in
United Nations history, with more than 100,000
peacekeepers in 40 United Nations missions, India has
perhaps more experience than most in implementing
Security Council mandates. It is indeed Indian troops,
along with the peacekeepers of fellow troop-
contributing countries, who convert the intent of this
Council into deed.

We take great pride in the stellar record of our
peacekeepers, both men and women, in the protection
of women, children and the weak. Indian troops have
apprehended some of the principal culprits behind the
recent sexual violence in the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We can do much more if more
resources are made available.

Martin Luther King once said that injustice
anywhere diminishes justice everywhere. We believe
that the perpetrators of those crimes must be brought to
justice. Relevant national capacities must be
strengthened.

The Secretariat and the funds and programmes can
do more. We believe that greater participation by women
in the areas of conflict prevention, peace negotiations,
peacekeeping and post-conflict reconstruction is an
essential prerequisite for lasting peace and security.

We believe that women's protection advisers have
a key role to play in implementation, and we would be
happy to contribute such personnel. We value the
contributions of civil society in that arena.

I am a member of the Sikh faith. Four centuries
ago, Guru Gobind Singh, at a time when conditions in
India were unstable and conflict-ridden, ordered us to
treat women captured in battle with the greatest
respect. That is the Indian ethos in respect of women,
particularly during situations of conflict. That is what
we are committed to and what we will uphold.

