Ms. Anderson (Ireland): Thank you for giving
me the opportunity to speak today. I asked to do so
because of my co-facilitation, together with my
colleagues from Mexico and South Africa, of the 2010
review of the United Nations peacebuilding machinery
(S/2010/393). I understand that the Security Council
would hope to adopt a resolution on the review later
this month to coincide with adoption of an identical
resolution in the General Assembly. Since a further
debate on peacebuilding is not envisaged by the
Council in the course of the month, this seems likely to
be the only opportunity for the co-facilitators to
address the Council on the subject of the review.

Before turning to the review, I will avail myself
of the occasion to underline my country's strong
endorsement of the Secretary-General's report
(S/2009/466) on women's participation in
peacebuilding, and particularly the seven-point action
plan which is at the core of the report. Each of the
seven commitments is individually important; their
collective impact promises to be truly significant. The
analysis in which the commitments are grounded is of
impressive quality and the report as a whole is clear
and compelling.

As I said, my specific reason to take the floor
relates to the report on the review of peacebuilding,
which was presented by the co-facilitators some
12 weeks ago, on 19 July. The report runs to around
40 pages. In an Organization struggling with paper
overload, not everyone around this table may have had
the time to read the whole report. Today's discussion,
therefore, is an opportunity to highlight aspects of
particular relevance to the Security Council.

In establishing a context for my remarks on these
specific aspects, it is important to underline the
approach followed in preparing our report. As
emphasized by my colleague from Mexico, the process
was a very open and consultative one, with a real sense
of common purpose among all who contributed. That
common purpose is simply stated: to help the United
Nations peacebuilding machinery to fulfil its potential
so as to better carry out the role envisaged by world
leaders when they came together at the 2005 World
Summit.

As co-facilitators, we tried throughout to keep
faith with the spirit of the process: to analyse the issues
with honesty and propose implementable
recommendations. Where perspectives differed among
those providing inputs, we sought to define approaches
that could keep the membership together while meeting
the basic test of strengthening the peacebuilding
architecture. And indeed, these two objectives should
not be seen in juxtaposition to each other: the
peacebuilding machinery will work most effectively
when it has the goodwill and active support of the
breadth of the membership behind it.

This is obviously not the occasion to cover the
detail across the various chapters of the report.
Although the co-facilitators believe the
recommendations need to operate alongside one
another and that they form a coherent whole, it is the
chapter on key relationships that I think it most useful
to comment on in today's setting.

We all know that institutional relationships within
the United Nations can be very sensitive. Since its birth
five years ago, the PBC has been trying to make its
way in this sensitive landscape. The two co-parents,
the General Assembly and the Security Council, have a
relationship with each other that is not always an easy
one. Nevertheless, as we point out in our report, both
bodies have the nurturing responsibilities inherent in
the parenting role. No honest analysis of the
peacebuilding machinery could have shied away from a
discussion as to how these responsibilities have been
met.

In Chapter IV of our report, which addresses key
relationships, there are specific paragraphs which focus
on the PBC's relationship with the Security Council.
The co-facilitators underline the dual requirement of
making space and earning space. We set out recent
positive steps but nevertheless express concern about
limited interaction and missed opportunities. We go on,
however, to state our belief that

"the benefits of an enhanced and more organic
relationship between the Security Council and the
Commission are increasingly being recognized,
and the potential now exists to create a new
dynamic between a more forthcoming Security
Council and a better performing Peacebuilding
Commission". (5/2010/393, annex, para. [OD 
I suggest that the passages on peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, in the same chapter, also bear careful
reading. The co-facilitators explicitly acknowledge the
prerogatives which the Charter confers on the Security
Council in relation to peacekeeping mandates.
Consistent with these prerogatives, we point to the
added value which a better performing PBC would
bring to Council deliberations in the successive phases
of mandate framing and renewal, and in approaching
the drawdown of operations. In that section too, our
emphasis is on cutting though any kind of disabling
circularity. We seek a situation whereby the PBC
provides more focused advice and the Security Council
understands that its deliberations will be enhanced by
tapping into that advice in a structured way.

As in other parts of the report, our brief
recommendations at the conclusion of chapter IV
reflect the earlier analysis.

The task for us as co-facilitators was to produce
an honest, balanced and implementable report on the
basis of our consultations. It is of course for the
membership to decide on implementation of our
recommendations, and for the General Assembly and
the Security Council, acting simultaneously, to adopt a
resolution in terms they deem most appropriate. The
co-facilitators are not demandeurs; our role at this
point is to elucidate and encourage.

I have focused my remarks as I have because,
amidst generally very positive reactions to the report,
there is discernible sensitivity in some quarters about
what the report states concerning the relationship
between the Security Council and the PBC. It would be
deeply regrettable if there were to be a narrowing of
vision and if the sense of common purpose which
has so characterized the process were to falter now.
What unites us all is the objective of strengthening
peacebuilding. It is a huge and complex task, and
collectively we have not been doing well enough.
There is now the opportunity to take real and concrete
steps.

It is my hope that constructive instincts will
prevail, and that the follow-up to the Peacebuilding
Review will be committed, purposeful, and large-
minded.

