The Secretary-General: I am honoured to
address the Council for the first time as Secretary-
General on the vital subject of women and peace and
security. We have gathered to discuss the
implementation of a landmark resolution. Since the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), seven years ago,
Member States have made significant progress. More
and more, women are participating in mediating and
negotiating peace, in searching for justice, in fostering
reconciliation, in supporting disarmament and
demobilization and in shaping development policies
and rebuilding institutions.

More and more, the Security Council is ensuring
that peace processes empower women and advance
gender equality. More and more, United Nations
entities are working closely and actively with
Governments and women's organizations, including
through the United Nations System-wide Action Plan
on implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
07-55817
But there is so much left to do, both for the
United Nations and for Member States. More countries
in conflict or post-conflict situations need to establish
their own national action plans. They need to take
greater ownership of programmes and priorities in
implementing resolution 1325 (2000). They need to
identify the capacity-building and the technical and
financial support needed to scale up programmes for
implementation, and they need to strengthen
approaches to monitoring, evaluation and
accountability.

For our part, we in the United Nations system
must take a more evenly coordinated approach than we
have done so far. We need to work better with
Governments to establish truly joint programmes
driven by national priorities. We need to clarify the
roles and responsibilities of United Nations entities at
the country level. We need to work better as a team, so
as to give countries access to a common entry point.

And we need to appoint more women in
leadership positions in our peace operations around the
world. I am delighted that Ambassador Ellen
Margrethe L¢j of Denmark has agreed to serve as my
Special Representative for Liberia. She will be heading
one of our biggest peacekeeping missions, and I know
she will provide a shining example of the kind of
qualities we need in our leaders in the field.

Violence against women has reached hideous and
pandemic proportions in some societies attempting to
recover from conflict. Together, all of us need to
strengthen our collective and individual responses to it.
That is essential if we are to reverse the damage done
by conflict and to build more inclusive, accountable
and cohesive societies, underpinned by viable
democratic institutions.

Earlier this year, I urged the Security Council to
establish a mechanism dedicated to monitoring
violence against women and girls within the framework
of resolution 1325 (2000). I reiterate that call today. I
also encourage Member States to actively consider
proposals to strengthen the Organization's gender
architecture, as presented by the High-level Panel on
United Nations System-wide Coherence. I believe we
could significantly advance our cause by replacing
several current structures with one dynamic United
Nations entity. Such a new body should be able to call
on all of the United Nations system's resources in the
work to empower women and realize gender equality
07-55817

worldwide. It should mobilize forces of change at the
global level and inspire enhanced results at the country
level.

We all have a collective role and responsibility in
accelerating the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) -the Security Council, Member States, the
United Nations system, other international and regional
actors and civil society. On this anniversary of its
adoption, let us rededicate ourselves to that mission.

