Ms. Miintefering (Germany): Women's rights are
human rights, and human rights are women's rights.
That is what we are fighting for and that is why we are
here today. This is also at the centre of my Government's
foreign policy.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General and
Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka for their comprehensive briefings.
We appreciate the focus of Ms. Diop on her work in
Africa. I want to thank Ms. Ekomo for her important
work with FemWise-Africa and the African Women
Leaders Network. I would also like to express my special
appreciation to Ms. Salah, who came from Khartoum to
give her testimony to the Security Council today.

Knowing the situation on the ground is the soul
of the service. Briefings by representatives from
civil society also ground our discussions here in the
Security Council, as they bring the much-needed
insight and expertise from the grass-roots level.
Representatives from civil society, including human
rights defenders, peacebuilders and local activists,
especially women, need to be an integral part of the
Security Council's discussions.

Let me assure the representatives of civil society
and all like-minded Member States that Germany will
remain by their side in their endeavours. We remain
by the side of women human rights defenders, women
peacebuilders, civil society actors and activists who
work every day - and often even risk their lives - to
make the full, effective and meaningful participation
of women, their full empowerment and respect for
women and their rights a reality. That is why, in April,
we invited a record number of 11 women and two men
representing civil society to brief the Council. The
outcome, in our view, was inspiring and helpful. We
hope to walk down that road together with all those
here today.

Resolution 1325 (2000), as you mentioned, Madam
President, was adopted 19 years ago. The adoption itself
changed not only the way the Council works but also how
the United Nations and the international community
approach peace and security issues. We all know that
it constituted long overdue recognition of the important
role that women play in creating peaceful societies.
There is no lasting peace without women. There is no
lasting peace without bringing representatives of half
of the population to the table and safeguarding their
involvement. Most important, perhaps, the involvement
of women changes the process itself by changing its
dynamics. That is one reason that peace treaties tend to
last much longer when women participate.

Today, more than a generation later, we are
taking stock of what has been achieved. We have to
acknowledge that, while progress has been made,
essential parts of the agenda remain neglected and
underfunded. Even today, there are very few women
negotiators and mediators. Very few peace processes
benefit from the meaningful participation of women.
Women and children are still the most affected by
sexual and gender-based Violence. Survivors of
sexual Violence receive little or no psychosocial care,
counselling or health care, including services regarding
sexual and reproductive health and rights. That which
could save the lives of survivors is often not available
owing to limited funding or ideological boundaries.

We want a world without these barriers - a world
where women and men participate equally politically,
socially and in economic life. I call on all fellow
members of the Security Council, all States Members
and the United Nations system as a whole to finally
fully implement what the Council has agreed upon 10
times since the year 2000. We made a promise to our
generation and to all those that will follow, namely,
nothing less than the full, effective and meaningful
participation of women in all aspects of peace
and security.

We demand accountability for its
full implementation. In April, Germany and the
United Kingdom, together with UN-Women, invited
Member States to pledge their renewed commitment in
implementing the full women and peace and security
agenda before its twentieth anniversary, next October,
and we will follow up on it. We all need to work harder
to translate our words into actions. Germany is already
implementing 10 of our 12 commitments and has fully
completed the implementation of three.

In Afghanistan, like in any other country, lasting
peace and stability can be achieved only if women's
voices are both heard and considered. In the framework
of the intra-Afghan dialogue, which we co-hosted
together with Qatar in Doha this July, we brought
Afghan women and other stakeholders of Afghan
society together, including the Taliban. Even a tense
security situation and threats to their lives could not
prevent Afghan women from exercising their rights.
They have our full support.

In April, under the German presidency, the Security
Council managed to adopt the ninth resolution on the
women and peace and security agenda. Resolution
2467 (2019) is a major step forward for the prevention
and fight against the scourge of conflict-related sexual
violence. For the first time, the Security Council places
a clear focus on the rights and needs of survivors of
sexual violence. Delivering justice and accountability
is key for survivors of sexual violence.

In the context of Iraq and Syria, criminal
prosecution of crimes committed by Da'esh is a priority
for my Germany. My country has also welcomed more
than 1,100 Yazidi refugees. Our Government is well
ahead in its proceedings against members of Islamic
State and the Syrian regime.

Last but not least, allow me to make some remarks on
behalf of the 61 member States of the Group of Friends of
the African Women Leaders Network, which Germany
proudly co-chairs with Ghana. Since its establishment,
in 2017, the African Women Leaders Network (AWLN)
has brought women's leadership and their participation
in peace, security and sustainable development in
Africa to the fore. The meaningful participation of
women in peace, security and peacebuilding processes
requires moving beyond the numbers to real qualitative
representation. Let me briefly underline three points
that I deem critical in their approach.
First, there is a need for capacity-building to
enhance women's qualitative participation. Secondly,
a bottom-up approach is needed, from the grass-roots
level to the local and national levels. I particularly
welcome the establishment of the Group of Friends;
to date eight national chapters have been established,
with the target of reaching 25 before the end of 2020.
Thirdly, we must achieve the integration of youth in this
work through dialogue between young and experienced
women leaders, for example.

The countdown to the twentieth anniversary for our
common agenda starts today. The time is now, and time
can be on our side if we make best use of it.

