The Deputy Secretary-General: I would like
to once again express my deep appreciation to the
Security Council for giving us this opportunity to
share what I think was not just a visit to the region but
one that left us with a lot of homework to do when we
came back, particularly considering that the Council is
underscoring the urgency with which we need to see
actions at scale to support the Horn of Africa. I would
also like to add my voice to the congratulations on the
leadership of our colleague from South Africa during
his presidency in October. It was an important month
for women and peace and security, and beyond that the
Security Council's visit was critical to reinforcing our
presence in the Horn of Africa, and now under your
leadership for November, Madam President, we are
starting off with a resumption of the open debate on
women and peace and security.

We have had a number of initiatives proposed in
the United Nations since we have been discussing the
visit with our colleagues and asking what more we can
do. First, with regard to very specific issues that were
raised during the visit, our peacekeeping departments
are already looking at what we can do with regard to
the uniform list and the kits being issued, for instance.
That is already something that we can take cognizance
of. But what is important is how to get better feedback,
such as this, that does not have to wait for a visit. I think
that is what concerned us most. We should not have to
wait for a visit to be aware of such challenges.

The capacity-building that we are providing
is insufficient, and we need more of it for women
peacekeepers. They need support in the cases where
they have not had specific training 4 for example, the
centres that our Ethiopian peacekeepers referred to,
saying that they need more of that, and that we need to
identify and map the whole range of relevant skill gaps.
In our missions too, it would be helpful to have support
for positions that are focused on better understanding
those gender-specific aspects. We therefore want
to encourage Member States, as they consider the
resources envelope, to put more into that. It does not
take very much, but it is not there right now.

In addition, peacekeeping has many trained
mediators who are women, but we do not have the
resources to deploy them, or the kinds of checks and
balances that we need to determine the complement of
women engaged in those negotiations right from the
outset, when the seeds are being sown. We all have a
role to play in that by asking those questions and trying
to push the envelope further in order to see women at
the table from the very beginning. That was particularly
applicable in the Sudan, where peace negotiations have
started, and the response to us was that they had only
just started, they were not there yet and would include
women eventually. But women need to be there from
the very start. I think that was something that the Prime
Minister was very enthusiastic and supportive of, but I
believe that the rest of the community around the table
should take it up quite quickly.

In other places, again concerning peacekeepers,
some of the issues were from the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), which has more than
1,000 peacekeepers. The feedback we received in that
regard, as we manage and support that Mission, was
that we also need to be aware of some of the needs.

Regarding girls' education, which is a tremendously
important part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and Agenda 2063, without which we will
not silence the guns, we must have educated young
people, particularly women and girls, whether as part
of the basic right to education at the beginning, second-
chance education or a renewal of skills, which we found
among a number of adolescent girls who would like to
join the marketplace and to be a better empowered to
take such decisions not just for themselves but also
since they impact the community. That reinforces what
we saw in the cases of the Sudan and Eritrea, namely,
that really looking at their plans and how inclusive
the curriculum was of girls entering education was
important. We continue to reinforce that.

The decade of action for the delivery of the
Sustainable Development Goals is approaching. I think
that this is something that requires that we undertake
much more analysis and planning, taking into account
the current context. Prevention and transitions are lenses
that we look through in Africa in particular regarding
girls' education. On the one hand, it is prevention
but, on the other hand, there are very many girls and
women who have been kept out of the space of being
empowered, particularly through education. As we look
towards the strategy for the Horn of Africa and for the
plan in the Sudan, it is an important area of planning,
including to see the investment that is going to be made
in the line item that we put for girls' education.

I am not sure if there were any more questions that
were asked, but we are following this up. Agency by
agency, it also becomes a matter for the United Nations
development system as well.

