Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): My delegation aligns
itself with the statement made by the delegation of
Namibia on behalf of Southern African Development
Community (SADC).

I would like to extend the gratitude of my
delegation to you, Mr. President, for having convened
this important meeting on women and peace and
security. We congratulate Ms. Michelle Bachelet on her
appointment as Under-Secretary-General and
Executive Director of UN Women. We assure her of
our full support in the discharge of her mandate.

As 2010 marks the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of the Security Council resolution 1325
(2000), on women, peace and security, it is of the
utmost importance that we strive to ensure gender
equality, fight violence against women and to enhance
women's participation in international peace and
security.
Resolution 1325 (2000) represents one of the
most important milestones of gender mainstreaming in
the United Nations. Since its adoption in 2000, this
important tool has allowed the United Nations and its
agencies, through the Inter-Agency Task Force on
Women and Peace and Security, to work together on
these issues. Considerable attention has also been paid
to its implementation at the national and international
levels.

Today's deliberations reaffirm the great
importance that we attach individually and collectively
to the impact of conflict on women and to the role that
women can play in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts. The deliberations also provide an opportunity
to reaffirm the core message of resolution 1325 (2000)
that sustainable peace will be possible only with
women's full participation, perspectives, leadership
and presence wherever we seek to make and keep the
peace.

As the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/498) indicates, some progress has indeed been
made in the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
as demonstrated by the notable efforts made by the
United Nations system, Member States, civil society
and other actors. In this regard, a number of activities
covering a broad range of areas have been undertaken
over the past decade.

However, we remain concerned that, in spite of the
adoption of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008),
which have become beacons of hope for millions of
women and girls, crimes of rape and sexual violence
persist. Women and girls continue to be targeted, while
rape and sexual violence continue to be used as weapons
of war. Women also constitute the majority of the
world's refugees and internally displaced persons.
However, we share a sense of optimism that, given our
collective will, especially within the Security Council,
we can bring an end to impunity and to this crime
against humanity. In this regard, we call upon all
concerned parties to refrain from committing human
rights abuses in conflict situations, including sexual
violence, to respect international humanitarian law and
to promote non-violent forms of conflict resolution and
a culture of peace.

We recognize that peace is inextricably linked
with equality between women and men. One of the
most important issues to be addressed with regard to
women and armed conflict remains women's
participation in conflict resolution and the negotiation
of peace agreements at the national and international
levels. In the same vein, we recognize that women's
equal participation in decision-making at all levels is
key to better advance and address the specific needs
and concerns of women.

We believe that if women are to play an equal
part in the maintenance of peace and security, they
must be empowered politically and economically and
represented adequately at all decision-making levels,
both at the pre-conflict stage and during hostilities, as
well as during peacekeeping, reconstruction and
reconciliation.

In this respect, it is also our belief that the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) can be
achieved only through increased recognition of the
crucial role of women, as well as their participation
and involvement in all efforts aimed at preventing and
resolving conflicts. We fully share the opinion that
gender equality should be recognized as a core issue in
the maintenance of peace and security.

Therefore, we must ensure that the provisions of
resolution 1325 (2000) are realized in order to enable
women to participate fully and equally in all levels of
decision-making with regard to conflict prevention and
peacebuilding. Women must become full agents in the
shaping and rebuilding of their communities in the
aftermath of war. It is our duty to continue to work
towards the full implementation of this resolution at
the national, regional and international levels.

In conclusion, Botswana attaches great
importance to the promotion and protection of the
rights and interests of women and to advancing the
status of women. The Government of Botswana has
made major achievements in protecting women from
violence and in ensuring a secure environment where
their rights are protected and their participation in
decision-making bodies is guaranteed.

