Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I should like to
begin by joining others in thanking you, Mr. President,
for holding this open debate on this very important
matter. I should also like to congratulate you on the
excellent concept paper you distributed before this
meeting. I should also like to thank the Deputy
Secretary-General, the Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General and the Executive Director of the
United Nations Development Fund for Women for their
fruitful and comprehensive interventions.

Portugal naturally concurs with the statement
delivered earlier by the representative of Sweden on
behalf of the European Union, but I should like to
make some additional remarks.

The adoption of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000) represented a landmark in the promotion and
protection of human rights. It not only brought to the
attention of this organ the pressing issues of gender
equality and the empowerment of women, but it also
made clear that women have a role to play in conflict
situations, besides that of victims, as peacemakers and
peacekeepers.

It is our belief that the equal participation of
women and men in decision-making processes has a
positive impact on the international security system,
thus favouring the implementation of the objectives of
the Security Council - maintaining peace and security.
At the same time, it is of fundamental importance that
we develop policies that envisage the promotion of the
political, economic and social roles of women in post-
conflict situations.

It is undeniable that situations of conflict have a
great impact on women. They are too often victims of
violence and of sexual violence used as a weapon of
war. And at the same time, they very often become the
main providers of economic security and survival to
their families. There is thus the need to ensure that, in
post-conflict situations, we also build on their
experiences.
Portugal reaffirms its commitment to the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We adopted
last August our national plan of action to contribute to
the implementation of that document at the national,
regional and international policy levels. The drafting of
this national plan of action involved a one-year long
participatory process, which encompassed wide-
ranging governmental contributions together with
broad and public consultations with universities, non-
governmental organizations, media and other relevant
civil society sectors and international networks.

Our national plan recognizes the specific impacts
of contemporary wars on the lives of women and
addresses the efforts to prevent, combat and mitigate
these impacts. Our plan, which will extend to 2013, is
built around the objectives of strengthening women's
participation and representation in all efforts to
promote peace and security; promoting gender
mainstreaming in the sectors of security, such as
peacekeeping missions and security system reform;
justice and development aid; and reinforcing the
protection of women and girls in conflict and post-
conflict areas.

Allow me briefly to highlight five main
objectives of our plan. It seeks, first, to increase
women's participation and mainstream gender equality
in all phases of peacebuilding processes and at all
levels of decision-making; secondly, to promote
capacity-building on gender equality and gender-based
violence, as well as other aspects covered by
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008), for all those
involved in peacebuilding and development aid efforts;
thirdly, to promote and protect women's human rights
in conflict areas and post-conflict scenarios, taking into
account the prevention and elimination of gender-based
violence and the promotion of the empowerment of
women; fourthly, to invest in and disseminate
knowledge on issues concerning women, peace and
security, including awareness-raising among decision-
makers and the broader public; and lastly, to ensure the
participation of civil society in the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and the national plan of action.

Our national plan thus embodies Portugal's
concern over the vulnerability of women and girls in
post-conflict situations, together with our national
commitment to developing measures to answer the
needs of women in these situations. In concrete terms,
this is translated at the international level into the
promotion of policies, strategies and legislation to
prevent armed violence, including domestic armed
violence, as well as in the systematic integration into
development programmes of a gender dimension and
training for development actors in this field.

Furthermore, our national action plan emphasizes
that women and girls are relevant and capable actors of
change and development, and is based on the
conviction that, first, it is critical that we overcome the
traditional perspective of women and girls as being
exclusively vulnerable victims in need of protection,
and that, secondly, it is thus essential to implement
measures that guarantee that this perspective will be
taken into consideration at all levels of peacebuilding
processes by the international and local actors
involved.

Finally, I wish to say that the Portuguese
Government interprets this resolution as extending
beyond armed conflicts and humanitarian aid to
include the promotion of policy coherence at the
national level concerning issues such as disarmament
and weapons control, public security and the
elimination of gender-based violence.

Nearly 10 years after the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), there has obviously been enormous
progress, but we must recognize that its aims have not
yet been fulfilled. I encourage the Council and its
members to carry on the good work in that direction.

