Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): I wish to express our
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for convening this
open debate on women and peace and security. Allow
me to also thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report (S/2004/814) on the same
subject.

As indicated in that report, resolution 1325
(2000) builds on the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action, the outcome of the twenty-third special
session of the General Assembly and the work of the
Security Council. It calls for women's equal
participation and full involvement in all efforts for the
maintenance and promotion of peace and security. The
resolution also reaffirms the need to fully implement
international humanitarian and human rights law to
protect women and girls from human rights abuses,
including and especially gender-based violence. It is
appalling, however, to note that instances of such
violence continue unabated in armed conflict.

Furthermore, the resolution identifies the need to
mainstream a gender perspective in conflict prevention,
peace negotiations, peacekeeping operations,
humanitarian assistance, post-conflict reconstruction
and disarmament and demobilization and reintegration
initiatives.

As we all know, women and children are the
prime targets during conflict situations and make up a
vast majority of all refugees and displaced persons.
They bear the brunt of the conflict and are exposed to
sexual and gender-based violence, which is
unfortunately and sadly used as a weapon of war.

Despite the disproportionate impact of conflict on
women, they continue to hold their families and
communities together. They often undertake initiatives
across warring factions under extremely difficult
conditions. In some cases, they have managed to bring
their experiences into formal peace processes.
However, those efforts are insufficiently recognized
and supported, both politically and financially. As a
result, women's rights are rarely integrated into peace
agreements or into the structures supporting post-
conflict reconstruction.

We should recognize that, when we fail to build
upon women's strengths, the whole peace process
suffers. Without equal participation and full
involvement by women in peace processes, we cannot
attain justice or development, and women will not be
protected from the violence and suffering unleashed
during conflict. We are, however, encouraged and
pleased that women are gradually finding a place at the
negotiating table, in the implementation of peace
agreements and in post-conflict rehabilitation,
reconstruction and disarmament. The time has come
for women to be included in those processes in a more
formalized way, at all levels and in all stages of
decision-making.

You will no doubt agree with me, Mr. President,
that Namibia has a special attachment to the successful
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). That is so
because it was during Namibia's presidency of the
Security Council in October 2000 that an open debate
and discussions were initiated, culminating in the
adoption of the landmark resolution 1325 (2000), on
women and peace and security, which we have the
honour of reviewing today. I am happy to note with
appreciation that many peace-related programmes have
been developed around that resolution and that it has
now become an instrument for women's fight for peace
in the world.

My delegation is committed to resolution 1325
(2000) because we believe that involving women in
peace processes brings a positive dimension to the
promotion of peace and security. Furthermore, as a
troop-contributing country, we have incorporated
gender perspectives and HIV/AIDS awareness into the
training manuals for all our uniformed personnel, and
we ensure that women are part of the Namibian
contingents participating in United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

My delegation fully agrees with the Secretary-
General that sexual and gender-based violence
continues to be used as a weapon of war in many
conflicts, especially those in Africa. In the eastern part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in the
Darfur region of the Sudan, for example, gender-based
violence has reached alarming proportions. We deplore
such horrendous acts and support the call for every
effort to be made to halt those horrible practices and to
bring the perpetrators to justice. We could not agree
more with the Secretary-General, and we wish here to
reiterate his appeal to the international community to
do everything it can to translate into reality the
objectives of resolution 1325 (2000). What is required
is political will.

My delegation also welcomes the Secretary-
General's intention to develop a comprehensive
system-wide strategy and action plan for increasing
attention to gender perspectives in conflict prevention,
with particular emphasis on monitoring and reporting
mechanisms, as stated in paragraph 20 of the report.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm my
delegation's full support for the Secretary-General in
his efforts to develop a comprehensive strategy and
action plan for mainstreaming gender perspectives into
peacekeeping activities at Headquarters and in the
field, and to urge the Security Council to monitor
implementation of the strategy and action plan.

