Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I would first like to
thank you, Sir, and the United Kingdom presidency for
organizing this debate. I would also like to welcome
the Secretary-General. Austria applauds him for his
unwavering commitment in the fight against all forms
of violence against women.

The adoption of resolution 1820 (2008) a year
ago was an historical event. The resolution clearly
states that sexual violence against women in armed
conflict can constitute a threat to international peace
and security that requires the attention of the Security
Council. Despite positive and successful steps
undertaken by the United Nations and individual
States, women continue to fall victim to sexual
violence used as a deliberate means of warfare. This
takes place on a daily basis in conflict situations
around the world.

Austria aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Sweden on behalf of
the European Union, as well as with that to be made by
the representative of Costa Rica on behalf of the
Human Security Network. I would like to concentrate
on a number of practical proposals on how the Council
could further improve its action on this important
matter.

Systematic attention needs to be paid to the
prevention of and protection from sexual violence in
the daily deliberations of the Council. We welcome the
recent adoption of resolution 1882 (2009), extending
the scope of the monitoring and reporting mechanism
to parties who perpetrate grave sexual violence against
children in situations of armed conflict. As women and
girls represent the majority of victims of sexual
violence, there is a need to ensure that reporting is not
strictly limited to victims under the age of 18. In this
context, we would welcome further information in a
follow-up report next year on an appropriate
monitoring and accountability mechanism to be
established by the Council.

Austria also welcomes the work of the Council's
informal Expert Group on the Protection of Civilians,
which we see as a useful forum for discussing
important protection concerns, including those in the
fight against sexual violence.

More consistent and comprehensive reporting on
sexual violence in the Secretary-General's country-
specific reports would enable the Council to address
the protection of civilians, particularly women and
children, from sexual violence in a more systematic
manner. To this end, the Council should include
specific reporting requirements in resolutions
establishing or renewing mandates.

Briefings by the Secretary-General's special
representatives, the Emergency Relief Coordinator, the
High Commissioner for Human Rights and relevant
rapporteurs will and can also provide the Council with
information crucial to its work.

We are fully aware of the sensitivities of
collecting data from victims of sexual violence, who
are often severely traumatized by the dramatic
experiences they have gone through. Guidelines on
information gathering must take ethical and safety
concerns into account. Short- and long-term assistance
for survivors of sexual violence, in particular
accessible and quality health care, psychosocial
support and legal advice should be a priority.

Let me also acknowledge the vital role that
non-governmental organizations and humanitarian
organizations play in this regard. Access constraints for
humanitarian actors can severely affect the situation of
victims of sexual violence.

Today, a clear body of rules outlawing sexual
violence, including in armed conflict, is contained in
international human rights, humanitarian and
international criminal law. In spite of this, perpetrators
who systematically commit serious violations against
women and girls still go largely unpunishcd.
Allegations of sexual violence need to be thoroughly
investigated and perpetrators need to be brought to
account, including not only through prosecution, but
also through the vetting of armed and security forces.
This situation demands further action by the
Security Council to strengthen the rule of law and to

end impunity. Where necessary, the Council should
consider appropriate measures encouraging and
ensuring accountability for those responsible for
international crimes, including through the
establishment of commissions of inquiry, referrals to
the International Criminal Court and the imposition of
targeted measures. Sanctions committees need to
receive relevant information to this end, including
through exchanges with other subsidiary bodies.

The Council took an important step when
deciding to give priority to the protection of civilians
in the mandate of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC). This led to the subsequent adoption of the
Comprehensive Strategy on Combating Sexual
Violence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
endorsed by the Government.

It is also a very important and positive
development that the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has now finally decided to take
concrete measures in the five particularly dramatic
cases to which the Council once again drew the
attention of that country's authorities during its mission
there. It is evidently necessary that the Council
continue to follow up on this matter.

We are encouraged by the valuable work of
MONUC's new joint protection teams. We must draw
on lessons learned by such best practices in order to
transpose them to the contexts of other missions. That
is certainly an issue with which we will have to deal
when we consider, in general terms, the subject of the
protection of civilians in peacekeeping.

The active contribution of women to
peacebuilding and conflict prevention is crucial to
achieving lasting peace. Resolutions 1325 (2000) and
1820 (2008) have underlined the need to include
women in peacekeeping and peacebuilding measures.
Further efforts are needed. The development of gender
guidelines for military personnel by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the development of
guidelines for mediators and their consistent
implementation can contribute to improving our
response to sexual violence in conflict settings.

In order to effectively fight sexual violence,
improved coordination throughout the system, as well
as leadership and accountability, are needed. Austria
fully supports the appointment of a senior person with
responsibility to attend to the prevention of and

response to sexual violence across the entire United
Nations system.

Austria is grateful for the Secretary-General's
willingness to provide the Council with annual reports
on this very important matter, and we look forward to
receiving them in the interest of enhancing the
implementation of resolution 1820 (2008).

