Mrs. Gatto (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union (EU) and with the statement delivered by the
representative of Switzerland on behalf of the Group
of Friends of the Protection of Civilians in Armed
Conflict, and wishes to add a few remarks in its national
capacity.

In these times, civilians have become victims of
senseless violence in an increasing number of conflicts
all over the world. Neither women, girls, children
nor other vulnerable groups have been spared in this
most urgent crisis, which the Security Council has
been discussing over the past year. All of the gender-
based forms of human-rights violations and abuses
experienced by women and girls, such as killings, sexual
violence, forced marriages, attacks on schoolgirls and
restricted access to education and health facilities, need
to be addressed by the Council urgently and resolutely.

This is not a matter of applying normative
tools - not any more. In fact, since its adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, the Security Council has recognized women's
vulnerability in armed conflict, as well as the vital
importance of increasing women's participation in
the prevention and resolution of conflicts, including
peacekeeping and humanitarian operations. Moreover,
in accordance with resolution 2122 (2013), the Council
has committed itself to promoting gender equality
and the empowerment of women in conflict and post-
conflict situations. In addition, the operationalization
of the United Nations monitoring and reporting
mechanism has been established and further developed
in recent years. However, as pointed out in the
Secretary-General's latest report on women and peace
and security (S/2014/693) and the 2014 International
Criminal Court Prosecutor's policy paper on sexual and
gender-based crimes, the global landscape for women's
and girls' rights in armed conflict and post-conflict
settings remains dire. That is why it is time to take
common action, led by the strongest possible political
will of the Council.

In that respect, Italy underlines the importance
of strengthening cooperation among Member States
and with international jurisdictions in order to fight
impunity. The effective protection of civilians depends
on a culture of accountability in all conflict scenarios.
Even States that are not parties to the International
Criminal Court nor a party to the Rome Statute
can cooperate with the Court and contribute to the
discharge of its mandate, thereby assisting in reaching
a fundamental goal of the international community as
a whole.

In strengthening the protection of civilians,
women and girls in particular, we must ensure that the
perpetrators of crimes realize that the Security Council
will effectively follow through in enforcing individual
responsibility for crimes under international law.

Prevention and the response to gender-based
violence were a priority during our recently concluded
presidency of the Council of the European Union, in
line with our long-term commitment to that issue.
The Italian Government has implemented specific
programmes targeting women and girls and the
survivors of violence in Africa, Asia and the Middle
East that aim to bridge the gap between humanitarian
and development assistance. Consistent with our work
on the ground, we have made the issue a priority in
the EU humanitarian affairs working group in Brussels,
and we organized the European Union round table on
gender-based violence in emergencies, which called for
renewed action at all levels.

Prevention is key. Let me conclude by stressing the
importance of disseminating early-warning mechanisms
to prevent gender crimes in conflict-related situations.
To counter the scourge of violence against women and
girls, due priority should be given to the peacekeeper
policy units that are providing training in the protection
of women's rights, as well as to strengthening United

Nations monitoring and assessment capabilities. To that
end, Italy warmly welcomes the launch of the Human
Rights Up Front initiative by the Secretary-General
some months ago, and the recent adoption of analytical
tools for preventing such heinous acts, such as the
Framework of Analysis for Atrocity Crimes.

