Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency for the month of August. My delegation
welcomes this opportunity to participate in this open
debate on women and peace and security, and wishes to
express our sincere appreciation to the delegation of
the United Kingdom for convening this debate. We also
thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report (S/2009/362) on the implementation of
resolution 1820 (2008) and for its presentation this
morning.

The genocide in Rwanda in 1994 witnessed some
of the most inhumane acts of violence targeted against
women and girls. As the Secretary-General's report
correctly points out,

"for the first time in 1994, in the
circumstances of the case, the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) qualified
the crime of rape as a form of genocide"
(5/2009/362, para. 6).

The survivors of the genocide continue to live
with the consequences of these crimes 15 years on,
with very little or no specific assistance from the
international community. The perpetrators of these
heinous crimes, the Forces democratiques de liberation
du Rwanda (FDLR), have been central to regional
insecurity in the Great Lakes region since 1994 and
continue to pose a threat to ongoing peace efforts. I
would urge the international community to complement
the efforts of the Governments of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Rwanda to eliminate the
threat posed by the FDLR and to assist the survivors.
It is imperative that the culture of impunity that
has allowed for the continued perpetration of
systematic sexual violence in the Great Lakes region
and elsewhere be uprooted once and for all. My
Government, in collaboration with our Parliament, has
continued to strengthen the capacity of both the police
and the judiciary to effectively respond to any incident
of sexual violence. In this respect, we welcome the
recommendations set out in the Secretary-General's
report to tackle impunity, and particularly concerning

the need for the United Nations system to deliver as
one to address sexual violence in all its forms.

The equal participation of women and men in the
promotion of peace and security in conflict and post-
conflict situations alike is integral to any
peacekeeping, peacemaking or peacebuilding process.
It is within this context that my Government has set out
to ensure that women are central to the political,
economic and social governance of our nation. Equally,
the participation of women in the maintenance of and
promotion of peace is essential, and Rwanda has
placed the prevention of sexual violence in situations
of armed conflict at the core of its peacekeeping
commitments. Sexual Violence against women and girls
is considered by the Rwandan Defence Forces (RDF)
as a key component of the security threat in all its
deployments. In this respect, the Gender Desk at
Rwandan Defence Headquarters devises training
programmes with the support of the United Nations
Development Fund for Women and other United
Nations agencies to raise awareness of gender-based
violence and violence against women in the armed
forces.

Awareness and training on responding to gender-
based violence and violence against women have now
been mainstreamed into the curriculum of all Rwanda's
military schools and training institutions, and is
09-44986

integral to the preparation of all RDF battalions for
peacekeeping missions abroad. The participation of
Rwandan policewomen in peacekeeping missions in
the Sudan has further ensured that they raise awareness
among the population in support of their missions. We
would urge the United Nations system to strengthen
and maintain its support to Member States in this
respect.

My Government remains firmly committed to the
joint implementation of Security Council resolutions
1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008) and will continue to play
its role at the national, subregional, regional and global
levels to ensure that the scourge of sexual violence is
eliminated.

