Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-
Ngcuka, Executive Director of UN-Women, for her
valuable briefing, and I also thank the other briefers.

Over the past two decades, the experience of the
Security Council has demonstrated that women's
participation in peacemaking and peacebuilding
maximizes the benefits of achieving and sustaining
peace, as well as preventing relapses into conflict.
The recommendations of the 2015 Global Study on
the Implementation of Security Council Resolution
1325 are of the utmost importance. However, they
remain a dead letter and have not been implemented.
In the context of the follow-up of implementing the
recommendations of the global study, we would like to
stress the following points.

First, Egypt values and supports the new United
Nations system-wide strategy for gender parity. We
believe that the strategy is an integral part of the
reform of the Organization. We stress the importance
of ensuring women's effective participation and
leadership, reinforcing gender-based knowledge and
providing the required funding for promoting gender
equality and the women and peace and security agenda.

Second, we support visits by United Nations
officials, focusing solely on women and peace and
security, to conflict and post-conflict areas, such as
the visit headed by Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed to Nigeria and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Ms. Mohammed briefed the Council on
the visit during Egypt's presidency last August (see S/PV.8022). In that regard, we stress that the scope ofthe
women and peace and security agenda should be limited
to countries in conflict and post-conflict situations.

Third, we take note of the Secretary General's
intention to focus his report (S/2017/861) on the
participation of women in peace operations. Egypt
calls for going beyond merely evaluating the level of
participation to developing concrete recommendations
aimed at ensuring a more effective participation of
women. In that connection, Egypt seeks to increase the
number of female peacekeepers as it deploys more Blue
Helmets to peacekeeping missions.

Fourth, it is not enough to only adopt action plans
on women and peace and security, as such plans and
their commitments need to be adequately funded.
Egypt therefore believes that it is critical to assist States
by building their capacity in that area.

Fifth, we are concerned that there has been a
setback in the meaningful participation of women, as
detailed in the Secretary-General's report, despite the
existing legal and institutional framework to enable
such participation.

Sixth, the suffering of women and girls is
exacerbated by terrorism in conflict areas. Furthermore,
women continue to suffer under occupation.

Seventh, we advocate the need to strictly adhere
to the delivery of the women and peace and security
mandate. Any deviation from the mandate to other
topics would undermine the agenda's purpose and
implementation. We must strike a balance between the
two key pillars of the women and peace and security
agenda, namely, protection and participation.

We must consider the specific cultural and social
character of every country when implementing
the agenda so as to increase the participation of
women in conflict and post-conflict areas. There
must be co-payment mechanisms in place involving
donors and implementing entities so as to ensure the
sustainability and effectiveness of the agenda. All
of that must be carried out while at the same time
stressing national ownership and joint implementation
with national authorities.

Egypt spares no effort to assist in the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda. With regard to combating sexual exploitation
and abuse, in response to the Secretary General's zero-
tolerance policy, we have introduced an intensive and
comprehensive training module on awareness related to
sexual exploitation and abuse into the predeployment
training of our peacekeeping troops. Furthermore, the
Cairo International Center for Conflict Resolution,
Peacekeeping and Peacebuilding has published a
manual entitled "Prevention of sexual exploitation
and abuse in peacekeeping operations", to be used by
Egyptian peacekeeping troops. The manual is available
to all troop-contributing countries, and it has been
translated into English and French.

With regard to training programmes, the Cairo
Center and Egypt's National Council for Women, in
partnership with the Crisis Management Center Finland,
organize basic training courses on the role of women
in peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Participants have
included members ofthe military and the police, as well
as civilians from numerous Arab and African States.
In the near future, the Center will collaborate with its
counterparts in other countries. Moreover, the Center
has developed a first-of-its-kind training manual in the
Arab region on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) as it relates to peacekeeping and peacebuilding
in the Arab world.

We call for renewed political and ethical
commitment to empowering women in post-conflict
areas and countries. Women are a main pillar in
the process of the transformation from conflict to
development, and from conflict-torn societies to sound
ones, capable of achieving sustained peace.

