Mr. Kelly (Ireland): I want to thank the United
Kingdom for its leadership on this important issue. We
were pleased to sponsor resolution 2106 (2013).

Ireland aligns itself with the statementjust made by
the observer of the European Union.

Significant progress has been made across the
women and peace and security agenda, with a steady
spotlight now being shone on rape and other forms
of sexual Violence in conflict. But progress has been
uneven and inadequate.
The Secretary-General's most recent report
(S/2013/335) makes a series of further useful
recommendations, but we are disappointed to see
little evidence of progress regarding the very first
recommendation, that is, that the Security Council
should identify ways to target suspected perpetrators
with sanctions and other measures in countries where
no sanctions regime applies. Council members should
also ask themselves whether the maximum pressure
possible is being applied to the 32 parties named and
shamed in the annex to the Secretary-General's March
report (S/2013/149).

Despite the broad range of activities and efforts
under way, the scourge of sexual violence remains
pervasive in many conflict and post-conflict situations.
How does impunity for those crimes persist? What
explains the reluctance to take decisive action to
address that impunity - to send a definitive signal that
sexual violence will no longer be tolerated?

The Secretary-General and Special Representative
Bangura have long emphasized that a radical challenge
to impunity can only be delivered at the national level.
The real imperative in that regard is the assumption by
national political leaders of ownership of this agenda.

While there has been a welcome shift towards
acknowledging conflict-related sexual violence as
an issue of peace and security, rather than viewing it
simply as a women's issue, it is undeniable that sexual
violence touches women and affects women far more
profoundly than men. It is therefore appropriate that
women take the lead in driving the necessary national
political change.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Great Lakes region, which might be considered
the cockpit of conflict-related sexual violence, is a
case in point. On 4 June, the Permanent Mission of
Ireland convened a high-level panel discussion on
women and peacebuilding in the Great Lakes region.
A report on the event is available on our website. At
the event, Special Envoy Mary Robinson explored
the opportunities provided by the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region. In particular, she
highlighted the importance of bringing together women
civil society leaders as part of a regional platform for
peace. At the panel discussion, Special Representative
Bangura described the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework as a new opportunity to tap into the vast
potential that is African women. Lina Zedriga, a civil
society leader for Uganda, offered powerful personal
testimony and called for women to be given the
opportunity to speak for themselves, saying "We are
not victims; we are stakeholders".

In support of Mary Robinson, Lina Zedriga and
women's leaders like her from the region intend to join
forces to change the national political calculus. They
aim to encourage and pressure national political leaders
to take ownership of the issue of sexual violence and
to implement the full range of commitments they
have made under the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework. To help kick-start the process of engaging
women, Ireland is pleased to co-fund an event in
Bujumbura next month organized by Femmes Africa
Solidarite'.

While the greatest potential for change lies at the
national level, we must all assume more responsibility
and do so with a keener sense of urgency. For our part,
Ireland recently published an independent mid-term
progress report on implementation of our national
action plan, based on resolution 1325 (2000). We are
one of a very small number of countries to publicly
share the lessons we have identified i where we have
done well and where we need to improve. We hope
that other States will benefit from the report, which
is available on our website. We will focus, too, on
preventing and responding to gender-based violence in
the immediate aftermath of humanitarian emergencies,
including through a roundtable on 28 June in Brussels
that Ireland, as current President of the Council of the
European Union, will co-host.

As Zainab Bangura pointed out, it is still largely
cost-free to rape a woman, child or man in conflict, and
sexual violence is used so widely precisely because it
is "such a cheap and devastating weapon". Although
there are many worthwhile initiatives being pursued to
combat sexual violence, they are not enough.

At the Security Council debate last week
(S/PV.6980), the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Children and Armed Conflict
announced the launch of a campaign to galvanize
concerned Governments, interested Member States and
the United Nations system to end the recruitment and
use of children by State forces in armed conflict by
2016. Do we dare to challenge ourselves in a similar
fashion and to raise the level of our ambition?
