Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Let me first of all
thank you, Madame, and your delegation for your
outstanding work, which led to the adoption by
consensus of resolution 1960 (2010) before us today.
The resolution brings significant added value to the
fight against sexual violence in armed conflict. We
greatly appreciate the Secretary-General's unwavering
commitment to this cause.

I would like to say a special word of welcome
and thanks to Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Wallstrom and her team for their extremely
significant contribution to the implementation of
resolutions 1820 (2008) and 1888 (2009). Let me also
express our great appreciation to the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, and in particular the Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations and the
Military Advisor, for their efforts to strengthen
protection and response in the field.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be made later on by the representative of the European
Union and by the representative of Costa Rica on
behalf of the Human Security Network.

The past two years have seen progress in the fight
against sexual violence, in particular through the
appointment of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict. At
the same time, the levels of sexual violence in many
conflicts around the world remain alarmingly high.
Women and children continue to fall victim to sexual
violence used as a deliberate means of warfare on a
daily basis. Some groups with specific vulnerabilities,
such as persons with disabilities, have not yet received
the necessary attention.

The extremely negative effect of sexual violence
on peace processes, reconciliation and post-conflict
reconstruction clearly makes that crime a security
threat. Sexual violence is not a mere by-product of
war; it is more often than not a deliberate tactic of
warfare. The Council, alongside affected States, has a
clear responsibility to use all tools at its disposal to put
an end to this scourge. Listing parties that are credibly
suspected of committing or being responsible for
patterns of rape and other forms of sexual violence;
establishing monitoring, analysis and reporting
arrangements; and monitoring the implementation of
commitments by parties to armed conflict would
significantly enhance a systematic consideration by the
Council, and thus the Council's capacities to act.

Let me add that my delegation will continue to
support the idea of establishing a Council working
group in order to be able to afford a similar level of
attention and response to the issue of sexual violence
as is currently and rightly granted to children in armed
conflict. This is a matter of credibility for the Security
Council.

We hope that the information generated through
the new system will help the Council when it considers
its reactions to widespread violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law. From our point of
view, possible reactions include the imposition of
targeted measures, the establishment of commissions of
inquiry and referrals to the International Criminal
Court.

We welcome the recent arrests and extraditions of
persons responsible for sexual violence and would like
to encourage all countries concerned to take the
necessary steps to bring them to justice. Furthermore,
sanctions regimes need to include designation criteria
pertaining to acts of rape and other forms of sexual
violence, and sanctions committees need to receive
relevant information to this end, including through
exchanges with other subsidiary bodies of the Security
Council and peacekeeping operations. We encourage
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict to build on emerging practice,
brief sanctions committees and share relevant
information on individuals committing sexual violence.
No perpetrator of sexual violence should go
unpunished. Equally transitional justice mechanisms
need to document sexual violence in a comprehensive
way and provide assistance and redress to the victims.
We welcome the appointment of the leader of the
Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and encourage
Member States affected by armed conflict to seek the
support of the Team.

We are concerned by the high numbers of
governmental security forces directly involved in
sexual violence. The conditionality policy of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is an important
step in the right direction and should be extended to all
United Nations peacekeeping missions. In light of the
incorporation of former militia members into the
national police and security structures, the
establishment of vetting procedures is a crucial element
of any integration process.

United Nations peacekeeping missions must also
strengthen their prevention and protection capacities.
We welcome efforts under way to develop scenario-
based training materials, such as curricula based on the
publication entitled "Addressing Conflict-Related
Sexual Violence: An Analytical Inventory of
Peacekeeping Practice". Also, the recruitment of more
community liaison officers, including women, will
significantly strengthen the ability of missions to
interact with the local population and ensure that the
voices of local women are better heard. We would like
to encourage the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations to continue its efforts in this regard. The
Council should exert its influence to ensure that peace
agreements refer to sexual violence, and we commend
the efforts of the Secretary-General to address the
underrepresentation of women in peace processes and
negotiations and to enhance women's participation in
all peacebuilding efforts.

Madame President, please rest assured that my
delegation will remain closely engaged in issues of
protection of civilians, among them in particular the
protection from and prevention of sexual violence,
after our membership in this body ends. We are looking
forward to continuing our work with interested
delegations and the United Nations system.

