Ms. Faremo (Norway): Ten years ago, atrocities
in Somalia, Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia made
even the hardliners soft - or at least softer. For the
first time, they let this Council discuss and agree on
key questions for sustainable peace: What do women
want? What do women need? How can women
contribute? Thus resolution 1325 (2000) came about.
At least on paper, this resolution gives women a voice
and better protection.

Mr. President, I thank you and the Council for
convening this open ministerial meeting to remind us
all of what a long way we still have to go to make the
good intentions of resolution 1325 (2000) a reality.

Ten years after the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), at the NATO Ministerial Council meeting
earlier this month, I called for including resolution
1325 (2000) in the NATO concept of operations. We
obviously have a job to do to make the military men
take this seriously.

As Minister of Defence, 1 note that all of the
United Nations force commanders are men. It is high
time to rectify this. I call on the United Nations to start
searching for women commanders while we continue
to improve the gender ratio of our forces.

We must get better at explaining that resolution
1325 (2000) is not about political correctness. The
better protection and more equal participation of
women in social, economic and political life -
including in peace processes and security services -
improve the quality of the process and the service,
making the result more sustainable. We simply cannot
afford to ignore half of society's talent and capacity.

We must also ensure greater accountability. I call
on the Security Council to show leadership by
maintaining its focus on the full implementation of all
resolutions on women and peace and security; by
endorsing today the indicators proposed by the
Secretary-General for this purpose; and by making the
prosecution of perpetrators a political priority. I
commend the work of Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Wallstrom in this regard.

We must provide the United Nations with
resources, including financing, to follow up on the
ground. I welcome the establishment of UN Women,
and I congratulate its first Executive Director, Under-
Secretary-General Michelle Bachelet. I trust that she
will monitor and support Member States and the
United Nations in ensuring the full implementation of
all the resolutions on women and peace and security.

Beyond what we have already done, I hereby
announce that Norway will immediately take on the
following commitments.

We will continue to increase the number of
female soldiers and officers, both in standing military
forces and in our contributions to international
operations. The next two commanders of Norway's
national command in Afghanistan will be women.

Recognizing that we also have a long way to go, I
will now make sure our military operations rest on a
gender analysis and adjust our operational demands
accordingly. We will strengthen the gender education
of our armed forces and our police, and we will
introduce a new system of reporting on gender and the
role of women in field missions, starting in December
with the Norwegian-led provincial reconstruction team
in Meymaneh, Afghanistan.

We will contribute experts on gender and gender-
based violence to international peacekeeping
operations. Last week, we deployed a team of such
experts from Norway's national police to the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti.

Norway will further strengthen our support to the
United Nations work to promote and protect gender
equality and the empowerment of women. Our
proposed allocation for 2011 is more than $30 million.

Finally, we will also act urgently to boost the
work of UN Women and will support its new and
welcome strategic partnership with the Department of
Political Affairs, specifically the project to increase
women's participation in peace processes and to
improve the gender balance at all levels of mediation.
The Norwegian Government will immediately provide
$1 million to this project.

Norway supports the women and peace and
security agenda because we know that it is the only
way to achieve sustainable peace and to free millions
of women and children from the appalling suffering we
have seen in too many current conflicts. This suffering
and humiliation is a scar on humanity's face. We
cannot tolerate this.

