Mr. Chabar (Morocco) (spoke in French): First
of all, on behalf of my delegation, I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for having chosen the very
important issue of women and peace and security as
the subject of this month's open debate of the Security
Council. This year, as we commemorate the eighth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
we should assess the implementation of the resolution
and its impact on the situation of women and girls in
conflict and post-conflict countries.

National measures are needed to ensure that
vulnerable societies emerging from conflict eliminate
those inhuman practices and reinforce the security and
justice sectors through the launching of reconstruction
processes in which men and women should take part
without any discrimination. In that respect,
peacekeeping operations should support local peace
initiatives launched by women and the participation of
women's groups in all activities related to the peace
process and the settlement of conflicts.

It is important to stress that the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission, which was set up
following the 2005 World Summit, is decisive for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). The
Peacebuilding Commission has all the necessary tools
to renew and enhance the role of women so that they
can take part in reconstruction and peacebuilding
activities in countries affected by the work of the
Commission. The mainstreaming of gender equality in
the Commission's Integrated Peacebuilding Strategies
in Burundi, Sierra Leone and Guinea-Bissau are
success stories that need to be reproduced elsewhere.

My country therefore supports the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and of the
relevant General Assembly resolutions, in particular
resolutions 61/143 and 62/133 on the intensification of
efforts to eliminate all forms of violence against
women and resolution 62/134 on the elimination of
rape and other forms of sexual violence in all their
manifestations, including in conflict and related
situations. Those are effective instruments for
promoting and protecting the rights of women in
conflict and post-conflict situations and in all situations
of violence.

It is clear that the active participation of women
in peace processes, conflict prevention, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding and their empowerment are two vital
ingredients for the sustainability of peace. To that end,
the most recent report of the Secretary-General on
women and peace and security (S/2008/622) of
25 September 2008 assesses the progress achieved in
implementing resolution 1325 (2000) by the Security
Council and intergovernmental and regional
organizations, and recounts the measures taken by
Member States, United Nations entities and civil
society.

However, while progress has been achieved in
integrating the gender perspective in national policies
and global strategies aimed at improving the situation
of women, shortcomings and weaknesses persist in the
actual implementation of those policies.

My country, which attaches considerable
importance to resolution 1325 (2000), considers that its

implementation must be carried out in the framework
of a global and integrated approach that mobilizes the
efforts of all Governments, civil society and
international organizations in a coordinated and
harmonized manner. In that respect, we are ready to
cooperate bilaterally and provide direct technical
assistance - to African countries in particular, when
they have requested it - or to cooperate trilaterally,
with the involvement of other partners, in order to
ensure the implementation of that resolution.

For its part, Morocco has responded positively to
the international movement that has been launched to
combat violence against women. That response has
been effected at many levels, in particular through the
establishment of a national strategy for counteracting
violence against women and the implementation of a
plan of action to implement that strategy by
strengthening neighbourhood institutions, legal
services for women who are victims of violence, and
legal, institutional, economic and social reforms.

Morocco has made considerable efforts, which
have been broadly welcomed, to promote gender
equality. In fact, my country considers such measures
to be key to achieving good governance and the agreed
development goals. Gender equality is an intrinsic part
of the policies of my Government, which are part of a
comprehensive process based on promoting economic
solidarity, economic and social development and equal
opportunity for all.

Morocco, which is aware that sustainable human
development must include integrated gender policies,
has for several years been taking proactive measures to
promote economic and political participation by
women. Our concrete action includes the integration of
the gender dimension in the drafting and analysis of the
national budget. We are one of the first countries to
have done so.

I take this opportunity to express our full support
for the many actions of the United Nations
Development Fund for Women regional office in
Morocco. Those actions reflect the growing interest in
the issue of violence against women and in economic
governance, as evidenced in efforts to integrate the
gender dimension in development policies.
I do not want to dwell on the activities of my
country with regard to gender equality and the
promotion of women's rights in general in the context
of the consolidation of the rule of law and democracy,
but I would like to reiterate my country's support for
the Secretary-General's vision in that regard. His
position is that the United Nations system has a role to
play in enhancing national capacities, particularly at
the highest level, in the definition of policies, the
adoption of measures and the establishment of
multilateral partnerships. That support must be coupled
with financial resources and technical assistance in
implementing those policies and putting an end to the
atrocities committed against women in conflict
situations.

To that end, my country believes that our efforts
should be based on four major activities. First, the fate
of women in conflict situations who are recruited
against their will by armed groups and forced to carry
weapons must be taken into account in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes.
Secondly, the gender-specific dimension of the justice
sector must be strengthened in order to prevent
impunity for those responsible for such violence.
Thirdly, the role of women in political, economic and
social life must be enhanced. Fourthly, gender equality
must be ensured in the various sectors of public life.

In conclusion, my delegation harbours the hope
that this debate will contribute to enhancing the now-
recognized role of women in the maintenance of peace
and security and in peacebuilding.

