Mr. Jinga (Romania): Romania aligns itself with
the statement delivered on 29 October on behalf of the
European Union. I would like to make a few remarks in
my national capacity.

Next year will mark the twentieth anniversary
of the adoption of the resolution 1325 (2000) and the
twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration
and Platform for Action. The eve of these significant
milestones provides an opportunity to reflect on what
we have done to place women at the heart of conflict
prevention, conflict resolution and peacebuilding
efforts and on what remains to be done. While we
recognize the advancements that have been made over
the past two decades, we remain deeply concerned
about the rising levels of violent misogyny, the use of
sexual and gender-based violence as a weapon of war
and the lack of justice and support for the survivors of
such violence.

Romania integrates gender considerations into
all aspects of its national security and stability. Our
allocation of 2 per cent of our gross domestic product
to defence and our support for women's representation
at all levels of decision-making, both locally and
internationally, are some of the measures that my
country has undertaken to implement the women and
peace and security agenda. We promote fair access
for men and women - both military and civilian
personnel - to all hierarchical levels, including
both leadership and executive positions, while also
observing compliance with performance selection
criteria. The Romanian Ministry of National Defence
has taken the lead in promoting and implementing the
women and peace and security agenda at the national
level by creating a gender management office, a
structure responsible for coordinating with all relevant
stakeholders towards the development of the national
action plan for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). In that regard, we have established a national
implementation group consisting of representatives
from different Government ministries and civil
society representatives. The group concluded the
elaboration of the national action plan in September,
and the Government is expected to adopt it by the end
of December.

Women peacekeepers play an indispensable role in
laying the foundations for sustaining peace in conflict
zones, and it has been proven that the presence of
women in United Nations peacekeeping missions has
a positive effect on local populations. As women and
children are the most vulnerable to becoming victims
of violence, it is easier for female peacekeepers to
overcome social and cultural boundaries and provide
victims and local communities with a more reliable
sense of security and trust. My country is a strong
promoter of integrating women into the contingents
deployed to peace missions. We have a successful
example from Afghanistan, where Romania provided
female engagement teams, which managed to regularly
interact with local women, building trust and confidence
in a very complex environment.

During Romania's chairmanship of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) in 2018, listening to
the voices of women was high on our agenda. In that
regard, the topic of financing the gender dimension of
peacebuilding was included in the PBC annual session.
In addition, during the working visits I paid last year to
the Sahel and West Africa as PBC Chair, I met women's
civil society groups and women leaders, which gave me
the privilege of better understanding how essential it is
to include women in all peace processes and ensure their
participation at all levels of society in order to achieve
lasting peace. This year, with Colombia as its Chair, the
PBC has continued to use its convening and advisory
role to provide a platform for women peacebuilders.

Romania strongly supports the Secretary-General's
Action for Peacekeeping initiative. I am proud to
announce that Romania has already surpassed the
16 per cent target for women's participation in peace
operations in 2019. In fact, 17 per cent of Romania's
military observers and staff officers, as well as 21 per
cent of our police contingents, currently deployed in
peacekeeping operations are women. Romania is also
increasing the number of security personnel trained
to prevent and respond to sexual and gender-based
violence and is supporting the Office of the Special
Coordinator on Improving the United Nations Response
to Sexual Exploitation and Abuse by providing it with
an expert on military law.

I conclude by saying that there is an urgent need for
more action and fewer words. I look forward to taking
stock of all our efforts in 2020. Romania remains fully
engaged on this issue.

