Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): It is
an honour for my delegation to participate once again
in an open Security Council debate on the subject of
women in conflict situations. We are therefore
especially grateful to you, Mr. President, and to the
delegation of Romania for having chosen this subject
on the occasion of the fifth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000). We are certain that this
debate will be an excellent opportunity to look into the
obstacles that continue to restrict the participation of
women in peace processes, as well to exchange
experiences on the involvement of women in those
processes.

We would also like to express our gratitude for
the participation in this debate of Under-Secretary-
General Guehenno; Ms. Rachel Mayanja, Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women; and Ms. Noeleen Heyzer,
Executive Director of the United Nations Development
Fund for Women. We are grateful too for the presence
of civil society organizations. All of them agree about,
and are providing us with further information on, the
situation of women in the developing world. That
should encourage us to bear in mind that the struggle to
achieve development is also a struggle on behalf of
women and that vulnerable groups are the main victims
of underdevelopment.

Five years ago, when the Council adopted
resolution 1325 (2000) - and my country was then a
member of the Council - we encouraged greater
participation by women in the area of peace and
security. Today we are certain that the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) was an important milestone in
the history of women's participation throughout the
various phases of conflict. Resolution 1325 (2000) is
the appropriate legal framework within which Member
States and United Nations bodies can increase the
participation of women in this area. However, we know
that there is unfortunately still a significant gap
between the legal framework and the reality of
implementation.

This year we mark the fifth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000). Five years after its adoption,
we must acknowledge that, although the subject of
women in the areas of peace and security has become
more visible within the United Nations system and a
series of measures have been implemented to make
their participation effective, there continues to be a
gender gap, which we must work to bridge. Women are
still underrepresented in peace processes and continue
to be the victims of serious human rights violations
during armed conflict. As we renew our commitment to
resolution 1325 (2000), it is imperative that we
translate that commitment into concrete action.

We recall that our debate last year focused on
gender-based violence. The Romanian presidency has
now called on us to consider in particular the
participation of women in peace processes and post-
conflict peacebuilding. We are convinced that such
processes will be lasting and effective only if they take
into account the perspectives and interests of all actors,
men and women alike. Women have demonstrated that
their presence can spark a peace process and that their
participation has been very important in ensuring
lasting and more just peace.

In my country, Argentina, the role played by
women's organizations, including the Mothers of the
Plaza de Mayo, during the unfortunate military
dictatorship was very important in making Argentina's
society, as well as the world, aware of the serious
human rights violations that were being committed.
Subsequently, once democracy was re-established, the
Grandmothers of the Plaza de Mayo continued their
search for children born in detention, almost 100 of
whom have been found to date.

We therefore believe that we must increase our
interaction with civil society on the ground, especially
by working with women's organizations, to ensure that
women are taken into account not just during peace
process negotiations but also during the drafting of
legislation and the establishment of new national
institutions.

We take note of the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2005/636) containing the action plan for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) throughout
the United Nations system, which was developed as a
result of a request by the Security Council. Bearing in
mind the importance and scope of that initiative, we
believe that the Secretariat should supplement the
information provided in the report of the Secretary-
General in an interactive format that includes the
participation of all Member States.

This year, heads of State and Government
reiterated their commitment to the dual role of women
in situations of armed conflict, both as peacemakers
and as victims of the most unjustified violence. The
2005 World Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1) provides for the establishment of a
Peacebuilding Commission that, among other things,
would have a mandate to intensify work with civil
society in order to collect accurate information about
conflicts and prevent new ones from occurring. We
hope that the Commission that we are in the process of
establishing will interact with civil society and will
bear in mind women's concerns in a range of areas, so
that women can participate on an equal footing with
men in peacebuilding processes and in the future
political life of their countries.

We urge the Security Council to continue to make
efforts towards the effective implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) in the field. Among those
efforts, we suggest the appointment of gender advisers
in peacekeeping missions, the mainstreaming of the
gender perspective in field visits and missions and the
need to maintain contact with civil society, especially
with women's organizations. In that connection, we
would like to thank the delegation of Denmark for
holding an Arria Formula meeting on this issue.

We also urge the Council to draw the Secretary-
General's attention to the need to appoint more women
at the decision-making level, including as his special
representatives. We also call upon Member States to
put forward female candidates for such positions. We
believe that, along with the implementation of the
Secretariat's action plan, the Council should establish
some sort of regular monitoring mechanism for the
resolution.

The obstacles to the full implementation of
resolution 1325 (2005) arise from both the instability
of conflict situations themselves and the lack of respect
for the human rights of women. We are aware that the
latter falls within the purview of other bodies, such as
the Third Committee of the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council's Commission on Human
Rights and, with respect to social and legal status, the
Commission on the Status of Women. In that regard,
we call upon Member States to carry out the
commitments they have entered into, especially under
the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and
the outcome document of the twenty-third special
session of the General Assembly, known as Beijing + 5
(General Assembly resolution S-23/3). As I have
stated, resolution 1325 (2000) is the framework for the
protection of the rights of women in conflict situations.
However, it also belongs clearly within the broader
framework of respect for human rights.

Lastly, although I realize that it is not the primary
subject before us today, we cannot fail to condemn acts
of sexual violence by United Nations personnel in the
field. As a troop-contributing country, we acknowledge
our responsibility for educating and training our troops.
I also wish to say that there is a need to take every
preventive action and adopt a zero-tolerance attitude
towards those responsible for such violence.

