Mr. Amolo (Kenya): Allow me to recognize the
presence earlier of the Secretary-General and that of
my sister the redoubtable Executive Director of UN-
Women, Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, as well as to
add the compliments of my delegation to those of other
delegations for the convening this important discussion
on women and peace and security.

Kenya welcomes the report (S/2016/822) of the
Secretary-General on women and peace and security
and takes note of the recommendations and conclusions
therein. They provide useful information on key areas
that need to be reinforced to enhance gender equality and
women's empowerment in peace and security settings.

Resolution 1325 (2000) was adopted a year after
Kenya's tenure on the Security Council came to an
end. Kenya commends the Security Council for its
sustained, committed engagement to the agenda on
women and peace and security over the past 16 years.
Kenya's commitment to the full implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, is unequivocal. It is further underlined by our
full support at the regional level of the African Union
Solemn Declaration on Gender Equality in Africa. I
am pleased to inform the Council that our Government
has undertaken a number of far-reaching measures to
that end.

In 2016, Kenya launched a national action plan for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), aptly entitled
"Kuhusisha Wanawake ni Kudumisha Amani' - which
in Kiswahili means "To Involve Women is to Sustain
Peace" - that encompasses the changing nature of
insecurity by incorporating women's human security.

Secondly, the action plan will continue to
mainstream resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008)
into Kenya's national development framework. The
national plan also takes into account progress made
by Kenya in advancing the promotion and protection
of women and girls, in accordance with the Kenyan
Constitution and intergovernmental and regional
policies related to security, peacebuilding and conflict
resolution; in improving the quality of women's
participation in their contribution to security at the
national level by increasing their numbers through well-
targeted recruitment; and in developing programmes
at the National Defence College that integrate gender
training for troops prior to deployment in peacekeeping
operations undertaken in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions.

The Kenyan Constitution, promulgated in 2010,
now addresses structural discrimination challenges
and protects and guarantees fundamental freedoms
and the civic and socioeconomic rights of men and
women equally. Based on our national experience,
I would like to underscore the important role that
education, capacity-building and communication can
play in combatting violence against women and girls.
Kenya therefore urges all stakeholders, Member State
and the United Nations to prioritize education and the
creation of awareness of the critical role of women in
peacebuilding, peace and security.

As the current Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission, Kenya has been at the forefront of efforts
to operationalize the United Nations women and peace
and security agenda. On 7 September, the Commission
adopted a gender strategy to promote gender-sensitive
peacebuilding. The strategy acknowledges the vital
role of women's leadership and participation in conflict
prevention and sustaining peace. Kenya urges all
Member States to address issues relating to existing
gaps. I am convinced that only thus can we meet our
collective commitments to women, peace and security.
We therefore welcome the cogent remarks made by the
representative of the penholder, the United Kingdom,
advocating for champions and leaders, and we were
happy to note that the representative of Sweden is a
good candidate for such a champion.

Kenya also appreciates the comments made by
the representative of China, assigning additional
blame to terrorists in blatantly targeting women,
especially in our continent, Africa. Earlier today, the
President of our Republic, His Excellency Mr. Uhuru
Kenyatta, condemned in the strongest terms a terrorist
attack in Mandera by such depraved individuals. We
also appreciate Japan's forward-looking approach to
enabling the World Assembly of Women meeting next
year in Japan. It is therefore necessary that we provide
predictable and sustained financing for peacebuilding,
target more funds towards gender equality, and support
special funds, such as the United Nations Trust Fund in
Support of Actions to Eliminate Violence against Women
and the United Nations Fund for Gender Equality.

Finally, Kenya believes that if the issue of the
diversion of resources from development to waging
war is not urgently addressed, our efforts to meet our
commitments to women and girls will continue to
lag behind.

