Ms. Skare: Thank you, Mr. President, for allowing
me to give a briefpresentation on NATO's contributions
to the implementation of the Council's resolutions
on women and peace and security. Allow me also to
welcome today's adoption of resolution 2122 (2013),
which is yet another significant resolution on women
and peace and security, and to thank our briefers for
their presentations at today's debate.

In the year that has passed since I last addressed the
Security Council (see S/PV.6877), work by NATO and
our partners on the issue of women, peace and security
has continued to progress. Awareness is growing, and
it is better understood that mainstreaming gender in
the broader security context will strengthen our ability
to meet today's security challenges. Furthermore, our
policies on women and peace and security are becoming
a more integral part of our everyday business.

In NATO's collaborations with partner nations
on women and peace and security we focus on joint
political leadership, as well as on practical cooperation
in the security and defence fields. Reforms and the
rebuilding of security institutions should be gender-
sensitive and ensure women's participation in security,
as in any other sector of our societies. I am happy to
report that over the past year a number of partners
have included or are considering including women and
peace and security-related goals in their cooperation
programmes with NATO.
A review of the practical implications of resolution
1325 (2000) in the conduct of NATO-led operations
and missions has been concluded together with our
partners in the International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) and the International Security Force in Kosovo,
and recommendations on the way ahead have been
approved by the North Atlantic Council. That review
and the ensuing discussions in the Alliance with our
partners provided a good opportunity for us to learn
from our experiences in Afghanistan and Kosovo.

A key lesson is that we need to strengthen our focus
on the implementation of already existing policies,
action plans and directives. We are therefore pursuing
the continued integration of a gender perspective into
all phases and activities related to conflict analysis,
planning and the execution of crisis management
operations, and we are strengthening the role of gender
advisers in the field. Those activities contribute to the
enhancement of operational effectiveness and to the
improved implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
related resolutions in an operational context.

As documented by that review, training, education
and exercises remain key tools for ensuring that
our security institutions and armed forces have the
necessary competencies. We have made strides in
strengthening the gender training offered under the
auspices of NATO. The Nordic Centre for Gender in
Military Operations, situated in Sweden, has been
appointed department head for NATO gender training
in military operations. Strengthened curriculums for
both troops and gender advisers have been developed.
NATO is also currently developing an online gender
course, in close collaboration with the United Nations.
We encourage partners to make use of available gender-
training opportunities offered by NATO and its allies.

NATO's overall purpose is to safeguard the
freedom and security of all its members by political
and military means. The Alliance is not defined by
the threats we face, rather it is defined by the values
we share. We are united by the principles of individual
liberty, democracy, human rights and the rule of law.

NATO fully recognizes the need to ensure access
to justice for all, and we recognize the challenges that
occur when the rule of law breaks down in a conflict
situation and when there is no equality before the law.
We do not have individual liberty if women cannot
decide for themselves; we do not have democracy if
women cannot participate; we do not respect human
rights if women's rights are not respected; and there is
no rule of law if women do not have access to justice.

The overall responsibility for ensuring the rule of
law and equality before the law rests with nations, but
the role of international law in setting standards and
ensuring accountability is also very important. Real
gains have been made in developing the international
legal frameworks and institutions to secure
accountability and justice for war crimes and crimes
against humanity.

NATO is exploring how we, as a politico-military
regional organization, can best, within our role and
responsibilities, prepare and assist in supporting the
rule of law and gender equality through our activities.
For example, under ISAF, we have been running a Rule
of Law Field Support Mission to support and enable
Afghan officials and international organizations in
their rule oflaw efforts.

The heinous crimes, and in particular the sexual
and gender-based violence, committed during conflicts
have amplified the need to stand united in the struggle
against impunity. Sexual and gender-based violence in
conflict undermines freedom, security and stability,
and, if unpunished, it undermines the credibility of
any legal system, denying access to justice for all.
Global prosecutions, civilian protection mechanisms,
the contributions of the United Nations and other
international organizations are there to complement
national efforts.

In September, all NATO allies fully subscribed to
the Declaration of Commitment to End Sexual Violence
in Conflict. It is highlighted, both in that Declaration
and in resolution 2106 (2013), that the collection of
data and the documentation of sexual and gender-based
Violence in armed conflict can be instrumental in
bringing perpetrators to justice and in ensuring justice
for survivors.

We should, however, not regard women as
passive victims and recipients. Just as women need
to be included in the prevention, management and
resolution of conflicts, women need to be included
also in reconciliation and transitional justice. Women's
participation is a matter of basic human rights and
democratic principles. Those most affected by conflicts
must be heard and enabled to contribute to the solutions
that prevent conflicts. We cannot afford not to include
women. It is not simply a question of what benefits
women, but of what benefits the whole society - men
and women, boys and girls.
