Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, I would like to thank the Russian presidency
for having convened today's open debate and for the
concept paper (S/2016/871, annex); Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for the briefing on his annual report
on women and peace and security (S/2016/822); the
Executive Director of UN-Women, Phumzile Mlambo-
Ngcuka, for her briefing; and the representative of the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security
and South Sudan civil society representative, Rita
Lopidia, for her valiant plea.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement of
the Group of Friends of women and peace and security
to be delivered by the representative of Canada.

Resolution 1325 (2000) was a question mark with
regard to the women and peace and security agenda
by acknowledging the disproportionate impact of war
and armed conflict on women, boys and girls. Today,
16 years after its adoption, the growing incidence of
terrorism, the nature and proliferation of conflicts,
as well as the persistent non-compliance with
international law, including international humanitarian
law and international human rights law by the parties
in armed conflicts merely serves to intensify the
above-mentioned impact by increasing the suffering
of millions of innocent people. Resolution 1820 (2008)
was the first to recognize sexual violence as a tactic of
war.

In spite of the efforts made at the national and
international levels, women and girls continue to be
subjected to deliberate attacks and are victims of
rape, gender-based violence, sexual slavery, forced
prostitution, genital mutilation, human trafficking,
forced marriages and pregnancies and sexual
exploitation and abuse. The victims of sexual violence
in conflict situations endure irreversible physical and
psychological trauma and, on many occasions, suffer
from sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/
AIDS. That situation is ofparticular concern in the case
of forced pregnancy, given the impact of such diseases
on the health of mother and child and the stigmatization
and social exclusion they face and of which they are the
primary victims.

Attacks on hospitals and humanitarian personnel
are not the only form of violations of international law
but they prevent the victims of sexual violence, as well
as newborns and pregnant women, from having access
to health services and sexual and reproductive health
services, including abortion services as well as the
medication needed to ensure their survival. Iurge parties
to armed conflict to comply with their international
obligations, in particular with the provisions of
resolution 2286 (2016), whose implementation is crucial
to alleviating the suffering of the weakest.

Likewise, we must deploy additional efforts to
ensure the sexual and reproductive rights of women in
conflict situations, as well as provide comprehensive,
non-discriminatory health-care services and
psychological support to victims. Similarly, we deem
it crucial to step up the efforts of the United Nations as
a whole and of Member States to prevent and respond
to sexual violence against women in refugee camps,
which currently poses a major challenge.

Uruguay would like to stress the link between
sexual violence and the maintenance and financing
of terrorist organizations, since the latter use women
and girls as prizes or incentives to recruit men and
boys and thereby force them into prostitution. Given
this cruel reality, we deem it crucial to reaffirm the
collective political will and commitment to fight sexual
violence, mobilize additional financial resources so as
to create programmes that are capable of responding to
the needs of victims, and ensure effective research and
data-gathering procedures as well as access to justice
at the national and international levels, including the
International Criminal Court.

Similarly, we call for progress in the implementation
of the commitments undertaken at the international
level to eliminate all forms of human trafficking and
discrimination due to race, colour, gender, language,
religion, political views or any other characteristic or
social condition.

We are deeply concerned by the impact of armed
conflict on the education and in particular the literacy
of girls, whose schooling is disproportionately
impacted. We are also deeply dismayed at the impact
of forced child marriage on the education of girls, who
are excluded from formal education and in many cases
forced to do domestic work. According to the report
of the Secretary-General, in conflict situations girls
are 90 per cent more likely not to receive secondary
education than in countries that are not so affected.
Appropriate access to educational and political systems
and the economic empowerment of women must be
guaranteed in order to be able to make progress with
respect to these goals.

Women must be part of the solutions to these
global challenges. Their inclusion in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding as well as in decision-making processes
is not only fair but also necessary, and it is crucial
to take measures and actions that are sustainable
over time and properly reflect the challenges on the
ground. Experience has shown that women are relevant
players in the prevention and resolution of conflict.
They play an important role in the peacebuilding
process, the rebuilding of societies and the promotion
of new approaches with a gender perspective. In this
framework, we believe that it is necessary to provide
opportunities that enhance the potential of women in
these areas and ensure their planned and equitable
access to decision-making posts.

The participation of women in the military and
police components of peacekeeping operations has a
positive effect on the population, since it reduces the
undue use of force and makes it possible to become
closer to the local population, in particular when there
have been cases of the sexual exploitation and abuse of
women and girls.

Despite all of the foregoing, very often we face
serious difficulties in enhancing the participation
and action of women in areas related to peace and
security. The number of women who participate in
peace negotiations is very low, as it is in terms of the
personnel deployed in peacekeeping operations, both
military and police. According to the report of the
Secretary-General, in December 2015 women made
up only 4.7 per cent of all deployed military experts,
3.2 per cent of military troops and 16.9 per cent of
police officers.

In this context, Uruguay reaffirms its commitment
through strengthening measures such as maintaining
an above-average percentage of women deployed in
peace operations; continuing with the mandatory
training of military troops that are to be deployed on
issues of the prevention of and response to violence,
sexual exploitation and abuse; and continuing with the
zero-tolerance policy in cases of misconduct, sexual
violence are any other violation of the code of conduct.
Likewise, we reiterate our commitment to the zero-
tolerance policy established by the Secretary-General
and our readiness to continue to ensure that those who
carry out acts of sexual exploitation and abuse are
held accountable.

We are aware of the fact that the problems associated
with women and girls due to armed conflict are very
extensive and complex and require multifaceted efforts to
be able to address them in a coherent and comprehensive
manner. In this respect, we welcome the efforts of civil
society and acknowledge in particular the synergies
that are possible in the context of the various global
tools available in this respect such as the Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women and the Sustainable Development Goals, the
value of exchanging experiences through the national
focal point network established by Spain, and the work
of the Security Council's Informal Expert Group on
Women and Peace and Security.

Also crucial is the quality and quantity of the
information that reaches the Security Council, and,
in this respect, we commend the work done by the
Secretary-General in including specific information
in his country situation reports urging fine-tuning of
the relevant mechanisms. The efforts made to ensure
the greater participation of women in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, as well as to adopt measures that reduce
the disproportionate impact of conflict on women, have
not had the desired results or allowed us to respond
effectively to the challenges on the ground. That is
why we deem it crucial to go beyond any approach that
leads us to exclude a segment of the population that is
particularly vulnerable to the effects of conflict from
the solutions and measures that are to be adopted.
Women are key actors precisely because they are direct
victims and because they make up approximately 50 per
cent of the civilian population affected.

In this respect, Uruguay is considering the holding
of an Arria Formula meeting in December to address
the possible synergy between the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women and the women and peace and security agenda.

We call upon the Secretary-General-designate, the
United Nations as a whole and all Member States to
continue to give pride of place to the women and peace
and security agenda and all that it entails.
It is frustrating that in the twenty-first century,
after so many discussions at the international level,
this reality has remained unchanged. We must act
with a focus on the challenges we are facing, which
require the more equitable participation of women at
all levels in peace and security discussions. We cannot
disregard this reality. We must undertake commitments
and devise solutions that are based on inclusion, not
exclusion. Millions of people are waiting for us to act.

