Mr. Srivihok (Thailand): Thailand aligns itself
with the statement made earlier on behalf of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
Thailand welcomes the focus of this year's Security
Council open debate - women's political and economic
empowerment as one of the means to effectively
implement the women and peace and security agenda
and sustaining peace through conflict prevention, as
well as broader efforts to maintain international peace
and security.

Resolution 1325 (2000), together with the other
seven resolutions adopted by the Security Council
on women and peace and security, have formed a
strong foundation and normative framework for the
operationalization of that important agenda. Since
2000, a number of innovations have been put in
place - including the establishment, in recent years,
of the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and
Security, and the Women, Peace and Security National
Focal Point Networks, in which Thailand has been
actively involved.

There has also been significant progress in the
Council recently with increased attention to the women
and peace and security agenda in response to crises,
such as new provisions in the mandates of peacekeeping
operations that call for women's participation in
security processes. Thailand welcomes the Secretary-
General's new agenda that aims to fully align with the
core purpose of the women and peace and security
agenda, including through the meaningful participation
of women in disarmament.

Thailand firmly supports the women and peace and
security agenda and believes that we are all responsible
for translating it into action, which includes closing
implementation gaps at national and international
levels. Thailand views that agenda in a holistic manner,
with an emphasis on achieving gender equality and
the empowerment of women and girls. In the adoption
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, we
reaffirmed that the empowerment of women and girls
and gender equality are key elements for conflict
prevention and international peace and security.
Thailand has therefore aligned the implementation of
that agenda with its national gender equality strategy
in areas ranging from development and prevention to
sustaining peace.

Our implementation of women and peace and
security agenda has also been part of our country's
report to the Committee on the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women. Moreover, we submitted a voluntary report on
the status of the iplementation of the women and peace
and security agenda, including data and analysis to
assist in the preparation of the 2018 Secretary-General
report on women and peace and security (S/2018/900).

One ofthe notable cross-cutting action plans in the
report was the integration of the Women Empowerment
Fund, established in 2012, to provide grants and
loans to women for development-related projects that
increase economic opportunities for women, in line
with Thailand's national measures and guidelines on
women and peace and security for the period 2017-
2020. Projects are now being launched in areas such as
capacity-building, effective negotiation and mediation,
engagement with community leaders and fund
allocation to promote women-led entrepreneurship.

On the international front, Thailand has been
an ardent supporter of women's participation in
peacekeeping missions. Seven of 27 Thai peacekeepers
serving at our three peacekeeping missions are women,
accounting for 20 per cent of the total. Thai women
peacekeepers are also at the forefront of community
engagement efforts to promote sustainable development
throughout their services in peacekeeping missions.

In conclusion, Thailand is committed to continuing
to do its part at home and abroad to genuinely advance
gender equality and empower women, both politically
and economically, and to maintain international peace
and security.

