Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing and his report
(S/2019/800) on women and peace and security. I also
thank all the other briefers for speaking so candidly.
We recognize the candour of the report and share its
sentiment. I would also thank Foreign Minister Pandor
for convening us to discuss the women and peace and
security agenda.
When it comes to conflict resolution, women are
indispensable. The truth was reinforced for me by a
gathering of women that I met in Malakal, South Sudan,
following the Security Council's trip to Juba. These
women have endured and are continuing to endure
more than most of us can possibly imagine. What is so
difficult for such women is not what the terrible secrets
that they carry but the fact that they cannot even share
the simple truths of what has happened to them because
doing so would put their families in danger. One of the
very brave women in Malakal walked for more than two
hours just to sit with us and share in confidence in a
place of safety.

Those women and so many like them have
important matters to express. Are we ensuring that
they have a voice? Are we paying attention when they
speak? The United States believes that the role of
women is so essential that in 2017 we signed a stand-
alone women, peace and security law - the first and
only one of its kind in the world. In 2019, the President
released the United States Strategy on Women, Peace
and Security. The Strategy outlines how we plan to
safeguard women's participation in peace and security
matters and advance the women and peace and security
agenda domestically and abroad.

Participation begins with having a seat at the table.
How are we doing in that regard? As we speak, in the
United States we are hosting nearly 80 women leaders
to build a cross-cultural understanding on advancing
the women, peace and security agenda. Earlier this
month, the United States hosted a high-level forum on
women and peace and security in the Middle East with
dozens of female participants, including women from
Syria. Those actions align with the aims of resolution
1325 (2000), including mandatory increases in the
representation of women at all decision-making levels
and the provision for the special needs of women and
girls in conflict.

However, ensuring a seat at the table for women
is only the bare minimum. We must also see to it that
women are empowered once they have that seat. That
is why we are so proud to have supported the travel
of Ms. Alan Salah to the United States. Briefings such
as hers strengthen the role of civil society in civic
life and underscore for us the role that women play in
conflict resolution. While we want to empower women
abroad, we must also attend to the issue at home. We
are therefore ensuring that our own national security
institutions are fully prepared to support women. The
United States is enhancing training for our diplomats,
development experts and military personnel so that our
public servants actively promote gender equality.

Lastly, our partner Governments must work towards
full equality for women, including girls, and securing
women's inclusion in all stages of conflict resolution.
The NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and
Security recently and rightfully called on us to defend
the legitimacy of the work of human rights defenders
and their role in promoting peace and security. We read
its open letter to Member States with great interest
and agree that women's full, effective and meaningful
participation in all aspects of peace and security must
be non-negotiable and safeguarded.

One place where we can heed that call is in the
Secretary-General's report on the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia (S/2019/780), which
stresses the need to address killings of human rights
defenders and social leaders and the specific risk
faced by women leaders. We can also heed the call by
responding to the Secretary-General's request for more
Member States to create national action plans to advance
the women, peace and security agenda as Colombia is
now doing through a joint partnership with the United
States. The United States is ready to support all Member
States in crafting and implementing women, peace and
security action plans and strategies. But if there is one
lesson that I have drawn from the past few weeks, it is
that the entire Council has a moral obligation to follow
through. So many women in Malakal in South Sudan
and in conflict zones around the world are faithfully
walking the road to peace but they need to know they
are not alone on that road.

I therefore need to ask two final questions. Will we
all commit to ensuring that all women have a voice?
Will we pay attention to what they are telling us?

