Mr. Schaper (Netherlands): I thank you first of
all, Madam, for having organized this important debate
and for giving Member States the opportunity to
participate in it. My delegation would like to make a
few remarks in addition to the European Union
statement, with which we align ourselves, and others
underlining the importance of women's participation in
mediation and conflict prevention.
Resolution 1325 (2000) is considered
internationally to be a milestone for women's roles in
peace and security. As United States Secretary of State
Hillary Clinton said, it is an imperative to human
security, and its full implementation is our common
responsibility.

On 4 December 2007, the Netherlands adopted its
first national action plan for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). The Dutch national action plan
relies on a broad support base, and is unique in its kind
as it was signed jointly by Dutch Government and civil
society. The plan has led to many joint activities
benefiting from the complementarity between
Government bodies and civil society. A further element
of the Dutch national action plan is that we strongly
believe that the ownership of these activities should be
with the national stakeholders - the Government and
civil society - of the fragile States for which they are
developed.

A good example of such a joint achievement, in
our view, is the security sector development
programme in Burundi. Based on research done by the
Dutch non-governmental organization Oxfam Novib, a
gender perspective in the security sector was developed
by the Burundian Ministries of Defence and Public
Security, together with the Dutch Ministries of Defence
and Foreign Affairs. This led to specific empowerment
programmes for female military personnel and to a
high number of female applicants for the Burundi
police force.

Another example is the number of Afghan women
in Government and Parliament. The Netherlands
Government, together with other Governments, the
Afghan Women's Network and the United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) - now
UN-Women - organized meetings and lobbies that
resulted in more female candidates being nominated
for political positions.

In past years, important initiatives and strategies
have been developed, and many examples of joint
achievements, such as the ones I mentioned in Burundi
and Afghanistan, are at hand. The Netherlands is one of
a group of countries that work hard and make real
progress. These are important accomplishments, but far
more needs to be done. To quote our Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Uri Rosenthal:

"Women represent 50 per cent of human
capital, and it is in every country's own interest -
and especially in the so-called fragile States - to
make sure that women are actively involved in
society, the economy and political decision-
making. They must be part of the power
structures; that is what empowerment is about".

Only if we manage to include women can we be
more assured that peace in those societies will be
sustainable, and, by doing so, global stability will be
promoted as well.

At this very moment, the Dutch ministries and
civil society are developing the second resolution 1325
(2000) national action plan for the period 2012-2015,
to be launched in December.

While the first action plan focused on the
physical and legal security of women and men, this
second national action plan is fully dedicated to the
enhancement of female leadership and the political
participation of women in conflict-affected societies.
Peace and security are linked to the playing of active,
powerful roles by women. The power of women to
positively influence situations of crisis was shown
beautifully by the 2011 Nobel Peace Prize winners
Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf, Leymah Gbowee and Tawakkul
Karman. In his words of congratulation, the Dutch
Minister for Foreign Affairs said:

"The fact that these three women have been
awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for their struggle
for freedom, peace and stability in the world is an
excellent example of the fact that women are not
solely victims, but current and future leaders."

Accordingly, it is not surprising that the
Netherlands continues to emphasize that the local men,
and especially women, living the daily reality of a
conflict are the key stakeholders in any intervention.
Individual local women and men, women's
organizations and women's movements are the real
drivers of durable change. Concretely, this means that
the second resolution 1325 (2000) national action plan
emanates from a demand-driven approach. This plan is
about the women, be it at the community or national
level, who have the courage to step up and become
leaders and to play their part in conflict mediation,
resolution and reconstruction. Thus our national action
plan is created to support the needs of those strong,
knowledgeable women and their movements. We
believe they know best what to do in their situation and
in the context of their culture.
We are on the eve of a new decade of promoting
women, peace and security. Together we are
responsible for implementing our joint commitments
now.

