Mr. Amayo (Kenya): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important debate,
and take note with appreciation of the comprehensive
concept note (S/2019/293, annex) that you circulated
to guide today's debate. I also thank Major General
Kristin Lund, the first female Force Commander and
current Head of Mission and Chief of Staff at the
United Nations Truce Supervision Organization, and
Ms. Lorna Nanjia Merekaje, Secretary General of
South Sudan Democratic Engagement Monitoring and
Observation Programme, for their briefings.

A general consensus exists that women enhance
the ability of peacekeepers to reach and interact with
local communities in a peacekeeping mission. That is
particularly so for local women affected by conflict,
who presumably find it easier to share their challenges
with fellow women and in the process reduce cases
of violence. However, beyond the question of gender,
many other challenges still exist to their deployment
and effectiveness. The ability of women peacekeepers
to make a difference in the peace and security arena
is sometimes limited by, among other things, their
numbers, the lack of training on specific gender-
related challenges facing local women in the missions,
language and, at times, an inadequate understanding of
the local culture and its social and cultural barriers.

The sheer lack of sufficient numbers of female
soldiers in the rank and file ofmost militaries is perhaps
one of the greatest challenges to the participation of
women in peacekeeping. A country can deploy women
to peace support operations only if they are available
within the establishment. That is further complicated
by the length of time of deployment, bearing in mind
the family responsibilities they also shoulder.

Equally, the success of women peacekeepers in
enhancing the effectiveness of peacekeeping is context-
specific and varies from one mission to another.
Women peacekeepers have proved to be more effective
in missions where they are familiar with the specific
gender-related challenges affecting local women and
children, including where the locals can resonate with
them in terms of culture, race, language and, at times,
colour. Where female peacekeepers are able to speak
the local language, they are more likely to understand
the specific challenges facing local women, which is an
ingredient vital to the mission's success. For example,
in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, Swahili
speakers have proved to be more effective in enhancing
the interaction between local women and peacekeepers,
thereby improving situational awareness and further
influencing the local women by acting as role models.
Similarly, cultural sensitivities in the local
communities may affect the deployment of women
peacekeepers in certain areas. That is particularly so in
communities that still view the profession of arms as a
preserve of men. My delegation therefore recommends
for consideration the following measures to address the
challenges that were already mentioned.

First, Governments of Member States should be
encouraged to fast-track gender mainstreaming in their
national security organizations in order to create a pool
from which female peacekeepers can be drawn.

Secondly, mission-specific training on gender-
related issues is critical to enhancing the readiness and
effectiveness of female peacekeepers. That will help
in developing a better understanding of the social and
cultural setting of the community and hence improve
performance and final outcomes.

Thirdly, certain considerations ought to be made
before a decision is taken on the deployment of women
peacekeepers. For instance, shorter deployment periods
should be considered for female peacekeepers who find
it hard to be away for lengthy periods. Additionally,
when deploying female peacekeepers, we should be
sensitive to cultural variations in different missions.

Fourthly, I am happy to report that Kenya's
deployment of women in peacekeeping operations now
stands at 19 per cent, thereby surpassing the United
Nations recommended percentage of 15 per cent
across all United Nations peacekeeping operations. As
a country, we shall continue to deploy more women
peacekeepers, as necessary.

Finally, I wish to reaffirm our delegation's
commitment to and support for the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative and the Secretary-General's
zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse .

