Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): Let me start by expressing
appreciation to you, Sir, for organizing this open
debate and for being here again to highlight the great
significance of the meeting today. I wish to thank
Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed, Under-
Secretary-General Adama Dieng and Ms. Mina Jaf
for their insightful briefings. It also gives me pleasure
to welcome the Defence Minister of Sweden, and I
thank him for being at this meeting. At a time when
the number of victims of sexual violence targeted by
parties to armed conflicts and terrorists is on the rise,
this debate could not be more appropriate and relevant
in the endeavour to mobilize efforts for concerted and
effective international action aimed at preventing and
responding to this growing problem.

The annual report (S/2017/249) of the Secretary-
General on conflict-related sexual violence, which was
issued last month, with its thorough analysis of current
trends and emerging concerns regarding sexual violence
in conflict as a tactic of war and terrorism, certainly
provides a useful framework for our discussion. Sexual
exploitation and abuse have indeed become rampant in
various conflict and post-conflict operations and are
often linked to other grave crimes, such as killings and
the recruitment and use of child soldiers. It has also been
used as a tactic of war by armed groups, particularly
extremist and terrorist groups, such as the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant, Boko Haram and Al-Shabaab, to
terrorize the civilian population and achieve strategic
objectives. Refugees, asylum seekers and migrants in
countries in conflict, including children, have in many
instances been subjected to conflict-related sexual
violence, and it should be remembered that such acts
are considered war crimes under international law.

The report of the Secretary-General and the
recommendations contained therein could form an
important basis for addressing sexual violence in
various conflict and post-conflict situations. They
will have particular significance in the consideration
of specific conflict or post-conflict situations, and the
Council should explore the ways and means of ensuring
the implementation of the relevant recommendations,
including by assigning protection advisers. The
Council should encourage or pressure, as appropriate,
all parties to an armed conflict to fully comply with
international humanitarian law, particularly in relation
to the protection of civilians. The implementation by
Member States of the relevant regional and international
legal instruments for the prevention, punishment and
eradication of all forms of violence against women
would also contribute to better national, regional and
international responses to victims of sexual violence.
The need to enhance the capacity of peacekeeping
missions to prevent conflict-related sexual
violence 4 particularly through increased participation
by women in peacekeeping, the provision of gender-
sensitive predeployment training on preventing sexual
exploitation and abuse, and the implementation of the
zero-tolerance policy - has already been recognized,
as has the need to involve women and other vulnerable
groups in conflict prevention, conflict resolution
and peacebuilding.

Where serious violations have occurred, the
individuals or groups responsible for such grave
violations of international humanitarian law should
certainly be held accountable, as allowing impunity
is no less a crime. It is important to strengthen
peacebuilding efforts aimed at rebuilding national
capacity and institutions, particularly the capacity of the
security sector and the judiciary to fight impunity and
bring perpetrators to justice. However, what is needed
in order to sustainably prevent sexual exploitation and
violence is to address the root causes of conflict. That
applies, of course, to all of the crimes and inhumane
acts that usually follow violent conflicts. Moreover, as
the Deputy Secretary-General stressed, in our efforts to
ensure success in the fight against sexual exploitation
and violence, we must never overlook what takes place
at the family and societal levels, since that lays the
foundation for what takes place, in a more egregious
manner, during times of violence.

We believe that enhancing global and regional
partnerships in the fight against conflict-related
sexual violence should form an important part of the
international response in conflict and post-conflict
situations. In that connection, the African Union has
demonstrated its commitment to fighting impunity and
holding accountable those responsible for conflict-
related sexual violence. The joint efforts of the United
Nations and the African Union are imperative, not only
in the fight against sexual exploitation and violence
in conflicts but also in supporting the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda on the
continent. The close cooperation and coordination
provided by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General of the United Nations and the Special Envoy of
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission are
important, and the implementation of the framework
for cooperation between the two organizations will
go a long way towards ensuring greater coordination
of efforts.

Finally, with regard to allegations of sexual
exploitation and abuse by United Nations peacekeepers,
we reiterate our strong condemnation of all such acts
throughout the United Nations system and reaffirm our
commitment to support the implementation of the United
Nations zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation
and abuse. We welcome the Secretary-General's
commitment to preventing and combating such abuses.
We support the measures he is undertaking, including
through the appointment of the special coordinator and
the establishment of a high-level task force to develop
a strategy for improving the United Nations response.

