Mr. Rosenblatt (United States of America): We
welcome the opportunity to participate in this
discussion on women and peace and security. It has
been nearly two years to the day since the passage of
the landmark Security Council resolution 1325 (2000),
and we are pleased that the Council has maintained a
focus on tracking its implementation.

We welcome the completion of the Secretary-
General's report on women, peace and security
(S/2002/1154), which provides a thoughtful analysis of
the challenges confronting women and girls during
armed conflict and which offers a number of useful
recommendations on ways the international community
can help address them. We thank the Secretary-General
for presenting this report to us personally and for
sharing with us his goals for implementation of the
report's recommendations. The report and the study
from which it is drawn provide documentation
concerning women both as victims and as actors that
cannot, in the twenty-first century, be ignored. We also
thank Carolyn Hannan, Director of the Division for the
Advancement of Women, which produced this report,
and acknowledge Noeleen Heyzer, Executive Director
of the United Nations Development Fund for Women,
whose parallel report will be released in the next few
days.

Since the adoption of Security Council resolution
1325 (2000), the United Nations, Member States and
the international community have made significant
progress in responding to the particular needs of
women in times of conflict. The Council has
recognized and supported the informal peace initiatives
of women's groups and networks. Additionally,
establishment by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) of gender units and gender adviser
positions in missions such as the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor, the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone has made a difference on the
ground in the lives of women and girls affected by
armed conflict. We commend the efforts of DPKO,
troop-contributing countries and Council members
towards implementing resolution 1325 (2000).

However, much more remains to be done. I know
that we are in agreement that reports and discussions
about the situation of women and girls in armed
conflict are just a beginning. But reports provide the
supporting data that the Secretary-General, the
Council, the Secretariat and Member States
contributing to peace operations can use to integrate
gender perspectives into all peace-building,
peacekeeping and peacemaking efforts. Reports can
help us to determine the best way to achieve our goals
in three specific areas: to improve the lives of women
and girls who are victims of armed conflict; to ensure
that women and girls who have been combatants are
eligible for the same assistance as men; and finally, to
involve women increasingly as actors, at the grass-
roots level, in peacekeeping missions and at the
planning and decision-making levels at United Nations
Headquarters.

My Government supports the Secretary-General's
recommendation set forth in the report that data
collected in research, assessments and appraisals on
peace operations be disaggregated by sex and age, and
that specific data on the situation of women and girls
be provided. That data will inform future planning and
operations. But we should not ignore the wealth of data
already available to us, which will enable us to begin
the integration process now.

We hope there will be an opportunity at a later
date to discuss in depth some of the issues raised in the
report and to begin to look at ways of prioritizing
action on the various recommendations. For example,
the United States would be interested in hearing the
views of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
on its progress in mainstreaming gender perspectives in
peacekeeping operations and on the challenges it faces
in promoting more gender diversity among the
peacekeeping operations staff.

We enthusiastically support an increase in gender
diversity in peacekeeping operations, and the
appointment of more women as special representatives
of the Secretary-General and as special envoys, and we
have provided the names of qualified women
candidates to the Secretary-General for that purpose.

Finally, I will just note that my delegation always
has questions regarding the budget implications of
some of the report's recommendations, which we will
raise at the appropriate opportunity. Thank you again,
Mr. President, for convening this important and timely
meeting. We look forward to further discussion on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in the future.

