Mr. Doualeh (Djibouti): (spoke in French): I thank
you, Sir, for giving me the opportunity to participate
in this very important debate on trafficking in persons
in conflict situations. First, I express my gratitude
and congratulations to the delegation of the United
Kingdom for having convened this high-level debate
today, which allows us to deepen our understanding of
a serious phenomenon and develop a joint analysis of
its causes and the increasingly sophisticated methods
of terrorists and traffickers, as well as to identify
appropriate solutions to sustainably solve the problem.
We underscore the judiciousness of the concept note
(S/2017/198, annex), which clearly lays out the problem,
clarifies what is at stake and asks a number of key
questions in a heuristic approach.

I thank the Secretary-General and the Director
General of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, as well as Mr. Kevin Hyland and Ms. Ilwad
Elman, for their penetrating perspectives and analyses.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of Bolivia on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

Trafficking in persons is a transnational crime
that today spares no country. Sadly, we witness all too
frequently a tragedy affecting thousands of persons,
particularly women and children. In addition to
suffering the horrors of armed conflict, they are often
the victims of trafficking and sexual violence, crimes
that comprise an extremely perverse affront to human
dignity and that, in certain circumstances, may well
be flagrant violations of international humanitarian
law and international conventions on human rights and
transnational organized crime.

The issue of human trafficking has been a main
priorityof the United Nations over the past few decades.
The 2000 Palermo Protocol and the 2010 United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking
in Persons serve as the cornerstones and benchmark
documents for all States Members of the Organization.
At the same time, in recent years we have seen a shift
in the forms of human trafficking, particularly during
and after conflict.

In various regions of the world affected by conflict,
sexual violence is used to destroy as a tactic of war
or terrorism and is a key element of the ideology and
activities of extremist groups such as Boko Haram,
Da'esh and Al-Shabaab. Those terrorist groups openly
advocate human trafficking as part of their military
strategy or as a source of funding. As a result, the
Security Council must pay particular attention to the
links between such phenomena as human trafficking,
sexual violence in conflict situations and the activities
of terrorist groups.

Djibouti recognizes that the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and
its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking
in Persons, Especially Women and Children, represent
the core international framework for combating human
trafficking. The spirit of the Convention must be
embedded in the national legislation of Member States
and duly implemented. In that regard, we attach great
importance to the assistance provided by relevant
bodies to Member States, such as the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and the Team of Experts
on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict,
particularly the guidance provided on legislation and
implementation. We hope that they will make further
progress on the issue and we support their crucial work.

The Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons,
especially women and children, Maria Grazia
Giammarinaro, highlighted the following in her report:

"It is estimated that 10 to 30 per cent of children
in fighting forces are female. Girls who are forcibly
recruited or abducted into military service typically
face forced domestic labour and sexual violence
and exploitation such as forced marriage and/or
sexual slavery." (A/71/303, para. 31)
Additionally, the report of the Secretary-General on
conflict-related sexual violence (S/2016/361/Rev.1)
highlighted the fact that in the past two years sexual
violence has been increasingly linked to the strategic,
ideological and financial objectives of extremist and
terrorist groups.

In the third report of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 2178 (2014) by States affected by foreign
terrorist fighters (S/2015/975, annex), its Executive
Directorate encouraged Member States to develop
effective regional strategies to deal with cross-border
issues and to cooperate closely with border communities
to foster knowledge sharing.

(spoke in English)

Indeed, if we are to effectively tackle this scourge,
we need to communicate more effectively, share
intelligence and mobilize resources. That requires
investment, vigilance and cooperation.

Over 90,000 men, women and children from
neighbouring countries transit through Djibouti en
route to Yemen and other locations in the Middle
East. In 2015, during the sixth meeting of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
Regional Consultative Process on Migration, held
in Djibouti, States members of IGAD decided to
redouble their efforts to combat trafficking in persons
and smuggling of migrants. My Government recently
enacted a new anti-trafficking law on the fight against
trafficking in persons and illicit smuggling of migrants,
repealing Djibouti's law of 2007.

In conclusion, Djibouti is appalled by the
commodification and dehumanization of human
beings. It reiterates its commitment and its willingness
to cooperate with the international community in the
global effort aimed at combating this increasingly
complex and sophisticated scheme developed by a vast
network of facilitators and criminals.

