Mr. Touray (Sierra Leone): Let me start by
expressing my satisfaction and gratitude for the
opportunity to participate in this open debate on the
use of sexual violence in armed conflict and its
aftermath

I also wish to sincerely congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of August and to wish you a
successful tenure. I extend my thanks and appreciation
to the members of the Council for having unanimously
adopted resolution 1820 (2008), which mandated the
submission of the report we are discussing today, as
well as its precursor, resolution 1325 (2000).

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his very informative and enlightened report
(S/2009/362) and to express my delegation's full
support for it and its consequential recommendations to
the Council. In addition, I would be remiss if I failed to
commend the Department of Peacekeeping Operations;
United Nations special agencies, funds and
programmes, including United Nations Action against
Sexual Violence in Conflict; and all other stakeholders
whose concerted efforts contributed to the production
of the report.

The Secretary-General, in the report under
review, emphasizes the need for the implementation of
resolution 1820 (2008) in the context of situations that
are on the agenda of the Council, including the
situation in Sierra Leone. He also describes key
challenges that remain and the need to address them as
a matter of urgency if progress is to be made in
containing sexual violence. He also outlines the
responsibilities of States and other parties in relation to
sexual violence in conflict and its aftermath, as well as
the efforts of the United Nations to prevent and
respond to sexual violence.

Sierra Leone experienced one of the fiercest and
bloodiest conflicts of the 19905, involving mass
killings; the maiming, hacking and amputation of
limbs; the targeting and terrorizing of civilians as a
tactic and instrument of war; the plundering and
pillaging of their property; and the subjection of our
women to horrendous and despicable Violations of their
human rights, including but not limited to rape,
abduction, gang rape, sexual slavery, forced marriage
and even forced labour and conscription.

However, with the help of the international
community, our bilateral partners and regional and
subregional organizations, the country is moving
comparatively swiftly towards stability and peace. That
is not to say, however, that the relics of the past are
gone and done with, for traces of the past - although
not many - remain with us in the aftermath of the war,
and gender-based violence within domestic settings is
not uncommon.
Much has been accomplished in my country
through measures taken to prevent sexual violence and
protect civilians, to combat impunity for sexual
violence, to address discrimination against our women
and girls, and to provide assistance, remedies and
reparation for victims of sexual Violence.

As a State party to relevant international human
rights instruments, we are quite conscious of our
obligations, under international law, international
humanitarian law and pertinent resolutions of this
body, to protect our women and girls from all forms of
violence, to punish the perpetrators and to provide
reparation for the victims. In that regard, Sierra Leone
has shown genuine political will and commitment
towards meeting the needs and interests of women and
girls and has taken appropriate measures to address
gender-based violence, including the following.

First, the Lome' Peace Agreement, which brought
an end to the hostilities and paved the way for peace,
was a major effort to ensure that the negotiations and
their outcome would contribute to preventing or
responding to sexual violence. It emphasized special
attention to the needs of women and the importance of
their inclusion in strategic decision-making positions
so that they can play a central role in the country's
reconstruction process.

Second, the report of the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission highlighted the pathetic
plight of women during the conflict. It recommended
30 per cent representation for women in the decision-
making process, as well as reparations for victims of
sexual violence.

Third, the Special Court for Sierra Leone was
established to demonstrate that there can be no
impunity for those who have committed acts against
women and to address the heinous crimes - especially
sexual violence against women - committed during
the war, irrespective of assurances of amnesty for the
perpetrators.

Fourth, three gender acts, aimed at reinforcing
women's rights and clamping down on sexual and
domestic violence, were adopted. The gender acts
modernized the law against rape, including marital
rape; criminalized domestic violence; and provided
protection for victims, especially women in rural areas.
Wife-beating is now a criminal offence, women can
now own property, and the idea of forcing young girls
into marriage is gradually becoming a thing of the past.
Fifth, the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women, a core
international human rights instrument on
discrimination against women, and the Convention on
the Rights of the Child have been ratified.

Sixth, we have endorsed and implemented
relevant resolutions such as resolutions 1325 (2000)
and 1820 (2008), including through the establishment,
in all our district police headquarters, of family support
units mandated specifically to deal with gender-based
violence. Although poorly resourced and understaffed,
they are in high demand.

Seventh, a national policy on the enhancement of
women through gender mainstreaming was adopted in
2001.

Eighth, a Gender Ministry - although also
poorly resourced - has been established.

Ninth, a national committee was established in
2008 by the Ministry of Social Welfare, Gender and
Children's Affairs, bringing together all agencies
working on gender-based violence, including UNICEF;
the Rainbow Clinic Centre, a counselling and treatment
clinic for raped and battered women; and other
non-governmental organizations to ensure proper
coordination. Since its establishment, the committee
has been very effective in facilitating referrals to
police, legal and medical practitioners, counsellors and
trained health workers for the assessment and
prosecution of cases of sexual violence.

Tenth, structures have been put in place for the
provision of remedies and reparation for victims of
sexual violence. The process of identification, enlisting
and registration is currently ongoing.

Eleventh, an affirmative action programme has
been adopted for the education of girls. It seeks to
empower our women and girls so as to transform them
into effective partners in addressing discriminatory
practices; to increase their participation in decision-
making, conflict prevention and peacebuilding
processes; and to improve their status in society.

Twelfth, the Human Rights Commission has been
established to report on, monitor and address human
rights issues and violations.

Thirteenth, the Constitutional Review
Commission of Sierra Leone has been established and
tasked to consider discriminatory provisions in the
09-44986

Constitution, particularly those discriminating against
women and on the basis of gender.

Finally, gender-sensitive enlistment for the
security sector, police, army and prison staff has been
made a matter of Government policy.

Laudable though these achievements may sound,
there is a need for more political space to articulate the
aspirations of women and to contain sexual violence in
all its ramifications, particularly within the context of
the cultural dimensions of issues affecting women and
changing culturally ingrained practices.

Barely seven years after the end of the civil war
in Sierra Leone and almost 10 years after the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), there is still a need for more
action to improve our performance on matters of
gender-based violence. Adequate performance is
constrained largely by a lack of much-needed resources
rather than a lack of political will. We still need the
continued support and assistance of the international
community to help us fully implement the provisions
of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008).

More is still needed in the sphere of international
assistance and support to States, particularly fragile
ones like ours that are emerging from conflict, to
enable them to fulfil all of the obligations imposed by
these resolutions in terms of the prevention of and
response to gender-based violence.

Furthermore, from an international point of view,
it is important that the prevention of and response to
sexual violence be clearly and specifically reflected in
peacekeeping mandates and mission directives and that
personnel selected for peacekeeping operations and
units be skilled in dealing with sexual violence. There
is also a paramount need to improve the collection of
data on sexual violence and to ensure accountability.

There are many hands on deck. The United
Nations Development Programme, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the
United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM), UNICEF and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs are all involved
in the process in their own special way, and there are
also senior-level mission focal points made up of
Deputy Special Representatives of the Secretary-
General, humanitarian coordinators and resident
coordinators. As the saying goes, too many cooks spoil
19
the broth, and the need for effective coordination is
ever present.

The Sierra Leone delegation accordingly supports
the call for the appointment of a special representative
of the Secretary-General for women and peace and
security, a call that was made most recently during the
March 2009 International Colloquium for Women's
Empowerment, Leadership Development, Peace and
Security, organized by the Presidents of our sister
Republic of Liberia and Finland. This would drive the
coordination of the system-wide response to sexual
violence in armed conflict, especially in the areas of
humanitarian assistance, data collection and reporting
on sexual violence and information management. This,
in the view of my delegation, would not only reinforce
the United Nations multisectoral response to gender-
based violence, but would immensely help to address
the existing gaps in it. It could further assist and give
direction to the understanding of the problem and the
adoption of effective strategies in strengthening the
United Nations role on gender-based violence, data
collection and other related matters.

I cannot conclude my statement without taking
this opportunity to thank the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone, a creation of
both the Security Council and the General Assembly
that was introduced in our peacebuilding architecture,
for its leadership role in ensuring that the incidents that
took place in Freetown on 13 and 16 March did not
escalate to the point of disrupting the hard-earned
peace that we have all tirelessly worked to sustain. I
must also commend the recent intervention by
UNIFEM. to facilitate the provision of victim- and
witness-protection services for the ongoing Justice
Bankole Thompson Commission of Inquiry, established
by His Excellency President Ernest Bai Koroma to
investigate the allegations of rape and sexual violence
that occurred during the political clashes in March this
year.

The Secretary-General states in his report that

"when it comes to sexual violence, we cannot
expect peace without justice, reparation without
recognition, and sustainable development without
the full empowerment of those who have suffered
sexual violence or are at risk". (5/2009/362, para. 58)
That could not be truer of the situation in Sierra Leone.

Finally, the Security Council's leadership in
controlling sexual violence has been invaluable and
praiseworthy. Its continual leadership is a must if
significant progress is to be sustained in this venture.

