Mr. Cho Tae-yul (Republic of Korea): I would
first like to join previous speakers in commending the
French presidency's initiative in convening today's
open debate on the critical issue of women and peace
and security.

I would also like to align myself with the statements
delivered earlier by the representatives of Canada and
Turkey, respectively, on behalf of the Group of Friends
of Women, Peace and Security and the MIKTA group
of Mexico, Indonesia, Korea, Turkey and Australia.

In 2000, the landmark resolution 1325 (2000)
laid a robust normative foundation, on which we
have made considerable progress, for strengthening
the protection of women in conflict and facilitating
women's participation in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts. Despite that progress, however, a wide
gap still remains between our goals and the reality on
the ground. Civilians, particularly women and girls,
continue to get caught up in armed conflicts in many
parts of the world. That is also a historical issue, and
much work remains to be done on it. The effects of
sexual violence perpetrated in the past can persist in
its victims as deep trauma. With that in mind, I would
like to highlight three points as we strive to implement
and further strengthen the normative frameworks of the
agenda on women and peace and security.

First, we must coordinate our efforts better if we
are to prevent women from falling victim to violence.
The Secretary-General's report on conflict-related
sexual violence (S/2017/249) shows that terrible sexual
violence continues to occur in conflict and post-
conflict situations. We must scale up our collective
efforts to prevent sexual violence in conflicts and hold
all perpetrators accountable for their heinous crimes.
We continue to be disturbed by occasional reports of
alleged crimes committed by peacekeeping operations
personnel, despite the fact that intensive efforts have
been made to combat the problem. We should not
tolerate any form of sexual exploitation or abuse by
United Nations peacekeepers. In that regard, I commend
the Secretary-General's determination and welcome his
initiatives aimed at stamping out such crimes, including
the voluntary compact and Circle of Leadership.

Secondly, our professed goal of increasing the
participation of women in peace efforts must be
translated into concrete action. That was highlighted by
the 2015 global study on women and peace and security
and its follow-up resolution 2242 (2015), as well as 2016's
twin resolutions on sustaining peace - resolution 2282
(2016) and General Assembly resolution 70/262. Noting
the variety of initiatives that have been undertaken at
the national, regional, and international levels, I urge
all Member States to continue such endeavours so that
they can all lead to tangible results.

The Republic of Korea, for its part, adopted its own
national action plan on women and peace and security
in 2014, and has been scaling up its efforts to increase
women's participation in peace efforts ever since. As
a result, we have met the 15 per cent target for women
peacekeeping officers, and will continue to increase
women's participation in the future.
Thirdly, we must ensure that the ongoing efforts
to reform the United Nations peace and security
architecture contribute to the women and peace and
security agenda. I welcome the fact that, in his recent
report (A/72/525) on restructuring the United Nations
peace and security pillar, the Secretary-General
once again emphasized his determination to ensure
women's meaningful participation in all peace efforts
at all stages of the conflict cycle. I also commend his
efforts to promote women's participation in peace
processes and to enhance gender equality, especially
through the selection process for high-level United
Nations positions.

I look forward to hearing more details from the
Secretary-General on how the women and peace
and security agenda will be promoted in the new
architecture's peace and security pillar. As the Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), I am committed
to working closely with him in that regard. When I
assumed the chairmanship of the PBC earlier this year,
1 announced that I would build on the Commission's
ongoing work to promote gender dimensions in
peacebuilding efforts. For the first time since its
inception in 2005, the PBC has appointed gender focal
points to implement the gender strategy it adopted in
September 2016, with Bangladesh and Canada currently
serving as those focal points.

The PBC has been increasing women's participation
in peacebuilding efforts at the country-specific level
as well. Most recently, during the PBC Organizational
Committee meeting on Solomon Islands, which
was attended by the country's Prime Minister, PBC
members engaged with a representative of the country's
Young Women's Parliamentary Group. The Chairs of
the country-specific configurations of the Commission
have also been engaging with women's groups and
individuals in their work, in both meetings and visits to
the countries on their agenda. The PBC will continue its
ongoing efforts to further promote gender perspectives
in sustaining peace.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the Republic
of Korea's commitment to promoting the women and
peace and security agenda both in its national capacity
and as Chair of the PBC.

