Mr. Palsson (Iceland): Ten years ago, the
recognition of gender equality as a security issue by
the Security Council was a watershed event, both for
women and for the Organization. Through the
unanimous adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), the
Council acknowledged not only the needs and concerns
of women in connection with peace processes, but
underlined the participation of women as an important
prerequisite for sustainable peace. A decade later, the
record reflects some positive developments, as
highlighted in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/498). However, truth be told, progress has
been slow and ultimately disappointing.

Only a handful of countries have adopted national
action plans to implement resolution 1325 (2000). In
the meantime, armed conflicts still devastate the lives
of women and girls in many parts of the world. Women
are often subjected to terrifying gender-based sexual
violence, which most of the time goes unpunished.
Women are also regularly marginalized in
peacemaking. This is hardly a satisfactory state of
affairs. Therefore, we must now focus on action,
implementation and accountability so that, 10 years
from now, we can look back with a sense of
achievement and say that we have made a difference.
There is a vital need for a system for monitoring
the status of the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). Therefore, Iceland urges the Security Council
to adopt the indicators put forward in the Secretary-
General's report so that United Nations organizations,
Member States and civil society are able to measure
the impact on the ground and men and women around
the world can reap the benefits.
At the same time, UN Women should play an
important role in overseeing the monitoring and
implementation of the indicators, as well other issues
related to resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent
resolutions. Allow me to reiterate my Government's
commitment to supporting UN Women and to
congratulate the new Under-Secretary-General,
Michelle Bachelet, on her recent appointment. Iceland
also welcomes the appointment of Margot Wallstrom as
the first Special Representative of the Secretary
General to fight the spread of sexual violence in
conflict situations. We stand ready to support the
Special Representative in her important work.

Advancing the aims and working towards the
strengthening of resolution 1325 (2000) is a priority for
Iceland. All Icelandic diplomatic missions are required
to support the aims of resolution 1325 (2000) in their
work. Iceland is working actively to advance resolution
1325 (2000) within NATO and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, in addition to our
work at the United Nations.

Iceland's national action plan has been in place
for almost three years. Preparations are under way to
revise the plan, with a view to adapting it next year.
This will be done through a participatory and
transparent process involving political leaders at the
highest level, all relevant Government agencies and
civil society. The plan will contain specific goals, clear
indicators and a transparent monitoring mechanism. It
will also take fully into account pertinent Security
Council resolutions on women and peace and security.

My Government has also undertaken projects to
highlight, strengthen and implement resolution 1325
(2000). Particular effort has been focused on women's
empowerment. Our gender equality training
programme is an international undertaking run in
cooperation with the University of Iceland. Its explicit
purpose is to promote gender equality and women's
empowerment through education and training. It is our
hope that the programme, which is now in its second
year and includes fellows from Afghanistan and
Palestine, will in due course be recognized as an
official United Nations University programme, making
it the fourth such programme located in Iceland.

In addition, Iceland has emphasized the
importance of gender perspectives in international
climate talks, for we are confident that the increased
participation of women will help the international
community foster a more sustainable response to the
scourge of climate change.

Ten years on, it is time for the international
community to get serious about the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). While women are often
depicted as victims of armed conflict - and rightly
so - it is important to bear in mind that they are more
often than not an integral part of the solution. Let us
make the coming decade a decade that counts and a
time when we no longer tolerate impunity for crimes,
women's needs and rights are respected, and women
and men are equal partners in forging lasting peace.

