Mr. Moura (Portugal): I would like to begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for convening this open
debate on women and peace and security, an issue to
which Portugal attaches great importance. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General; the Under-
Secretary-General and Executive Director of UN
Women, Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka; the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Ms. Navanethem Pillay; and Ms. Brigitte Balipou for
their very enlightening statements.

Portugal of course shares the views that have been
expressed by the observer of the European Union
regarding the matter of the rule of law and transitional
justice in conflict-affected situations. However, allow
me to expand on some aspects of political significance
for my country.

It is increasingly evident that the rule of law is all
too often the second victim of conflict, the first victims
being women and girls. Portugal reaffirms the view
that women and girls are disproportionately affected
by armed conflicts and remain particularly vulnerable
in post-conflict situations. Sexual and gender-based
violence, child and forced marriages and disruption in
education, to name but a few of the facts of conflict,
are magnified when it comes to women and girls. The
Security Council has repeatedly acknowledged that fact
and must continue to act on such a basis. On the other
hand, there is a tendency to consider transitionaljustice
as the second-to-last concern of peace agreements,
the last being the participation of women in peace
agreements.

It is our firm beliefthat only through the systematic
and active participation ofwomen in peace processes can
transitional justice truly assume a national dimension
and lay the foundations for rebuilding the rule of
law and reconciliation. We have been witnessing the
very important role women can plan in reconciliation
processes when they are included from the outset.

Portugal feels particularly encouraged by the
rising awareness regarding those issues, and by the
efforts made at the United Nations and national levels
to increase expertise in several areas, such as mediation
and capacity-building for the political participation of
women, whether as candidates, electoral observers or
office holders.

With regard to peacekeeping and peacebuilding, we
also find encouraging examples of clearer political will
and adequate allocation ofresources aimed at increasing
the proportion of women in uniformed components in
operations and in national security sector institutions.

The Council has heard, on a regular basis and
and directly from the ground, requests for further
strengthening the implementation of protection
mandates. We hope that the targets set by the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations of 20 per cent for female
police participation in peacekeeping operations by 2014
will be attained. Portugal continues to develop policies
to promote the recruitment and retention of women in
the military and in the police forces, and looks forward
to cooperate further in training and in sharing good
practices with other troop and police-contributing
countries.

Let me conclude by stressing the role of the
economic, social and cultural rights of women as a
central component of protection. Portugal strongly
supports the inclusion of this subject in the Secretary-
General's latest report (S/2013/525). These issues
belong at the forefront of our discussions on women
and peace and security and we commend his effort to
do so. Further analysis of the relationship between the
stability of livelihoods and the safety of women and
girls is therefore, from our point of View, crucial. We
encourage the United Nations to continue to give it due
attention.

