Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank the Secretary-
General, Major General Kristin Lund and Ms. Lorna
Merekaje for their succinct briefings on the role of
women in peacekeeping.

Just days after the 2019 Peacekeeping Ministerial
and as we approach the twentieth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000), we are meeting in the Chamber
today to admit that more Security Council action
is required to support the objectives set out in the
Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations of the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative and to advance the women and peace and
security agenda. Peacekeeping operations are one of
the United Nations most effective tools in promoting
and maintaining international peace and security, yet
only 4 per cent of uniformed personnel and 22 per cent
of civilian personnel are women. That tool will not be
effective enough as long as gender inequality persists,
and to such a disproportionate degree.

We recognize that significant progress has been
made, especially with regard to the decisions set out
in Security Council resolutions, which have deployed
more gender advisers in United Nations missions,
increased the number of women participating in
peacekeeping and incorporated a gender perspective
into peacekeeping operations, but that is not
sufficient. There is still a demand for deliberate and
sustainable efforts by the Security Council and for
the necessary resources to support those efforts. It is
very regrettable that initiatives to promote the women
and peace and security policy framework, primarily
on the ground, continue to be threatened by budget
cuts and depend disproportionately upon voluntary
extrabudgetary resources.

We vehemently defend the need to link women's
rights with peacebuilding, always in line with the
Beijing Platform for Action. That is why it is important
to train peacekeepers on gender issues and ensure that
gender issues are taken into account in the design,
planning, implementation and evaluation of peace
operations. At the same time, there is still a need to
include gender-disaggregated data in all mission
reports, to deploy gender and women's protection
advisers, and to strengthen zero-tolerance policies for
acts of sexual and gender-based violence committed
by peacekeepers.

Increasing the presence of women among deployed
troops opens channels for communication for women
and girls in conflict situations, addresses their protection
concerns and immediate needs and encourages them to
participate and lead. There is no doubt that the presence
of women raises awareness about their problems, but
it is also a critical factor in increasing the operational
effectiveness of all tasks and improving the image,
accessibility and credibility of the missions among
the local population. The women deployed in missions
are familiar with the local protection strategies that
affect them; they are able to act as an early-warning
mechanism; they interact more effectively with the
people; and they have a comparative advantage in
interacting with survivors of sexual and gender-based
violence and in the process of demobilization and
reintegration into civilian life.

In order to achieve gender parity in missions,
it is essential to work closely with troop-
contributing countries. Although in recent decades
an increasing number of countries have raised the
percentage of women in their armed forces and adopted
measures in their national military institutions on
gender policies, at the same time various constraints
remain, such as the persistent abuse and discrimination
suffered by women within national military institutions
in many countries. In that regard, we understand that
troop-contributing countries should take measures
aimed at increasing the level of female representation,
such as implementing specific legislative reforms
to encourage the participation of women and combat
harassment and sexual abuse within the military;
eliminating barriers and the exclusion of women from
some categories of military personnel; making changes
to family policy, as well as ensuring the proper training
of personnel on gender issues before deployment, in
accordance with United Nations standards.

It is also imperative that United Nations missions
prioritize visible and tangible respect for women's
physical well-being and safety. It is therefore essential
to review the planning and budget of all missions to
make life in them more suitable for women, such as
by incorporating health facilities, specialized medical
care, including access to sexual and reproductive
health services, special licensing arrangements and
investment in the internal security of bases.

We commend the work being done by the
Department of Peace Operations, primarily its gender
unit, to ensure that women's priorities are central to
peace and security decisions at all levels. We call for
the continued use of gender-based analysis to better
assess progress against the goals and commitments
of the women and peace and security agenda and, in
doing so, improve the design, conduct and performance
of United Nations missions. We believe that the United
Nations Military Gender Advocate of the Year Award
is a recognition of the efforts of peacekeepers in
promoting the principles of resolution 1325 (2000).
We take this opportunity to congratulate Brazilian
Lieutenant Commander Marcia Andrade Braga for
having received that award as a result of her work
with the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic.
Nonetheless, earlier this year we are also pleased to
have witnessed a milestone in the history of the United
Nations, in the peace mission in Cyprus, which is being
led by three women - a special representative, a force
commander and a senior police adviser - overseeing a
contingent of more than 1,000 people including police,
military and civilians monitoring the ceasefire line and
working to find a political solution between Greece and
the Turkish Cypriots.

Investing in gender equity and the empowerment of
women is the crucial way to prevent and end conflicts,
as well as to build peace and prosperity in the world.
Without a doubt, the face of peace is a woman.

