Mr. De Klerk (Netherlands): Thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important debate and
for the opportunity to participate in it.

My delegation would like to make a few remarks
in addition to the European Union statement yet to be
delivered.

The importance of women's participation in
conflict prevention, conflict resolution and
reconstruction is clearly addressed in the landmark
Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008). Resolution 1325 (2000) has become one of the
best-known resolutions the Security Council has
adopted. It should become one of the most widely
implemented resolutions.

Basically, we need to talk to women, to obtain a
better understanding and resolution of a conflict. We
must protect women, to keep them and their families
safe from violence and to keep their communities
stable. And we must involve women, to build back a
more secure and economically viable society.

On 4 December 2007 the Netherlands adopted the
Dutch National 1325 Action Plan, relying on a broad
support base. The signatories - including the Ministries

of Foreign Affairs, Defence and the Interior, civil
society organizations and knowledge institutions - took
it upon themselves to jointly make a difference within
the field of women, peace and security. As a result of
our integrated approach, where diplomacy, defence and
development are mutually reinforcing, gender has been
fully incorporated in the assessment framework for
Dutch contributions to peacekeeping operations.
Together, we invested €23 million in 2009 to support
women's organizations in fragile States, to promote
female leadership and political participation, and to
increase gender capacity.

An active role for women is essential in
interventions aimed at ending conflicts and increasing
security, stability and human security globally. But is
not enough. We need the partnership of men: male
leaders who speak up about the atrocities of sexual
violence, male commanders that instruct their
uniformed services on how to protect civilians. The
Netherlands and Australia will support a United
Nations training module on sexual Violence geared
towards peacekeepers. We will furthermore support a
human rights training package geared towards the
Congolese national army. In 2011 we will also continue
our joint Foreign Affairs/Defence training on women,
peace and security for our own staff.

Our second commitment is the Dutch support to
the originally Canadian Justice Rapid Response
initiative to bring perpetrators to justice. This
multilateral standby facility gives United Nations
entities and Member States access to a roster of rapidly
deployable criminal justice professionals. They will
perform human rights and international criminal justice
investigations, undertake special political and
fact-finding missions and form commissions of inquiry,
as well as security sector reform assessments. Criminal
investigations and forensic inquiries are of great
importance to ending impunity and preventing heinous
crimes committed against women in armed conflict.
The Netherlands currently has five people at the
disposal of the roster of rapidly deployable criminal
justice professionals.

The Dutch Government has summed up its efforts
and results to date in a booklet that will be launched
next month, entitled "The Dutch Dos on Women, Peace
and Security". Ten years after the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), we can say that more
perpetrators of sexual violence are being brought to
justice in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, more
women are taking part in decision-making processes in
the Sudan, and more Afghan women are demanding
support in exchange for their votes. These are results
we can take pride in. But let us not fool ourselves -
there is still a long way to go before the spirit of
resolution 1325 (2000) has fully permeated the work of
the United Nations, its Member States and civil society.
And that is why the Netherlands pleads for
strengthened accountability mechanisms for the
implementation of our commitments expressed here
today. We also believe that defining clear roles and
responsibilities for Member States and within the
United Nations system would be conducive to stepping
up our efforts to reach the goals of resolution 1325
(2000) and subsequent resolutions.

We are on the eve of a new decade of promoting
women, peace and security. We now have a shared
responsibility to implement our joint commitments.

