Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to convey our congratulations
to you, Madam President, and to Nigeria for presiding
over the Security Council this month and to thank you
as well for the invitation to participate in this important
debate.

(spoke in English)

This open debate is an important opportunity to
review the shocking but all too constant tragedy of
sexual violence against women and girls in conflict
situations. The debate today serves as a necessary
bridge between the considerable political commitment,
concrete programming in the field and high-level
activities. In 2013, at the United Nations and elsewhere,
the international community worked to raise awareness
and establish a framework for the prevention of violence
against women, including conflict-related sexual
violence. Canada is encouraged by the momentum
demonstrated by upcoming high-level activities
focused on practical measures to improve the lives of
women and girls, and to empower them to participate
and contribute fully to the development of their
communities and countries unhindered by the effects
of sexual violence, female genital mutilation and child,
early and forced marriage.

(spoke in French)

In the past year, the United Nations Human Rights
Council adopted a resolution (A/HRC/RES/23/25) on
accelerating efforts to eliminate all forms of violence
against women with a focus on sexual violence,
including in conflict. The Human Rights Council
also passed the first-ever stand-alone resolution
(A/HRC/24/23) that addresses the harmful practice of
child, early and forced marriage. Canada is honoured to
have played a role in those resolutions and is pleased by
the support for them by many other delegations.

In New York in June 2013, the Security Council
passed resolution 2122 (2013), which further addresses
sexual violence in conflict and emphasizes the essential
role of women's participation in preventing sexual
violence. In September 2013 at the General Assembly,
some 140 Member States endorsed the United Nations
Declaration of Commitment to End Sexual Violence
in Conflict, which was co-sponsored by the United
Kingdom, Canada and many other champions of
preventing sexual violence.

(spoke in English)

The impact that conflict and long periods of post-
conflict recovery have on the safety and security of
women and girls and the barriers that the various forms
of sexual violence represent for their capacity to learn
and to develop their full human potential is an issue
that we all must address.

Canada continues to call for support for women's
civil society organizations, particularly those assisting
survivors of violence to ensure their health, safety and
dignity, and those amplifying women's participation in
decision-making processes.

(spoke in French)

Canada welcomes the Security Council's resolve
to include explicit requests for protection and support
for women and children affected by conflict in mission
mandates. The missions can play a key role in helping to
monitor, investigate and report on violations committed
against women and girls, including all forms of sexual
violence in conflict, and to contribute to efforts to
identify and prosecute perpetrators.

(spoke in English)

I can assure the Council that Canada remains
committed to women's political and economic
empowerment as essential elements in efforts to
address and prevent conflict-related sexual violence. In
that regard, we plan to continue to work closely with
Ms. Zainab Bangura, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and
the Council in a forthright, integral and results-focused
manner to try to put that detestable practice behind us.

