Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): I extend the gratitude of
the Nigerian delegation to you, Mr. President, for
convening this crucial meeting on women and peace
and security. I thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, for his lucid and concise introductory
statement on his report (S/2009/362), which sets out
several thought-provoking ideas, assessments and
recommendations.

Today's deliberations reaffirm our sense of
urgency on the issue of sexual violence against women
and girls. My delegation is concerned that in spite of
Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008), which provided hope for millions of women
and young girls, the crime of rape and sexual violence
has not only increased but has become a tactic and
weapon of war. Indeed, it has become systematic and
widespread, and it remains largely unpunished.

Nonetheless, I share the optimism and hope that,
with our collective will and support, we can bring an
end to that impunity and to these crimes against
humanity. It is in this regard that my delegation

appreciates the recommendations of the Secretary-
General, particularly on establishing mechanisms of
accountability, ensuring that peacekeeping mandates
address sexual violence and providing regular annual
reporting on gender-based violence. Those concrete
proposals would complement and strengthen the
implementation of the largely unfulfilled commitments
made by Member States in resolutions 1325 (2000) and
1820 (2008). With respect to fulfilling those
commitments, I would like to make the following
observations.

First, there is need to tenaciously uphold the
zero-tolerance policy, which calls for an end to
impunity in post-conflict situations. This can be
achieved through promoting efforts and programmes
for transitional gender justice, provided through
mechanisms such as the International Criminal Court,
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda and the Special Courts. Member States should
support the work of those mechanisms in order to
promote justice for women survivors. Seeking justice
for survivors and punishing the perpetrators conveys an
unequivocal message about our commitment to
accountability and responsibility.

Secondly, it is crucial that support programmes
for survivors emphasize income generating, food
security and protection schemes that would enable
them to restart their lives.

Thirdly, the Secretary-General's request for more
women troops deployed to conflict zones should elicit
a renewed response from Member States. It is common
knowledge that the Indian all-female police unit has
recorded some positive results in Liberia, restoring
confidence and self-esteem in Liberian women, some
of who are now enlisting in the armed forces.

Fourthly, it is imperative to provide adequate and
appropriate training to peacekeepers on dealing with
human rights violations and on strategies to address
gender-based violence. Such specialized training
should encompass members of the military, police,
judiciary, civil society, women and gender advocates. It
will provide the skill set required to identify and
address issues relating to sexual violence and other
crimes against humanity.
Fifthly, we invite the Secretary-General to utilize
existing regional and subregional resources, such as the
African Peace and Security Architecture and the early
warning system of the Economic Community of West
African States, to strengthen efforts to protect women
in situations of conflict on the continent.

As one of the largest troop- and police-
contributing countries, Nigeria remains ready to
contribute to peacebuilding and post-conflict
reconstruction. The Government of the Federal
Republic of Nigeria, with support from the United
States Government and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, has established a model
peacekeeping training centre in Jaji, Kaduna, early this
year. The centre, which is headed by a senior military
officer with extensive peacekeeping and training
experience, is designed to improve and enhance the
skills of Nigerian troops in relation to managing post-
conflict reconstruction, human rights violations and
gender awareness in peacekeeping environments. We
will continue to provide the Council with updates on
best practices and progress.

Once again, we thank the United Kingdom
delegation for initiating this dialogue and for
introducing a very useful draft resolution.

