Mr. Castro Cordoba (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): Costa Rica thanks the Peruvian presidency for
convening this open debate on such an important issue.
We also thank Ms. Amina Mohammed, Ms. Pramila
Patten and Ms. Razia Sultana for their briefings.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be made by the representative of Mali on behalf of the
Human Security Network.
Sexual violence is unacceptable anytime, anywhere.
However, its widespread use as a tactic of terror and a
weapon of war and terrorism, where it is inflicted as
one of the cruellest and most terrible forms of social
coercion, affecting people's dignity and autonomy
in the deepest sense, is particularly worrying and
reprehensible. Sexual violence perpetuates conflict and
undermines security and stability, disrupting people's
participation in the political, social and economic life of
their societies. The United Nations, as an Organization,
and we, as an international community, carry a heavy
burden on this issue, having failed to address the
causes of violence and sexual abuse through preventive
measures and to eliminate impunity in such cases.

The primary responsibility for protecting
populations lies with States. It is incumbent upon us to
establish robust legal and institutional frameworks with
a View to laying a firm foundation for preventing and
addressing gaps in the protection of victims, especially
women and girls, and to expand the scope of protection
measures to the most vulnerable populations, such as
ethnic and religious minorities; women in rural areas;
women and girls associated with armed groups; the
lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender population; as
well as boys and men, who are equally vulnerable to
sexual violence, the prevalence of which is increasing.

Sexual violence as a cause of forced displacement
is equally worrying, as is the growing risk of violence
in the context of mass movements where migrants,
refugees and displaced persons are subjected to sexual
extortion, trafficking and smuggling, harassment and
rape, among other abuses. It is essential that conflict-
related sexual violence be considered as grounds
for granting refugee or asylum status, with victim
assistance policies.

We urge States to criminalize all acts of sexual
violence in the strongest possible terms, including,
where appropriate, by referring them to the International
Criminal Court, in order to completely eliminate
impunity in such cases. These acts of violence are war

crimes, and a zero-tolerance policy must be applied to
those who commit, order or condone sexual violence in
conflict situations.

Fully utilizing existing international legal
mechanisms and ensuring accountability are dissuasive
means and vital instruments for ensuring justice for
victims. It is also important to encourage cooperation
and information-sharing, as well as to provide legal
assistance to victims and training for security forces
and peacekeepers. Similarly, in the context of the
United Nations, we welcome such initiatives as the
appointment of an ombudsman for victims' rights and
the voluntary pact on preventing and addressing sexual
exploitation and abuse, promoted by the Secretary-
General.

It is fundamental to implement Security Council
resolutions outlining commitments and plans for the
prevention of sexual violence in conflict and to monitor
their implementation. Similarly, sexual violence in
the context of armed conflict and terrorism must
systematically become a criterion for being subject
to sanctions, applied to all those who participate in
the financing, planning, or support of armed groups
with connections to acts of sexual violence. In order
for that to be effective, key actors must collaborate.
The Special Representative of the Secretary-General
plays an important role in that regard, ensuring fluid
communication and the exchange of information.

Prevention is key. The systematic inclusion of
women protection advisers in the strategic planning
processes of political missions and peace operations,
as well as adequate gender training to help prevent and
respond adequately to sexual exploitation and abuse,
are essential. For all of that to be possible, programmes
must be adequately funded.

It is essential that all such efforts focus on the
victims. Support programmes should be established
for the adequate reintegration of Victims into their
social structures, which should contribute to the
re-establishment of the social fabric of populations
suffering the consequences of armed conflicts. Legal
frameworks should be established at the national level
in order to protect victims and combat the stigma
associated with sexual abuse and violence. These should
contemplate reparations and compensation, taking into
account that different forms of sexual violence require
different solutions and responses.

Finally, it is essential to involve women and girls
in decision-making processes and leadership positions.
The lack of opportunities, the lack of national policies
for their protection and inclusion, as well as structural
barriers in all areas that promote discrimination
against women perpetuate a cycle of poverty, exclusion
and violence, thereby hampering their enjoyment of
their rights. It is therefore critical to guarantee equal
opportunities, access to education and women and
girl's economic, political and social empowerment so
that they can assume a vital and transformative role in
their communities during and after conflicts, and can
regain their dignity and enjoyment of their rights.
