Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Let me begin by expressing my appreciation to the
delegation of Cameroon for convening this open
meeting and to the Secretary-General for personally
introducing his report.

Likewise, I wish to thank the Office of the
Special Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of
Women for preparing the report and the United Nations
Development Fund for Women for preparing the
independent experts' assessment. We are confident that
the study and discussion of those documents will
effectively contribute to improving the situation of
women in the context of armed conflict and the
promotion of a wider understanding of the need for
their equal participation in all spheres of society.

Colombia attaches great importance to the
protection of women and the role they can and must
play in conflict prevention, peacekeeping and peace-
building activities. That is why we firmly supported
resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace and security
and have been participating in the group of friends with
a view to its implementation and dissemination.

The international community has recognized that
peace is inextricably linked to equality of opportunity
between women and men. However, despite the efforts
made to implement the commitments contained in
resolution 1325 (2000), it is clear that much more
remains to be done. To that end, the 136
recommendations included in the two reports constitute
a valuable contribution to what should be a global
strategy towards our common goal of gender equality
in relation to peace and security.

Colombia believes that the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) must be a process guided by
goals to be met in the short, medium and long terms.
We believe that, after a careful analysis of these
recommendations, the next step should be to prepare a
plan that prioritizes actions, establishes time frames
and assigns responsibilities for implementing
agreements.

The members of the Council will reflect the
views expressed in this debate and their first reaction to
some of the recommendations in a presidential
statement to be adopted on 31 October, the second
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).
Moreover, Colombia believes it highly important that
the efforts of the Council in this respect go hand in
hand with the work being done by the General
Assembly to implement and follow up on the
commitments contained in the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action and the Outcome Document
adopted at the special session on gender equality,
development and peace for the twenty-first century,
held in 2000.

My delegation would now like to react to some of
the issues contained in the reports.

In the first place, we recognize the need to
facilitate the active involvement of women in peace
processes and in the larger context of decision-making
in order to ensure that their needs are adequately
covered in the social and political arrangements
resulting from peace negotiations. We believe that the
Council can play an important role in this regard by
promoting the inclusion of clauses favouring their
participation in peace agreements.

We share the views of the Secretary-General
emphasizing the important role of women's
organizations and we welcome his intention to
establish a database of gender specialists and women's
groups and networks in countries and regions in
conflict. The meetings with these groups held by
members of the Council in their missions to the
Democratic Republic of Congo, Kosovo and Sierra
Leone, as well as those held under the Arria formula,
have contributed positive elements to the Council's
debates on peace processes.

Secondly, I would like to refer to peacekeeping
operations in order to reiterate the importance of
integrating gender perspectives into the mandates of all
missions, standard procedures, manuals and other
guidance materials, as well as in the provision of
gender-sensitive staff training. Colombia notes with
appreciation the efforts made so far by the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations. We believe it necessary to
ensure that such efforts be undertaken systematically
through the creation of focal points with qualified
personal, both within the Department and in the field.

To that end, we highly value the experience of
including gender advisers in several peacekeeping
missions, such as those in Timor-Leste, Kosovo, the
Democratic Republic of Congo, Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Sierra Leone. Likewise, Colombia
strongly supports the Secretary-General's policy of
zero tolerance regarding abuses committed by
peacekeepers and humanitarian personnel involved in
the protection of and assistance to communities
affected by armed conflict.

Lastly, I wish to underline the importance of
working through mechanisms that allow us to
overcome the impunity of crimes committed against
women and children, especially in the context of armed
conflict. My delegation considers the strengthening of
national legislation and capacity to penalize and
redress all forms of violence against women to be
fundamental to any attempt towards reconciliation. We
believe that full support for all women and children
survivors of such violence is an essential part of
societies' reconstruction process and should be
included in aid programmes following conflict.

On several occasions, my country has expressed
its view that one of the more outstanding aspects of
resolution 1325 (2000) is the important role played by
civil society organizations, and especially by the many
women's organizations that contributed to the process
leading to the adoption and implementation of the
resolution and its provisions.

My delegation is pleased to see that this has
become an ongoing process and wishes to express its
readiness to continue to work with the Secretary-
General and Member States in the integration of gender
equality into activities related to peace and security.

