Mr. Corr (Ireland): First, Mr. President, I would
like to thank you for convening this open meeting
today on women and peace and security. I would also
like to express the appreciation of my delegation to the
Secretary-General for personally introducing his report
(S/2002/1154) this afternoon.

The representative of Denmark will shortly make
a statement on behalf of the European Union, and
Ireland, of course, fully associates itself with that
statement.

Resolution 1325 (2000) involved a two-fold
dimension: the immense and disproportionate impact of
armed conflict on women and girls, and also, crucially,
as the Secretary-General emphasized in his remarks
this afternoon, the central role women can and must
play at the centre of efforts to resolve armed conflict.
As Assistant Secretary-General Angela King said here
last July (see S/PV.4589), sustainable peace and lasting
security cannot be achieved without women's
empowerment and full involvement. This is central to
the work of the United Nations. As the Secretary-
General put it to the Council before the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), while the United Nations was
set up to save succeeding generations from the scourge
of war, the Charter also proclaims the equal rights of
men and women, and we must live up to both
challenges or we shall not succeed fully in either (see S/PV.4208, p. 2).

My delegation believes that the Secretary-
General's report illustrates that this is one of the most
important issues facing the entire international
community today and that it must be at the forefront of
our agenda. We are also grateful for the
recommendations in the study coordinated by Assistant
Secretary-General King as well as for the
recommendations made by the independent experts
commissioned by UNIFEM, Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf and
Elisabeth Rehn. They point the way forward.

I would also add that my delegation fully agrees
with the observations made by the Secretary-General in
his report concerning the abuse of the human rights of
women and girls and welcomes the recommendations
he has made with a view to protecting those rights.

There are several main issues involved in our
discussion here today: that resolution 1325 (2000)
provides a blueprint for action in recognition of the
essential contribution of women to the maintenance
and promotion of peace and security; that we have
travelled some distance institutionally in implementing
resolution 1325 (2000), but that we still have far to go;
that progress depends on implementing change not
only in New York at United Nations Headquarters but
in conflict areas, in prevention of conflict, in rebuilding
after conflict around the world; that, in implementing
the provisions of resolution 1325 (2000) we are
tackling fundamental issues not only of justice and
equity, but also of effective policy if conflicts are to be
prevented and war-torn societies are to be restored; and
that this issue and how to make strong and rapid
progress are among the greatest challenges facing the
United Nations and the entire international community
today.

In fully agreeing with the Secretary-General's
recommendations, I would like to emphasize a number
of points of particular importance to my delegation.

First, the main challenge ahead is to ensure that
the recommendations and guidelines contained in the
Secretary-General's report are implemented
consistently, and to ensure that, where the United
Nations system deals with peace-making, peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peace-building, the gender
perspectives are taken fully into account as a matter of
course by the Departments centrally involved.

My delegation believes that this is of central
importance, and we welcome the recommendation in
the report for explicitly incorporating gender mandates
into all peacekeeping missions and provisions to
systematically address this issue in all reports to the
Security Council.

Secondly, it is essential to ensure that the
necessary financial and human resources are made
available for gender mainstreaming, including the
establishment of gender advisers or units in
multidimensional peacekeeping operations and
capacity-building activities. Gender advisors should be
deployed at the outset of peace operations, including at
the planning stages, and should be sufficiently senior to
have an influence on the decision-making process. We
recognize the progress that has been achieved in East
Timor, Kosovo, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Sierra
Leone because of the presence of full-time gender
advisers.

Thirdly, my delegation believes that an increase
in the number of women participating in the military,
civilian and humanitarian components of missions,
including at the highest level, would have an important
impact on the effectiveness of each mission. We note
the Secretary-General's comments in the report about
steps taken to increase the number of female staff in
peace operations. We welcome the commitment the
Secretary-General has given towards achieving greater
gender equality in this area, while acknowledging the
point he makes that Member States must also be active
in this regard.

Fourthly, it is equally important to ensure that
gender issues are fully addressed in the transition from
peacekeeping to peace-building, so that the promotion
of equality and women's rights is integrated into the
peace-building phase, as well as during humanitarian
operations and the reconstruction process. My
delegation notes with satisfaction the Secretary-
General's recommendation concerning the importance
of close consultations with women's groups and
networks. From the Mano River Union to Burundi, we
have seen the crucial role that women's groups play in
conflict resolution.

As the Secretary-General said earlier, the Security
Council, in its missions to the Great Lakes region and
elsewhere over the past year, have seen the value of
this work first hand. The full involvement of women in
negotiation of peace agreements is essential, as is the
recognition of the particular needs of women and girls
in the design and implementation of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes.

On a national level, Ireland has been strongly
supportive of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000),
and we are anxious to see it fully implemented and
taken forward. I might add that, from our own
experiences of the peace process in Northern Ireland,
we are fully aware of the immense contribution made
by women's civil society groups doing what the
Secretary-General once referred to as the work of
building bridges, not walls.
We believe that the issues raised in the Secretary-
General's report are of the greatest importance.
Accordingly, we believe that there should be
continuous monitoring and evaluation of how different
parts of the United Nations family are doing, and what
steps could be taken to improve the system to ensure a
fully consistent and coherent approach.

Considerable progress has been made in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). A
considerable distance still remains to be travelled. We
in the Security Council, across the range of conflict and
peacemaking issues, have no more urgent task.

