The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Council in October 2009, I should like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute on behalf of the Council to
Her Excellency Ms. Susan Rice, Permanent
Representative of the United States, for her service as
President of the Security Council during the month of
September 2009. I am sure I speak for all members of
the Council in expressing my appreciation to
Ambassador Rice for the great diplomatic skill with
which she conducted the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Women and peace and security

Report of the Secretary-General on women
and peace and security (S/2009/465)

Letter dated 18 September 2009 from the
Permanent Representative of Viet Nam
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2009/490)

The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia, Azerbaijan, Belgium,
Brazil, Cambodia, Canada, Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt,
Finland, Germany, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland,
Italy, the Lao People's Democratic Republic,
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nigeria, Norway, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines,
Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Serbia, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland,
Ukraine and the United Republic of Tanzania, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Ms. Rachel N.
Mayanja, Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on
Gender Issues and Advancement of Women.

It is so decided.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Ms. Ines
Alberdi, Executive Director of the United Nations
Development Fund for Women.

It is so decided.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Ms. Asha Hagi Elmi Amin, representative of the NGO
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security.

It is so decided.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 1 October 2009 from the
Permanent Representative of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya to the United Nations, in which he requests
that the acting Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations, His Excellency Mr. Tete
Antonio, be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item in accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure. IfI hear no objection, I
shall take it that the Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to His Excellency Mr. Tete Antonio.

There being no objection, it so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Antonio
took the seat reserved for him at the side of the
Council Chamber
09-54136

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/465, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on women and peace and security. I
should also like to draw Council members' attention to
document S/2009/490, which contains a letter dated
18 September 2009 from the Permanent Representative
of Viet Nam to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/2009/500, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Austria, Burkina Faso,
Cambodia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Finland, France, India,
Italy, Japan, Lao People's Democratic Republic,
Mexico, Norway, Philippines, Singapore, South Africa,
Turkey, Uganda, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Viet
Nam. This draft resolution is a continuation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and is designed to respond to
the needs of women and girls in post-conflict
situations. It provides for concrete action and for
promoting their participation in all aspects of the peace
process with a view to ensuring sustainable peace and
security.

In accordance with the understanding reached
earlier among members, the Security Council will take
action on the draft resolution before it prior to hearing
statements from the participants in today's meeting.

Accordingly, I shall put the draft resolution to the
vote now.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Austria, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, France, Japan, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mexico, Russian Federation, Turkey, Uganda,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Viet Nam.


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1889 (2009).

In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
09-54136
to limit their statements to no more than five minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.

I now give the floor to the Deputy Secretary-
General, Her Excellency Ms. Asha-Rose Migiro.


