Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): I wish to express my
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for organizing
today's important open debate. Your well-rounded
concept note (S/2013/587, annex) is indeed very useful
in providing us with the clear objective of our debate
on the issue. We also express our gratitude to the
Secretary-General, the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, the Executive Director of UN Women and the
representative of the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security, whose remarks serve as a good
basis for our focus at today's meeting. The theme of the
meeting is well-chosen and timely, particularly as we
continue to advance the agenda to strengthen the role
and engagement of women in peace processes.

The resolution 2122 (2013), adopted this morning,
is another clear reflection of the strong resolve of
the Council concerning the critical role of women in
conflict prevention, conflict resolution, peacebuilding
and peacekeeping. We are particularly appreciative of
the fact that the resolution provides a good reference on
supporting the development and strengthening of the
capacities of national institutions in order to provide
sustainable assistance to women and girls affected by
armed conflict and post-conflict situations.

The critical role of women in all stages of and
throughout any peace process has been reaffirmed in
various United Nations resolutions and documents -not
the least, of course, in resolution 1325 (2000) and its
subsequent texts. The recent declaration adopted by
the Peacebuilding Commission on women's economic
empowerment in peacekeeping showcases yet another
unyielding commitment from Member States to support
the participation of women in conflict prevention,
conflict resolution, peacebuilding and post-conflict
economic recovery. The declaration also reaffirms
the primary responsibility of national authorities in
identifying their priorities and strategies for post-
conflict peacebuilding.

In that context, Indonesia wishes to emphasize the
critical importance of sustaining political momentum
behind ongoing peacebuilding processes, promoting
gender equality and promoting and protecting the
human rights of women. We are fully convinced that
the involvement of women in all aspects of society
unleashes a vast and dynamic pool of ideas, creativity
and skills, which inspire society to move on and gain
prosperity. Therefore, the promotion and protection
of human rights for all, including women in conflict-
affected countries, is evidently crucial. Furthermore,
the ability of women to exercise their rights and
responsibilities will define a successful transition to
peace and stability based on the rule of law.

As stated in the Secretary-General's report on
women's participation in peacebuilding (S/2010/466),
it is essential to improve the approach of the United
Nations in combating sexual and gender-based
violence, particularly through the training for United
Nations peacekeepers. In the context of peacekeeping,
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
other related resolutions has paved the way for a
gender perspective mechanism in United Nations
peacekeeping operations. Increasing the number of
female peacekeepers on the ground would also be a
positive step in support of resolution 1325 (2000). On
our part, we are happy to point out that Indonesia has
deployed female peacekeepers as well as military and
police observers in several missions, including the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan and the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti.

It is a matter of regret that respecting the rule of
law in conflict situations continues to be a significant
challenge for the international community. In our View,
that is a strong reason for inclusive peace negotiations
that produce peace that is durable, sustainable and long-
lasting. It is also reason for including the participation
and engagement of women in that process. We also
believe that national reconciliation, as one tool of
transitional justice, must benefit from the active
participation of women. Indonesia, in that regard,
agrees with the call made by the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations last year that lasting progress
on security, national reconciliation, human rights, the
rule of law and sustainable development needs to occur
in parallel, given the interconnected nature of those
challenges in countries emerging from conflict.

In that regard, any assistance from the United
Nations, including that undertaken through the
Peacebuilding Commission, must be carried out in a
concerted manner and include a gender perspective.
In addition, it must also be in accordance with the
principle of national ownership, taking into account
the unique and specific needs and situations present in
each country.

Indonesia is steadfast in its commitment to
ensuring women's participation at all levels of conflict
prevention, conflict resolution and peacebuilding, and
it has been undertaking various measures at home
to that effect, in close partnership with civil society,
including women's organizations.

Finally, Indonesia reiterates the importance of
the international community working in a concerted
manner to improve women's participation during all
stages of peace processes, particularly in conflict
resolution, post-conflict planning and peacebuilding,
including by enhancing their engagement in political
and economic decision-making at the early stages of
recovery processes.

