Mr. Barros (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile would
like to thank the Nigerian presidency for convening this
open debate on sexual violence in conflict. We would
also like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
and his Special Representative on Sexual Violence
in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, for their
briefings. And we are grateful to Ms. Rhoda Misak for
her statement, which calls us to act decisively to prevent
and eradicate this scourge and the stigma that goes with
it, and to ensure the restoration and reintegration of its
survivors.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered later by the representative of Austria on
behalf of the Human Security Network, of which my
country is a member.

We would like to highlight the priority that the
Secretary-General has accorded this subject since
the publication in 2006 of his report on the "In-depth
study on all forms of violence against women"
(A/61/122/Add.1), which addressed sexual violence in
conflict and post-conflict situations. In the eight years
since then, we have adopted resolutions 1820 (2008),
1888 (2009), 1960 (2010) and 2106 (2013), all sponsored
by Chile, and whose implementation will contribute to
the Secretary- General's recommendations in the report
before us today (S/2014/181). That comprehensive,
multisectoral and multidimensional report, and its
preventive and protective framework, will enable us to
establish early-warning mechanisms and appropriate
responses. We commend the field visits the Special
Representative has conducted and the commitments
made by national and regional authorities to the
United Nations system, which have been reflected in
resolutions renewing mandates. We would also like to
highlight the Special Representative's recent visit to
the Central African Republic, during which President
Samba-Panza renewed the commitment expressed in
the 2012 joint communique.

Such efforts must be backed up by holding
perpetrators of sexual violence to account and combating
their impunity. The International Criminal Court is an
important complement to the work of national courts
and hybrid tribunals in this area, as we saw in the trial
of Jean-Pierre Bemba and the voluntary surrender and
subsequent arrest of Bosco Ntaganda. The proliferation
of arms has helped to create an environment conducive
to this type of violence. Chile, aware of the problems
associated with that proliferation, has signed the Arms
Trade Treaty and urges other States to support it.

Chile welcomes the policy and operational
recommendations for preventing and eradicating this
type of violence, and stresses that primary responsibility
in this area belongs to the States concerned. In that
regard, we would like to emphasize the importance
of multidisciplinary, timely and non-discriminatory
assistance to survivors of sexual violence, including
children born of such violence, of ensuring targeted
and appropriate services for children and adults and of
promoting survivors' empowerment and reintegration.
We call on all parties to conflicts who are responsible
for, or suspected of, committing acts of sexual violence,
including those listed in the report, to put a stop to
such violations and make concrete and time-bound
commitments to protect. Mediators and envoys
involved in mediation, ceasefire, peace and preventive
diplomacy processes must be properly trained in this
area and ensure that peace agreements contain concrete
provisions concerning them, including ensuring
adequate preservation of the evidence of such crimes.

Preventive measures should be explicitly
reflected in the processes of security sector reform, of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, and of
justice reform initiatives in areas such as capacity and
policing. We reiterate the important role of reporting,
prevention, protection and reintegration played by civil
society, including women's organizations, community
leaders, religious leaders, the media and human rights
activists, and we support the efforts of the system to
build the capacity of these groups.

The situation of internally displaced persons and
refugees - who are particularly vulnerable to this type
of Violence, which is often used as a tactic to induce
displacement - is of concern to the Council. Chile is
organizing, together with Australia and with the support
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, an Arria formula meeting on the protection of
internally displaced persons on 30 May.

Chile supports the systematic inclusion of the
prevention of conflict-related sexual violence and its
follow-up in the relevant country-specific resolutions
and in the mandates ofspecial political andpeacekeeping
missions. These missions, commissions of inquiry and
other related mechanisms should consider including
women protection advisers. We also look forward to
the possibility of including this issue in the work of
the monitoring bodies of the relevant Security Council
sanctions.

As the Secretary-General recommends, we urge
the consideration of the links between conflict-related
sexual violence and the illicit trade in natural resources,
as well as such illegal activities as the illicit drugs trade
and the traffic in persons covered by the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, its
protocols and relevant legal instruments.

We stress the importance of deepening the
exchange of information among the system's actors
and strengthening the training of all peacekeeping
personnel using innovative tools, among others, those
of the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict and the corresponding United
Nations initiative. We encourage the international
community and donors to support the prevention and
eradication of the scourge through the United Nations
Action Multi-Partner Trust Fund.

At the regional level, in July 2013 Chile's Joint
Peacekeeping Operations Centre, together with the
United States Naval Postgraduate School, organized
a seminar in Santiago on theme "Women, peace
and security: new challenges to implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000)", with the participation of
regional professionals. It included training in gender-
based sexual Violence and resolution 2106 (2013), inter
alia. At the national level, the Centre's 2014 curriculum
addresses resolution 1325 (2000) and related resolutions
and the prevention of abuse and sexual exploitation,
with a focus on the norms expected of peacekeeping
personnel.

Sexual violence continues to be used to humiliate
opponents in conflict, as a form of torture, to inflict
injury, to extract information, to stigmatize, degrade
and intimidate, to destroy communities, to displace
communities and groups from their land, and to
intentionally spread HIV or reward fighters. We cannot
continue to ignore the scourge and reiterate our firm
determination to implement resolution 1325 (2000) and
related resolutions on such violence, while supporting
efforts towards its prompt eradication and the healing
and reintegration of victims and survivors.

