Mr. Kolby (Norway): It was an important
breakthrough when the Council adopted resolution
1325 (2000) and included women, peace and security
on its agenda. That resolution provides us with an
instrument to ensure the full and equal participation of
women at all levels of decision-making and in
promoting peace efforts, including conflict prevention
and resolution and post-conflict reconstruction.

I commend you, Mr. President, and the United
Kingdom presidency for organizing this meeting. It is
clearly important that the Security Council actively
follow up resolution 1325 (2000) and its
implementation. I want to thank Angela King for her
leadership in preparing the study on women, girls,
peace and security, and Jean-Marie Guehenno and
Noeleen Heyzer for their important contributions. I am
pleased to learn that recommendations for future action
have been identified during the work on the study. We
are looking forward to being able to closely examine
the study and the report of the Secretary-General. The
recommendations will be crucial for further progress in
this field.

During the spring of this year several Arias
formula meetings were held to provide members of the
Security Council with information and views on the
status of women in war-affected areas. We heard
accounts of horrifying human rights breaches and
abuse. Despite the many bleak stories, it must be
stressed that women must not be viewed only as
victims of crime and abuse. Women are peacemakers
and peace builders and it is of the utmost importance
that they be included at all levels of peace planning and
in efforts to maintain peace in a post-conflict situation.

Norway has actively supported strengthening of
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO)
with regard to gender issues. I regret that the gender
adviser posts previously proposed by DPKO were not
given needed support. We continue to believe that these
posts are necessary and hope the study will contain a
recommendation to include gender advisers in DPKO.

We also look forward to revision of the standard
operating procedures to include gender perspectives.
Policy- and decision makers need to pay attention to
gender-based differences. We recommend that gender
focal points be established in all United Nations
mandated operations and that gender awareness be
included in training packages intended for
peacekeeping personnel. Also, more efforts should be
made to seek out women candidates and promote
women to positions, both in peace missions and as
special representatives of the Secretary-General.

I also hope the forthcoming recommendations
will include practical and detailed mechanisms to
ensure accountability for gender mainstreaming.
Implementation remains the most challenging part of
this work, and efforts should be made to develop
practical tools and training.

In conclusion, I take this opportunity to suggest
that a guidance note on gender perspectives be
prepared which details issues that should be included in
reports to the Security Council.

