Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium): I am
pleased to take the floor on behalf of Argentina, the
Netherlands, Slovenia and my own country, Belgium.
First of all, we thank Spain and the Security Council for
organizing this ministerial open debate on trafficking
in persons in conflict situations.

Human trafficking is not simply an ordinary category
of crime with transnational dimensions but indubitably
ranks as one of the most serious crimes of concern
to the international community as a whole. In recent
years and in too many parts of the world, widespread
conflict-related sexual violence, enslavement and
other acts of human trafficking have been reported.
This morning we heard the deeply moving testimonies
of two representatives of the victims of those crimes.
Human trafficking nowadays represents the world's
fastest-growing criminal industry.

We welcome the reports of the Secretary-General
on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2016/361) and on
the implementation of measures to counter trafficking
in persons (S/2016/949).

In this brief intervention, we wish to give some
elements of an answer to two of the main questions
asked in the concept note (S/2016/1031, annex),
including what Members States can do to better prevent
and combat trafficking in persons, particularly as that
relates to conflict-related sexual violence, and how we
can ensure the accountability of those who engage in
trafficking in persons in conflict situations.

Enslavement and conflict-related sexual violence
are forbidden by a number of treaties and by customary
international law. Moreover, in addition to the statutes
and decisions of various international criminal courts
and tribunals, most States Members of the United
Nations, in their national legal frameworks, consider
enslavement, conflict-related sexual violence and other
acts that derive from human trafficking in conflict
situations to amount to crimes against humanity and war
crimes. At this point, it is worth recalling that in most
cases, States have the jurisdiction to prosecute such
crimes, either because the crimes happened fully or in
part in their territory or because they have jurisdiction
over the victim or over the perpetrator. The primary
responsibility to prosecute lies, therefore, with States.

Very often, that proves to be a challenging task.
Owing to the transnational nature of this type of
crimes, suspects and witnesses, evidence and assets
relating to acts of human trafficking will often not be
found in the territory of one single State. That means
that States that wish to investigate and prosecute
such crimes will have to rely heavily on full practical
and judicial cooperation from other States to be
truly effective. However, an increasing number of
States share the opinion of practitioners and legal
experts from all regions of the world that the current
international procedural legal framework for mutual
legal assistance and extradition for such international
crimes is incomplete and outdated. They believe that
the most efficient and practical way to fill that gap is to
open negotiations for a new multilateral instrument for
international cooperation.

For that reason, Argentina, Belgium, Slovenia and
the Netherlands have taken the initiative to promote
negotiations on a multilateral treaty for mutual legal
assistance and extradition for domestic prosecution
of the crime of genocide, crimes against humanity
and war crimes. Such a treaty would serve as a tool
to facilitate better practical cooperation between States
investigating and prosecuting such crimes, which
would, in turn, enable them to both comply with their
international obligations and empower their national
judiciaries. Ensuring accountability for perpetrators
engaging in human trafficking is one of the most
effective ways to combat and prevent such odious acts.

Looking forward, we believe that the most concrete
and effective way for Member States to act against
that type of crime would be to join the permanent
declaration in support of the opening of negotiations on
such a procedural multilateral treaty, and we encourage
our colleagues here to do so.

