Mr. Duarte (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I commend
Uruguay for convening this open debate on such an
important issue.

(spoke in English)

I would like to thank Deputy-Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed for her remarks, as well as Special
Representative Adama Dieng and Ms. Mina Jaf for
their briefings.

The use of sexual violence as a weapon of war and
terrorism is abhorrent and utterly unacceptable. These
crimes destroy the social fabric of communities and
inflict long-lasting psychological trauma. Brazil has
repeatedly condemned all forms of violence against all
women and girls, including sexual violence in conflict.
It was during Brazil's chairmanship of the Committee
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in 2011, that the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, then Ms. Margot Wallstrom
of Sweden, was invited to briefthe Committee on sexual
violence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
This eventually led the Security Council to impose
sanctions, for the first time, for acts of sexual violence
in conflict, in collaboration with the Government ofthe
Democratic Republic of the Congo, placing the issue
permanently on the agenda.

Notwithstanding some progress that has been made
as a result of our collective engagement, the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2017/249) still paints a
grim picture. Victims face lethal retaliation, honour
crimes, suicide, untreated diseases, unsafe abortion,
economic exclusion and indigence. Of particular
concern are children born of rape, who may themselves
face a lifetime of marginalization. Survivors of sexual
violence in war zones must be recognized as legitimate
victims of conflict and terrorism.

We support the Secretary-General's call on
traditional, religious and community leaders to address
harmful social norms and contribute to redirecting the
stigma of rape from victims to perpetrators, who must
be held accountable for their crimes. Accountability
is a powerful deterrent, as well as a moral duty to
those afflicted. The lack of adequate national capacity
and expertise to investigate and prosecute for acts of
sexual violence remains one of the main impediments
to ensuring accountability not only for sexual violence
but also for related crimes. This situation often leads to
widespread impunity and has had an impact on access to
justice and on the safety of survivors. The international
community should encourage and help States to fully
exercise their responsibility. Promoting the universality
of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
is also crucial to ending impunity.

Given the atrocity of these crimes, we must do
everything in our hands to prevent them. Among
other measures, we must help strengthen national
capacities, curb the availability of weapons, ensure
prosecution, protect victims, take adequate action to
change how they are perceived in their communities,
and protect witnesses.
Sexual violence is not sufficiently viewed as a
threat to peace and in its relation to broader issues of
insecurity. Peace agreements rarely make reference
to the need to eradicate all forms of violence against
women and girls. They seldom include provisions
linked to accountability for gender-based violence.
Post-conflict arrangements hardly ever deal with
the situation of women who have been subjected to
violence during conflict and its aftermath. More has
to be done to ensure that women have a voice and are
active participants in peace agreements and in the
negotiation, design and implementation ofpost-conflict
and peacebuilding arrangements.

In highlighting once more the importance that
Brazil attaches to the women and peace and security
agenda of the Security Council, let me conclude by
mentioning the release, last March, of Brazil's first
National Action Plan on Women, Peace and Security,
which is the result of a joint effort by the Ministries of
Foreign Affairs, Defence and Justice and Citizenship,
as well as UN-Women and civil society. Policies to
protect women and girls from the consequences of
war and to prevent sexual and gender-based violence,
including sexual violence in conflict, are among the
key components of our National Action Plan, along with
measures to engage women, including in leadership
positions, in peace and security initiatives.

