Mrs. Colin Ortega (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico welcomes the briefers' statements and thanks
the delegation of Chile for convening today's debate on
an issue that presents a challenge to the maintenance of
international peace and security.

Civilians remain the primary victims in situations
of armed conflict, largely because ofthe use ofweapons
in heavily populated areas. It is not only a question
of collateral damage a civilians are increasingly
becoming targets of groups or factions in conflict.
It is estimated that over 80 per cent of the victims of
armed conflict are civilians. And among them, the
majority are women and girls displaced from their
places of origin and subject to sexual violence and
inhuman treatment. Mexico reaffirms its condemnation
of any attack - deliberate or not - against civilian
populations, whether or not it is part of a widespread
pattern in armed conflict.

The effective protection of civilians requires
respect for international humanitarian law and human
rights law, as well as measures to guarantee compliance.
Civilian populations should not be the object of the
conflict, nor should they be used directly as part
of a military tactic. International humanitarian law
provides for special protection for women and girls in
armed conflict, protection against sexual violence and
protection for pregnant women as well as mothers and
children, prisoners of war and women detained during
armed conflict. It is our responsibility to ensure that
such protection is provided.

Mexico reiterates its commitment to the United
Kingdom initiative to prevent sexual violence in
conflict, which seeks to strengthen the response to such
violence and to promote the efficacy of the International
Protocol on the Documentation and Investigation of
Sexual Violence in Conflict, adopted in June 2014. We
hope that that initiative will facilitate investigations
that allow for the prosecution of those responsible and
for the provision of care to victims.

The calls that the Security Council has made over
the past 15 years in the area of women and peace and
security provide an international perspective on the
very transformation of armed conflicts and new threats
to international peace and security. From the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000) to the presidential statement
adopted last October (S/PRST/2014/21), which calls on
Member States to protect their populations, particularly
women and girls affected by violent extremism, the
Council, often criticized for inaction, has contributed
significantly to highlighting the way in which our
societies have lagged behind on gender issues and has
shown the way towards putting the measures adopted
to close the gap into practice. Facing new challenges in
the agendas of the protection of civilians and women
and peace and security requires prevention strategies
that include the strengthening of economic and social
rights and the promotion of opportunities to ensure the
full participation and inclusion of women.

Mexico hopes that the review processes on
peacekeeping operations, the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and the comprehensive study
on the implementation of that resolution will serve to
provide us with a road map for integrating our concerns
on the protection of civilians and women, especially in
conflict and post-conflict situations.

Lastly, I wish to stress the central element of the
protection of civilians in peacekeeping operations, a
theme that will also be discussed during the next session
of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.
In that regard, my delegation calls on the Security
Council to take into account the recommendations
and policies that the Special Committee will produce
with regard to setting up or renewing peacekeeping
mandates. We also call on all other Member States to
effectively participate in that debate.
