Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I thank the Russian Federation for convening
this annual debate on women and peace and security.
I also thank the Secretary-General, the Executive
Director of UN-Women and the representative of civil
society for their briefings.

The report of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446), the report of
the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of the
Peacebuilding Architecture (see S/2015/490) and the
Global Study on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) mandated under resolution 2122 (2013)
can only give new momentum to the role played by
women in conflict situations, the inclusion of a gender
perspective in all phases of peace processes and the
importance of increasing women's participation in the
prevention of, and response to, conflict and in post-
conflict reconstruction.

Althouh we acknowledge that progress has been
made in implementing the agenda, it has not been
widespread, owing to geographical and political
limitations. It is therefore important that we take this
opportunity to review the peace agenda to renew the
commitment of the membership and advocate for
women and the gender perspective as core aspects in
international peacekeeping and security, and, above all,
the role of women and development in peacebuilding
and sustainable peace.

The adoption of General Assembly resolution

70/262 and Security Council resolution 2282 (2016) has
served to establish a paradigm shift in the United Nations
international peace and security agenda with regard to
the concept of sustainable peace. Sustainable peace
requires comprehensive and long-term approaches that
link political action, security,justice, development, and
the promotion of human rights in support of national
efforts, in which women play a central role. In particular,
we recognize the need to foster greater participation by
women in United Nations initiatives relating to conflict
prevention, mediation, the cessation of hostilities,
disarmament and the monitoring of peace agreements.

In that regard, Mexico highlights the successful
case of Colombia, where the negotiations process
leading up to the peace agreement in that country was
marked by the significant presence and participation
of women. We also acknowledge the efforts of the
United Nations Mission in Colombia to maximize the
number of women as observers and in all other roles.
The approaches followed in Colombia must become the
norm. Accordingly, we support calls upon the Secretary-
General to appoint more women mediators and women
leaders of mediation groups and to ensure that United
Nations-launched mediation processes incorporate a
gender perspective. Similarly, gender perspectives and
the specific needs of women must be comprehensively
included in all peace agreements.

It is essential that the activities carried out by a
peacekeeping or special political mission take into
account the specific needs of women and girls and
recognize the importance of their participation in
interactions with local communities. We therefore
support the idea ofpeacekeeping operations integrating
a gender perspective, starting from the planning phase
and in all other phases, and we support the integration
of gender advisers into such operations so as to provide
specific and differentiated attention to women and
girls who fall victim to conflict and violence. We
acknowledge that 16 peacekeeping operations already
have units or focal points dedicated to gender issues,
and we call for the same effort to be made in special
political missions, as there are gender experts in only 6
out of the 10 ongoing missions. In that regard, we also
underscore that the deployment of a greater number
of women on the ground, as well as an increase in the
number of female personnel in the national armies of
States Members, continues to be a priority.

Crises are not neutral in nature from a gender
perspective. Armed conflicts affect women more
because, unfortunately, sexual abuse and exploitation
have become a weapon of war. Mexico condemns in the
strongest terms the violence and sexual exploitation to
which women and girls have been subjected in situations
of armed conflict. For that reason, our country is a
regional champion of the Preventing Sexual Violence
in Conflict Initiative.
My country commends the actions taken by the
Secretary-General to prevent sexual abuse by personnel
serving under the United Nations flag. Such acts
must not be allowed to happen again. We particularly
welcome the appointment of a special coordinator
to deal with those issues and call upon all troop-
contributing countries to strictly implement the zero-
tolerance policy in connection with the commission of
sexual abuse by their personnel. At the same time, we
support international efforts to harmonize the training
of military, police and civilian personnel in issues
involving gender and the prevention of sexual abuse.

Mexico also expresses its concern with regard to
the alarming increase in the use of sexual violence as
a tactic by terrorist groups, particularly those involved
in armed conflict. On that account, we welcome the
initiative of the Secretary-General to identify gender
equality as one of the priorities of his Plan of Action to
Prevent Violent Extremism, and we see it as a positive
sign that General Assembly resolution 70/291, which
was the culmination of the fifth review of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, highlights
the importance of promoting greater synergies among
Member States, the United Nations and women's
organizations in developing strategies to combat
terrorism and violent extremism.

Finally, I reiterate Mexico's commitment to the full
implementation of the sustainable peace agenda, while
comprehensively promoting programmes that meet the
specific needs of women in connection with prevention
and conflict in all of its phases.

