Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): As the penholder
on women and peace and security, I want first to
welcome all of our numerous guests today and to thank
the Secretary-General and Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka for
their briefings and all the work they do on this agenda.

I also want to pay tribute to Rita Lopidia for her

briefing. Sha has given us a valuable insight into what
"women and peace and security" really means on the
ground in South Sudan. I commend the work that she
and others like her are doing to turn the words "peace"
and "security" into a reality. I also want to welcome the
fact that Russia, in organizing this debate, has accepted
the importance both of the women and peace and
security agenda and of the role of civil society on this
and, I hope, on other issues. Talking of civil society, I
want to pick up one of Rita's points and assure her that
the United Kingdom will invite civil society to brief
in country-specific meetings under our presidency in
March, and I call on other presidencies to do the same.

More broadly, it is not enough to support the
women and peace and security agenda today, one day
a year. Words spoken in this Chamber are not enough.
Commitment means action every day throughout the
year in mandate renewals and other negotiations, here
and in capitals. And sadly, the reality at the moment is
that women and girls continue to be affected inordinately
by conflict and insecurity in Syria, in South Sudan and
in so many other places. And to compound the injustice,
while women's lives are on the line, their voices are
seldom heard in the pursuit ofpeace. We need only look
at the gender balance of the Council.
And yet, in this very Chamber a year ago, we all
committed to doing something about it - to take the
words of resolution 2242 (2015), which I was proud
to draft with Roman, and turn them into something
meaningful, something real. We have had a year - a
year to increase the effective participation of women
in peace processes; a year to increase women's roles
in the military and peacekeeping; a year to increase
the finance to support all this work and more. So
how have we got on? Well, let me take those three
points - participation, peacekeeping and money - in
turn.

On the first, over the past year the United Kingdom
has been pushing to get women a seat at the negotiating
table, and not just because it is the right thing to do.
We are doing so because it works. As the Secretary-
General and Samantha reminded us, when women
are at the table the chances of peace increase by 20 to
35 per cent. And yet less than one in ten negotiators
is a woman. In Yemen, United Kingdom support has
enabled the United Nations Special Envoy to employ an
expert on women's political participation. It has enabled
a UN-Women project to boost the influence of Yemeni
women in the peace process. And in Syria, we have
worked hard to ensure that women's views are heard,
including through support for the Women's Advisory
Board and the Women's Consultative Committee that
Carolyn rightly mentioned.

Some would say that this counts for very little when
the bombs still fall - that these are just token gestures.
But as many of my colleagues have done, let us look at
Colombia. The guns have fallen silent. The negotiations
included a gender subcommission. Three delegations of
women's organizations held talks with the negotiating
team in Havana. Those are not token gestures. They
are meaningful steps towards bringing a sustainable
end to more than 50 years of war, and I am proud of
the diplomatic and financial support from the United
Kingdom that has helped to make that happen.

Secondly, however, we must match those steps at
the negotiating table in United Nations peacekeeping
missions and our own militaries. Women have as much
ofa role to play in keeping the peace as in negotiating it.
That is why the United Nations peacekeeping defence
ministerial meeting, held in London last month, included
such a strong focus on women and peace and security,
as Siti reminded us earlier. More than 60 countries
signed our ambitious communique, and we now need to
deliver on it, doubling the number of women in United
Nations peacekeeping operations by 2020, increasing
the number of women in missions as a whole and
tackling every single allegation of sexual exploitation
and abuse until such horrific practices end. Our efforts
should not stop at peacekeeping. The United Kingdom
is updating the training that our armed forces receive
so that everyone understands the agenda on women and
peace and security and knows how to prevent sexual
violence in conflict. And we will be doing the same for
the troops we train from other countries, too.

Finally, an increase in our ambitions for women
and peace and security should be matched by an
increase in the financing underpinning it. That includes
more support for the Global Acceleration Instrument
for Women and Peace and Security and Humanitarian
Action (GAI), and for UN-Women and civil society.
It means making our development spending gender-
sensitive, something that the United Kingdom
continually strives for. And in the most basic terms, it
means increasing our spending on projects related to
women and peace and security. The United Kingdom
has increased its spending by more than 50 per cent, to
$10 million in this financial year, including $1 million
for the GAI, and I hope others will do the same.
But in conclusion, we need something more than
money. We need leaders - leaders like Rita Lopidia.
We did not choose a woman to be the next Secretary-
General, but in Antonio Guterres we have chosen a
true champion of gender parity, and in appointing a
gender-balanced transition team, he is already off to
a good start. We look to him to continue that work
when he begins in earnest, and to help to make the
second anniversary of resolution 2242 (2015) an even
greaters success.

