Ms. Power (United States of America): I know I
had the floor at length earlier, so I will try to be as
brief as possible. Like the Secretary-General, because
of the gravity of what we are discussing here and the
insufficiency of what we have mustered up to this point
as an international community, I think it is worth coming
back to some of the points of convergence around the
table, as well as the few points of divergence, which I
do not think we should paper over.

First, in response to something my Egyptian
colleagues mentioned with respect to the number of
cases, Ijust want to seek clarification because, at least
as interpreted, there was an initial reference to several
dozen cases, but later to only a handful of cases. I want
to state for the record that it is more than several dozen
cases, and certainly far more than a handful. We had
more than 69 allegations in 2015; we have already had
26 people come forward to report cases in 2016. But we
have no idea how pervasive this problem is. We have
no idea. I think that everyone believes that one case is
one too many, but I think we need to be very careful
given the details outlined the Secretary-General's
report (A/70/729). We need at least to all mobilize
around the extent of the problem that has managed
to be documented. I suspect that if there were better
reporting in more places, unfortunately we would
likely see more allegations being brought forward.
But that is a supposition. Let us at least have a shared
understanding of the facts that have been presented by
the Secretary-General.

Secondly, like a number of Council members that
have made this point, we totally agree that there cannot
be collective guilt or national stigmatization. I think
that is extremely important, and all of us have tried
to make that point in our statements. But that is why
individual responsibility and accountability, as well as
individual punishment if warranted, are so important.
And it is not happening, by and large. I shall come back
to the Secretary-General's statistics in a second, but the
definition of insanity is to do the same thing over and
over again 4 or not do the same thing over and over
again - and expect a different result. The system that
has been in place has not had the desired effect, in two
respects.

Allegations keep being brought forward, with a lot
of documentation - photographs ofbabies whose DNA
has been tested, and so on. This is happening; this is a
phenomenon. Moreover, the individual perpetrators of
these crimes are not being punished back in their home
countries. I particularly appreciated the Secretary-
General's extemporaneous comments in that regard.
Absolutely, the United Nations and the individuals who
serve it have to do much more, but we do not have court
martial processes or courtrooms in this building, so the
Member States have to support the Secretary-General.
He can do everything he sets out to do in the report,
which he and those who work for the United Nations
must do, but he needs us. What he does is totally
necessary and not at all sufficient. We have got to make
changes. We cannot just say the same things we have
been saying for a decade and expect the outcomes to be
different - that there is going to be less sexual abuse
or more accountability in capitals.

Thirdly, the representative of Egypt said that the
General Assembly is the competent body to deal with
what my friend and colleague rightly denounced as these
horrific crimes. The United States is part ofthe General
Assembly. We would welcome constructive action by
the General Assembly, but the General Assembly has
had 11 years since our last open security meeting on
this topic (see S/PV.5191) to take more aggressive and
constructive steps that might have made more of a dent
in this problem. What we in the General Assembly have
done has not yet worked. The facts are the facts; the
allegations are the allegations; the record of inaction
in the capitals is by and large a record that shames us
all, including those of us who have very strong bilateral
relationships with a lot of the countries concerned. We
have not been as aggressive as we needed to be.

What is hard about hearing the jurisdictional
argument again and again about how this issue belongs
somewhere else is that in, the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, Egypt has consistently
refused to support language welcoming or taking
note of the Secretary-General's report. Somewhere,
these steps have to be taken and the Security Council
has waited a long time for those steps to be taken
and for the kind of consensus we need in the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations to give the
Secretary-General the support he needs and to be more
aggressive, commensurate with the gravity of this set
of crimes. Again, if it were happening to our kids, we
would not be having jurisdictional fights like this. We
would not even think that it does not belong here, and
yet - because it is somebody else's kids - we want to
push this off somewhere else, where we know there will
be a stalemate and gridlock and we will find ourselves
in the same world in which we have been. And that is a
world that is not working for these victims.

Fourthly, and this is related, several countries have
again implied that the Security Council should stand
down. I have to repeat, as a matter of logic - and
maybe I am just not smart enough to follow all the
jurisdictional hijinks that go on here at the United
Nations - that in areas where peacekeepers are
deployed, we, the Security Council, are responsible and
try to take action when armies rape women and kids.
We, the Security Council, see ourselves as responsible
when non-State actors and militias rape women and
kids, or men, for that matter. Again, we see ourselves as
responsible when terrorists, who pose a grave threat to
international peace and security, rape women and kids.
How is it possible that we can argue that when our own
peacekeepers, the people we have sent into the field,
rape women and children, the Security Council does
not have responsibility? How can we say that? This is
our problem, our responsibility.

Fifthly, the Secretary-General described cases
closed. I would like to thank him once again for his
leadership and the personal responsibility he has taken
in insisting that we move beyond getting reports from
the field that say that cases are closed, to a world of
transparent and thorough investigations. We do not
know why those cases were closed. Was it because
people waited a year to go back and actually try to talk to
a victim? Was it because the evidence had disappeared?
Was it because the peacekeepers who were alleged
to have committed the crimes were deployed out?
Knowing what we know, and having tried to unpack a
little of what happens in those investigations, I would
be very careful about equating closed cases with just
and thorough investigations.

Finally, my last point reinforces something that
the Secretary-General, and I believe everyone in the
Chamber, has said, which is that the peacekeepers, as
the President also said, are serving in some of the worst
circumstances imaginable. When they go back to their
home countries, those men and women will find that
their families will barely know where they have been,
in places that none of their families or neighbours will
ever have visited, and that they will have no parades, no
celebration of the service that they have given overseas.
It is an awesome sacrifice that the troops, police and
civilians who serve in these missions are making, and
the risks are off the charts.

The United States is not a big troop- or
police-contributor to United Nations peacekeeping,
and that gives us a lot of humility when we discuss
this subject in the Council. When I look around this
table I have even more respect, whether I am looking
at Egypt or China or Senegal or Uruguay, which send
thousands of peacekeepers into these environments. We
salute them. That is why during his time as President
Mr. Obama has devoted more time and energy than
any other American President to trying to support
peacekeeping. It is so important, and so thankless. We
should do more to honour that service, and I think that
is a great point of convergence around this table. These
people are saving thousands of lives - hundreds of
thousands, probably - every day, if we think about
what the situations would be like without them.

We must also be clear as to who the victims are
as we talk about that is happening in the field. They
are not the United Nations troops and police, most of
whom, as everyone has said, with such distinction and
bravery. They are the men, women and, far too often,
the children who are the victims of rape, sexual abuse
and other violations of human rights, committed by the
very people who were sent to protect them. Those are
the victims. We cannot forget that fact as we debate
about what to do. We cannot forget who the victims
are or how we would act if we actually knew those
victims - if they were not numbers or abstractions but
people we knew, people we were related to, people we
cared about.

