Mr. Lal (India): We thank the delegation of France
for convening this open debate. We also thank all the
briefers for sharing updates on the ongoing efforts and
the emerging trends regarding this agenda item.

The situations of armed conflict directly addressed
by the Security Council over the past two decades
have primarily been intra-State conflicts. Such
internal armed conflict situations are often a result
of a breakdown in the capacity of the State to enforce
the rule of law and maintain effective governance.
These conflicts also involve non-State actors and
terrorist networks destroying the social fabric. In
many of these conflicts the world has, regrettably,
seen extreme brutality being inflicted upon women
and sexual violence being used as a tool. At the same
time, the importance of women's empowerment and
their participation in conflict resolution, peacebuilding
and governance for sustaining peace is also becoming
better understood.

Despite the increased focus on the links between
women, peace and security, and the evolving normative
framework during the past decade and a half,
non-combatant women and girls continue to be major
victims during armed conflicts. The heinous crimes
against humanity perpetrated by terror networks such
as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham in West Asia,
Boko Haram in parts of West Africa or Al-Shabaab in
East Africa, especially against women and girls, are
stark reminders of the serious challenges that need to
be overcome.
Increased institutionalized involvement by women
in peacekeeping, conflict prevention and resolution and
political processes is important to address this challenge.
That requires capacity- and institution-building at
the ground level. Therefore, the issue of women,
peace and security must be seen in the wider societal
context of women's empowerment and longer-term
sustainable development.

At the United Nations, the work done by the
Commission on the Status of Women, the Committee
on the Elimination of Discrimination against
Women and other entities continues to push a gender
empowerment agenda that can have a transformative
impact on societies. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development highlights the interlinkage between
sustainable development and peace and security. Also
at the United Nations, while there is recognition of the
need for greater participation ofwomen in peacekeeping
operations, progress remains slow.

In the specific context of United Nations
peacekeeping, India has been the lead troop contributor
over the past seven decades. While there has been only
a marginal increase in the overall number of women
peacekeepers, almost a decade ago, in 2007, India
deployed the first-ever all-women formed police unit
for peacekeeping with the United Nations Mission
in Liberia. Prime Minister Modi has committed to a
higher representation of Indian female peacekeepers
in missions. India has committed to fulfilling the
pledge to have women serve in 15 per cent of military
observer positions by the end of this year. India has
also committed to provide another all-female formed
police unit.

Moreover, India has taken the lead in hosting
specialized training courses for peacekeepers on sexual
violence in armed conflict situations. Among other
issues, those courses have focused on the role ofwomen
in the context of post-conflict situations. Earlier this
year, India hosted the third such specialized course for
female military officers, which was organized by the
Centre for United Nations Peacekeeping in New Delhi,
in partnership with UN-Women. India, the first country
to contribute to the Secretary-General's trust fund in
support of victims of sexual exploitation and abuse, has
continued to contribute to this cause this year.

Prosecution is essential for prevention. The
international community has an important role in helping
build adequate resources and capacities in that regard.

In that context, earlier this year, India contributed to the
Residual Special Court for Sierra Leone. The Special
Court was among the landmark tribunals that tried and
convicted persons for crimes that included the use of
child soldiers and forced marriages.

Several key decision-making positions in India are
held by distinguished women. They include the Speaker
of the Lower House of Parliament and many ministers.
More than 1.3 million elected women representatives at
the local Government level across India are involved in
formulating and implementing gender-sensitive public
policies. In international forums, too, India assigns
high importance to the role of women. In 1953, the
first woman President of the General Assembly was
from India.

India remains ready to contribute further
internationally, both to the normative and practical
aspects, on issues relating to the women and peace and
security agenda.

