Mr. Logar (Slovenia): I would like to thank the
Nigerian presidency for convening the meeting and
organizing this timely discussion. My appreciation
goes also to the Secretary-General, Ms. Zainab Hawa
Bangura, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and Ms. Rhoda
Misaka of the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace
and Security.

I also align myself with the statements delivered
by the observer of the European Union and by the
representative of Austria on behalf of the Human
Security Network. Allow me to add a few thoughts
from our national perspective.

Slovenia traditionally pays special attention to
the empowerment of women and the protection and
promotion of their rights. As has been recalled many
times, the protection and advancement of women's
rights is of key importance for stability, sustainable
peace and prosperity at all levels.

On the other hand, armed conflict and instability
often disproportionately affect women. In times of
instability, violence against women, including sexual
violence, increases. It is therefore important to include
women in conflict prevention and resolution efforts as
well as post-conflict recovery and reconciliation.

Furthermore, sexual violence is used in conflict as
a weapon of war to humiliate and injure victims, their
families and entire communities, and often continues
after the conflict has ended. Victims, not just women
and girls but also men and boys, are traumatized and
stigmatized forever. Those heinous acts remain vivid in
the recollections of whole communities for generations,
as we are reminded by the legacy of conflict in the
Western Balkans and Rwanda. Such acts should not
be repeated and must be stopped in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Central African Republic,
Syria, Mali and Somalia and in other situations of
concern at the present time.

We should not forget that sexual exploitation and
abuse in conflict and post-conflict situations is not only
committed by members of the parties to the conflict,
but also by United Nations personnel. Therefore, we
welcome the developments in applying the United
Nations zero-tolerance policy in certain situations on
the Council's agenda. We call on the Council to include
all aspects of the policy in all resolutions renewing or
establishing peacekeeping mandates. It is important
that the United Nations set an example by practicing it
preaches.

Although the commitment to accountability and
the fight against impunity regarding sexual violence
in conflict has been reiterated many times - again
in today's discussion - and enshrined in Council
resolution 2106 (2013), there are many obstacles to
ensuring perpetrators' accountability and access to
justice for victims of sexual crimes in conflict.

All of the issues mentioned were also raised at
the third seminar of the Initiative on Mediation in the
Mediterranean Region, held in Slovenia last month
on the topic of promoting a culture of mediation and
prevention in the Mediterranean, where the need to put
the issue of sexual Violence in conflict at the top of the
agenda was highlighted.

The Rome Statute and the International Criminal
Court play an important part in upholding accountability
for perpetrators and the fight against impunity.
Their role should be seen as an important element in
establishing peace and security and the rule of law. We
would also like to commend the Team of Experts on
the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, the
Justice Rapid Response Initiative and the UN-Women
sexual and gender-based violence justice expert roster
in assisting the international community and affected
countries through their expertise in addressing conflict-
related sexual violence.

We believe that the primary responsibility for
the prosecution of conflict-related crimes, including
conflict-related sexual violence, lies with States. In that
regard, allow me to recall the initiative of Slovenia, the
Netherlands, Belgium and Argentina to consider the
possibility of adopting a new international instrument
on mutual legal assistance and extradition aimed at
effective investigation and prosecution, by domestic
jurisdictions, of the crimes that are of the most serious
concern internationally.

