Mr. Mminele (South Africa): The South African
delegation wishes to thank the Republic of Chile for its
leadership in convening this open debate and for your
presence here today, Sir. We would also like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Kyung-wha Kang for
her consistent and visionary leadership on protection
in all its dimensions. Out thanks go too to Dr. Helen
Durham, Director for International Law and Policy
of the International Committee of the Red Cross,
and Ms.Ilwad Elman, from the NGO Working Group
on Women, Peace and Security, for their insightful
briefings.

The violence against women and girls, which is on
the increase, is becoming a worrisome global scourge.
South Africa applauds the fact that the international
human rights and humanitarian law systems have
produced a body of law for protection in this regard.
The challenge is very often a matter of failure by States
to implement the key provisions of these instruments as
well as failure to comply with their obligations. To this
end, we call on all States committed to taking concrete
and tangible measures for the maximum protection
of women and girls in situations of armed conflict to
faithfully implement the relevant Conventions, that
is to say: first, the 12 August 1949 Fourth Geneva
Convention as well as its 1977 additional protocols, and,
secondly, the optional protocol to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children
in armed conflict, which was adopted by the General
Assembly on 19 December 2011.

Thirdly, in October 2009 the African Union, for
its part, adopted the Convention on the Protection and
Assistance of Internally Displaced Persons in Africa,
known as the Kampala Convention, which remains a
vital tool in addressing the root causes of displacement
in Africa, where around 10 million people are displaced
because of conflict and climate-change related natural
disasters, among other things. And, fourthly, there
is the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women, adopted by the
General Assembly in 1979, which is often described
as an international bill of rights for women. Together
with other international instruments, these provide us
with clear guidelines on how to address the protection
of children in armed conflict.

South Africa is firmly committed to the protection
of civilians in armed conflict, including to the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, which seeks to address many
challenges facing women and children. Furthermore,
South Africa has consistently highlighted its major
concerns about the apparent lack of political will
to address the fact that generations face severe
vulnerabilities and lack of protection in Palestine and
Western Sahara. Children and women in those situations
of armed conflict have for decades been unable to live
a decent life of peace and security and unable to fully
ensure the upbringing of their children in a secure
environment. In that regard, noble programmes, such
as the realization of Millennium Development Goals,
sadly remain unattainable.

South Africa welcomes the international
community's efforts to protect civilians in armed
conflicts. However, the in-country participation of
all the relevant stakeholders must be sought. While
positive efforts and progressive steps are being made, it
is clear that the lack of political will and the complete
disregard for civilian lives remain a major obstacle to
their protection during armed conflict. It is therefore
important that, as international actors and external
organizations provide constructive assistance, they
should comply with the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations, while fully respecting the will,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the country
concerned and refrain from forcible interference. In
that regard, South Africa strongly believes that all-
inclusive dialogue and national reconciliation should
be promoted in order to reduce the scourge of violence,
which will also prove valuable in finding solutions and
laying the groundwork for sustainable peace in crisis
situations.

The Secretary-General's latest report on women
and peace and security in September 2014 (S/2014/693),
highlights some progress on all areas of the women
and peace and security agenda, as well as some notable
challenges and gaps. A sustained, integrated approach
in a coherent and coordinated manner remains
critical to ensuring effectiveness. The most notable
challenge, however, continues to exist at the level of
implementation. It is at this practical level that we see
a lack of progress pertaining to the actual protection
of civilians, including women and girls. Women and
children, especially those displaced from their homes,
in violent conflict areas are especially vulnerable to
attack, including rape, trafficking and all manner of
physical, sexual and psychological abuse. We have
too often seen cases whereby female civilians taking
no part in hostilities become the deliberate targets of
war or find themselves in danger simply because they
happen to be in an area where conflict is taking place.

The African Union Agenda 2063 - "A global
strategy to optimize use of Africa's resources for the
benefits of all Africans" - has a vision to free the
African continent from armed conflict, terrorism
and extremism, intolerance and gender-based violent
crimes. It furthermore aspires to silence all guns
by 2020, and my delegation views this move as an
important stride forward. We are also pleased to learn
that the Security Council encourages States to adopt
minimum standards and codes of conduct in their
armies, militias and police services, and to ensure
their implementation to reduce the incidence of gender-
based violence as a result of power imbalances. Further
to that, the acknowledgement by the Security Council
that sustainable peace requires an integrated approach
based on coherence between security, development,
political activities, human rights, including gender
equality, justice activities and the rule of law, is
particularly encouraging. It should be stressed that
actions by peacekeeping missions to protect civilians
will be successful only if there is confidence and trust
in the security mechanisms and institutions and in the
rule of law of the host country.

In the past year, we have witnessed some significant
advances when the Security Council adopted
resolutions that allow for practical expressions to our
collective need to ensure protection of civilians with an
emphasis on the challenges and needs faced by women
and girls in armed conflict and post-conflict settings.
Actions undertaken, such as efforts to strengthen early-
warning mechanisms and risk assessments with gender-
sensitive indicators, serve as points of departure. The
interaction with civil society and women peacebuilders
regarding the collection of information and reporting
is also pertinent. However, the development and
significant changes in the mandates, monitoring and
training of peacekeeping missions remain vital factors.
Examples of what has been achieved among the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and
the United Nations country teams joint-assessment
missions to identify humanitarian and security
concerns in camps for internally displaced persons in
Darfur have enabled a degree of success.

I would like to conclude by commending all
personnel involved in peacekeeping missions and civil
society groups for the services they perform. Often
they are inadequately resourced for the enormous
challenges that they face on a daily basis. South Africa
will continue to interact closely with them to allow
them to perform their vital international role.

