Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): I thank you,
Sir, and the Chinese delegation for convening this
debate of the Security Council on women and peace
and security, with a focus on the participation of
women in all stages of the peace process. I thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(8/2008/622) on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), to which Viet Nam attaches great importance. I
also thank all the invited speakers for their meaningful
contributions.

Women account for more than half of the world's
population. Families cannot be homes without women
playing a key role in maintaining and nurturing them.
Societies cannot be peaceful communities without the
vital participation of women. My delegation commends
the measures that the United Nations has taken over the
past years in promoting the role of women in peace and
security in many parts of the world, particularly in
conflict areas. Most notable among those measures
have been the adoption by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations of directives and plans on
gender equality in peacekeeping operations; the
integration of gender quality in planning, monitoring
and the collection of data by humanitarian entities; and
the development by many United Nations agencies of
strategies to further mainstream gender into the
mandates for conflict prevention and peacebuilding.

My delegation is encouraged to see United
Nations agencies, and especially peacekeeping
missions, playing a more active role in promoting,
through technical as well as financial assistance,
women's participation in all stages of the peace process
in many countries. As the Secretary-General notes in
his report, there has emerged "a culture of gender
equality and women's empowerment in peace and
security areas" (S/2008/622, para. 8). We consider that
trend to be encouraging.

My delegation remains preoccupied, however, by
the fact that we are still far from able to ensure the full
and equal participation of women in conflict
prevention, peace negotiations, peacemaking and post-
conflict peacebuilding. In many societies, women are
left inactive and with little chance to take part in
decision-making processes, and are often excluded
from activities related to peace and security. Women's
representation in security institutions, law enforcement
bodies and peace negotiation delegations has seen little
improvement since the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000).

We believe that the most effective way to
enhance the participation of women in peace processes
is to empower them both politically and economically.
To that end, it is important to ensure their equal access
to education and information, since that helps to raise
their awareness of their own rights and equips them
with the knowledge and skills necessary to actively
participate in governance and economic activities and
in peace processes. Gender mainstreaming needs to be
strengthened in peace and security areas, with gender
incorporated into all legislation, strategies and policies
on conflict prevention and resolution, and
reconstruction. That, in turn, will build foundations to
back women's equal representation and leadership in
peace and security institutions, while enlarging space
for their participation in peace talks. The
implementation of such efforts can and should be
assisted by the United Nations through a wide range of
measures, from legal and technical assistance to
negotiation and leadership skills training programmes.

In Viet Nam women served in wartime as
generals and peace negotiators. Our country now ranks
third in the Asia-Pacific region in terms of the female
ratio in the parliament membership and has had, for
over two decades, a female Vice-President of State and
several female Ministers. In every State or public
institution there is a women's affairs committee that
oversees and promotes the implementation of gender
equality policies. Ensuring gender equality and
empowering women has been and continues to be a
major policy of the Vietnamese State and Government.
We support and continue to implement resolution 1325
(2000) at all levels.

