Mr. Duarte Lopes (Portugal): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this open debate.

My statement is fully aligned with the one already
delivered by the observer of the European Union.

As we approach the twentieth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), the gap between
commitment and implementation remains particularly
significant in matters related to the economic, political
and social empowerment of women. Despite the
accountability tool created by the resolution, the latest
report of the Secretary-General on women and peace
and security leaves no room for doubt:

"We continue to witness devastating failures
to respect international human rights and
humanitarian law across conflicts, particularly
with regard to grave violations of women's human
rights." (S/2018/900, para. 1)

Portugal therefore calls on all Member States to
implement resolution 1325 (2000) in a more effective
and efficient way. Like many others, we believe that
there is a connection between gender equality and the
prevention of conflict. Empowering women should be
regarded as a fundamental part of any peacebuilding
process. Allow me to briefly mention a couple of
examples of what we are doing.

We are organizing exchanges and sharing of
experiences of officials deployed to peacekeeping and
peacebuilding missions. We are providing training on
gender equality and violence against women and girls
to officials in the justice sector, the armed forces and
the security forces. A total of 81 Portuguese women
are taking part in United Nations and European Union
bilateral and regional missions.

The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development - in particular Sustainable Development
Goals 4, 5 and 16 - is extremely relevant in the
consolidation of the role of women in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding processes. Better articulation between
the 2030 Agenda and the resolutions on women and
peace and security would allow for greater investment
in education in conflict situations.

Portugal has continuously promoted respect for
the right of education, including higher education in
humanitarian emergencies. A global and coordinated
approach for the promotion of higher education will
better equip a new generation of leaders that will be
able to rebuild the countries and societies shattered by
war and break the cycle of violence. In that context, let
me mention the Global Platform for Syrian Students.
Allow me also to call on all Member States to endorse
the Safe Schools Declaration. Eighty-one countries,
including my own, have joined the Declaration, which
was promoted by Norway and Argentina in 2015. The
Declaration highlights the importance of protecting
access to safe education for women and girls living
in conflict.

I conclude with a special reference to Nadia Murad
and Denis Mukwege as symbols in the denunciation
of sexual violence against women and its use as
warfare. The 2018 Nobel Peace Prize acknowledges
the unequal consequences that armed conflicts impose
upon women, who are particularly vulnerable to sexual
crimes, trafficking and other forms of exploitation.
Countering such violence is a priority for Portugal in
our internal policies and in our external action.

