Ms. Rulumeni (South Africa): Allow me to
express our sincere gratitude to you, Mr. President, for
organizing this debate on such an important matter.
South Africa welcomes the open debate and believes
that it is also timely, leading the processes in
preparation for the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security in 2010. South Africa aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of the
African Union (AU) later today.

Resolution 1325 (2000) was adopted nine years
ago. Consistent with the resolution, the theme today is
"Responding to the needs of women and girls in post-
conflict situations for sustainable peace and security".
It is designed to examine how Member States and
international and regional organizations could further
improve women's participation in all stages of peace
processes, particularly in conflict resolution, post-
conflict planning and peacebuilding, including by
enhancing their engagement in decision-making in the
early stages of recovery processes. While women may
be the first casualties of war, they remain active agents
of change and play a meaningful role in the recovery
and reintegration of their families. Women are also
instrumental in bringing about democracy and
reconciliation in post-conflict societies.

The African Union and subregional organizations
offer several advantages in the pursuit of effective
conflict prevention and resolution. Therefore, the
Assembly of the African Union, in its efforts to
promote the participation of women in peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and security, has taken concrete steps
and pledged that the organs of the AU and the regional
economic communities and member States, using the
frameworks of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008), will integrate gender policies, programmes and
activities on conflict and peace. That would ensure that
women participate fully in conflict resolution and
management processes.

Subregionally, gender equality and the
empowerment of women are among the founding
principles of the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) and are enshrined in the SADC
Treaty. We have been greatly honoured by the
leadership and important contribution of women in
recent peace processes and negotiations in our region.
On 17 August 2008, the SADC heads of State signed
the SADC Protocol on Gender and Development,
which has been hailed as an important step towards the
empowerment of women, the elimination of
discrimination and the achievement of gender equality
and equity.

In the context of peace and security, the Protocol
stipulates that the States parties shall endeavour to put
in place measures to ensure that women have equal
representation and participation in key decision-
making positions in conflict resolution and
peacebuilding processes by 2015, in accordance with
resolution 1325 (2000). Furthermore, the Protocol
specifies that States parties shall, during times of
armed conflict, take such steps as are necessary to
prevent and eliminate incidences of human rights
abuses, especially of women and children, and also to
ensure that the perpetrators of such abuses are brought
to justice before courts of competent jurisdiction.

There is an urgent need to advocate more strongly
for the equal participation and full involvement of
women in all efforts for the maintenance and
promotion of peace and security. We also believe that
all actors to the binding resolution should devote their
attention to ensuring sufficient resources, the capacity
to address the challenges and empowerment through
educational programmes so as to increase the
awareness and understanding of how to find lasting
solutions. We encourage Member States to finalize and
concretize national action plans for the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) that provide for the
necessary training of women and men alike.

South Africa continues to support the work of the
United Nations and of the African Union in promoting
the equal participation and full involvement of women
in all efforts for the maintenance and promotion of
peace and security, as well as in protecting women and
girls against sexual violence. From our experience in
the SADC region, we have learned that it is important
to build solidarity among all role players, particularly
women, and therefore we remain committed to working
within a consultative and collaborative framework to
find peaceful and lasting solutions to conflicts.

To that end, we believe it important for women in
local communities to be allowed to participate in
finding solutions for the reconstruction and rebuilding
of their countries. The importance of equal
representation and participation of women in formal
peace processes and at negotiating tables cannot be
overemphasized.

The primary responsibility for preventing and
protecting women and girls in conflict situations and
their aftermath should not lie with the international
community alone. That would assist in promoting local
ownership in peace processes. South Africa remains
committed to the full and effective implementation of
resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820 (2008) and 1888 (2009).
We in the international community have an obligation
to women to ensure that their rights are protected and
that their place in all aspects of the peace process is
assured.

In conclusion, my delegation will continue to
support the work of the United Nations and of the
African Union in promoting the equal participation and
full involvement of women in all efforts for the
maintenance and promotion of peace and security, as
well as in protecting women and girls in post-conflict
situations and their aftermath.

