Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Allow
me to thank the French presidency for organizing this
important open debate and all those who have provided
us with their insights and testimony.

Luxembourg associates itself with the statement of
the European Union.

While we will commemorate on 19 June the
International Day for the Elimination of Sexual Violence
in Conflict, the situation on the ground unfortunately
continues to be out of step with the resolve repeatedly
expressed by the international community to end
this scourge.

As for the situation of children in armed conflict,
the vast majority of parties listed in the annexes of
the Secretary-General's annual reports are non-State
actors, extremist groups and terrorists such as Da'esh
or Boko Haram. However, States too are known to
use this type of violence. Thus, the Syrian regime's
resort to sexual violence in detention centres and
interrogations - including against men and boys - is
part of an arsenal of terror that contributes to massive
displacements of people, which make the situation of
already vulnerable groups even more precarious.

In recent years, the horror has reached new
climaxes with the implementation of a veritable
regulated political war economy, in which trafficking
in persons for sexual purposes plays a central role.
Sexual violence - which serves as remuneration for
fighters, a way to sustain the group and a source of
income - is part of the system whereby Da'esh remains
in power in the territories it occupies. This highlights
the importance of the Security Council's decision in
resolution 2253 (2015) to include on the sanctions list
anyone who transfers funds to Da'esh in the context of
sexual exploitation, trafficking or trade.

As you rightly note in your concept note (S/2016/496, annex), Mr. President, beyond the obvious physical and
psychological trauma, sexual violence poses significant
risks of the socioeconomic marginalization of victims
and can perpetuate the vicious circle of conflict.
Children born of rape, who are often not registered at
birth, are at increased risk of being radicalized in their
turn and recruited by armed groups. Birth registration
is the most effective mechanism for determining the age
and preventing the recruitment of minors. That is why
resolution 2143 (2014) on children and armed conflict,
adopted on 7 March 2014 under the Luxembourg
presidency of the Security Council, stresses the
importance of recording all births, even belatedly.

We fully support the recommendations of the
Secretary-General in his report (S/2016/36l), including
its call for on Security Council to add sexual violence
as a criterion for designation for all relevant sanctions
committees, and on the sanctions committees to
systematically register alleged perpetrators of sexual
violence on their lists. Moreover, the Council should
see to it that the alleged perpetrators of systematic
sexual violence, or those who sponsor them, are
brought to justice, for example by referring situations
in which such acts are committed to the International
Criminal Court.

We also support the call of the Special Representative
ofthe Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Bangura, on the Security Council this morning to
provide her with the resources necessary to provide
a comprehensive and multidimensional response to
the challenges, old and new, posed by conflict-related
sexual violence. I take this opportunity to reiterate
our ongoing support for the Special Representative's
outstanding work and for her Team of Experts on the
Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict.

Denial and impunity are the two major obstacles
in the fight against sexual violence in conflict. To deny
that sexual violence has an impact on security and
peace is to grant impunity to the perpetrators. We will
denounce this double injustice on 19 June and every
19 June until the reality on the ground finally reflects
the aspirations of the international community.

