Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): Let
me start by commending Germany, as well as France,
for their excellent stewardship with regard to the
women and peace and security agenda during the past
two months.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands fully aligns itself
with the statement to be delivered by the observer of
the European Union and the statement delivered by the
representative of Canada on behalf of 55 countries.

The pertinent briefings of the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative show that addressing
that topic is as important today as ever. We applaud
their leadership and want to reiterate our full support
for Ms. Patten and her mandate. In addition, we wish
to express our appreciation for Dr. Denis Mukwege,
Ms. Nadia Murad, Ms. Inas Miloud and Ms. Amal
Clooney for sharing their experience and expertise on
that topic.

Today, I will focus on accountability, addressing,
first, the role of the International Criminal Court
(ICC); secondly, sanctions; and thirdly, the survivor-
centred approach, including sexual and reproductive
health and rights.

First, enhanced accountability would send a strong
and preventative signal to perpetrators and protect
the safety and lives of millions of women, girls, men
and boys in conflict areas. A coherent accountability
approach to conflict-related sexual violence is important
and the primary responsibility for accountability rests
with the State. When States are unable or unwilling to
prosecute, the ICC can play an important role in holding
perpetrators accountable. We remind the Council of its
power to refer situations, such as the situations in Syria
and Myanmar, to the ICC and we call upon States to
become a party to the Rome Statute of the ICC.

Secondly, sanctions can contribute to the fight
against impunity and be a form of deterrence and
prevention. Last October, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands initiated an Arria formula meeting, at which
the Council discussed ways in which sanctions could
contribute to moving from a culture of impunity to a
culture of deterrence. Allow me to highlight three main
takeaways. They are in line with the recommendations
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/280),
which we strongly support.

To start with, the Council should systematically
and explicitly incorporate and apply sexual violence
as a stand-alone designation criterion in sanctions
regimes. We call upon all Council members to extend
that practice to all remaining relevant sanctions regimes
and to ensure adequate follow-up. Furthermore,
the cooperation and interaction among sanctions
committees, panels and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General should be further strengthened.

It is important for the Council to include sexual
violence in its deliberations on country-specific
situations. In December, we facilitated the briefing by
Special Representative Patten to the Council on sexual
violence in Bentiu, South Sudan (see S/PV.8431). Such
briefings, as well as briefings to Sanctions Committees,
should become the rule rather than the exception. Lastly,
the sanctions architecture should be better linked to the
findings in the Secretary-General's report, which has
the same list ofparties as last year's. Where no specific
sanctions regimes exist yet, the Council should explore
innovative ways to use sanctions following the listings
in the annex.

My third point is about the survivor-centred
approach. Taking a survivor-centred approach means
listening to survivors and respecting their rights, wishes
and needs while taking into account their privacy and
confidentiality. Sexual violence is aimed at wrecking
communities, and it is essential to address survivors'
needs if communities are to be rebuilt. To enable
survivors to choose freely, we should support them with
comprehensive information and services, including
those related to sexual and reproductive health and
rights, safe abortion and mental health and psychosocial
support, as guaranteed by international humanitarian
and human rights law. In that regard, we fully support
the statement by the representative of France following
the vote on resolution 2467 (2019). We should provide
survivors with both protection and legal action. I am
thinking not only about the survivors of sexual Violence
in South Sudan whom I mentioned earlier, but also
about Yezidi women and girls, and about the Rohingya
women and girls I met during the Security Council
visit to Bangladesh and Myanmar almost a year ago
today. The Security Council has raised expectations
and should follow through on them, and justice is
at the top of the list. In that regard, we reiterate our
full support to the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and to the
Myanmar investigative mechanism that will soon start
its important work.

In conclusion, I should like to quote Ms. Nadia
Murad on her acceptance of the Nobel Peace Prize:
"Thank you very much for this honour, but the
fact remains that the only prize in the world that can
restore our dignity is justice and the prosecution
of criminals."

