Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French): First,
let me say a few words on behalf of the Group of Friends
of Women, Peace and Security, an informal network of
more than 40 interested States Members of the United
Nations that is chaired by Canada.

(spoke in English)

The 45 members of the Group of Friends, which
represent all five regional groups at the United Nations,
reaffirm their support, in the strongest terms, for the
work of the Security Council aimed at preventing and
responding to conflict-related sexual violence. The
Group of Friends welcomes the recent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2013/149) on this issue and calls
on the Security Council and the United Nations system
to act systematically and comprehensively to address
gaps and challenges to, and accelerate progress in, its
work on women, peace and security, and to monitor
commitments by parties to conflict to prevent and
address conflict-related sexual violence. We further
urge the Security Council to ensure that its mandated
missions consistently evaluate the level of protection
and promotion of women's human rights.
The Group of Friends welcomes the work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Hawa
Bangura, and strongly supports her efforts aimed at
preventing and addressing conflict-related sexual
violence, while underlining women's empowerment
and equal participation as prerequisites for tackling
the underlying causes of sexual violence in conflict.
The Group of Friends also welcomes the adoption by
the Commission on the Status of Women during its
fifty-seventh session, from 4 to 15 March, of its agreed
conclusions entitled "The elimination of violence
against women and girls".

As mandated by the Security Council in resolution
1888 (2009), the Group of Friends urges the further
and timely deployment of women protection advisers
to Security Council-mandated missions. Missions
must plan and budget for women's protection advisers
in all the relevant situations of concern. The Group of
Friends also recognizes that women's human rights
defenders face particular risks in conflict situations
in the course of their work, as that work can include
frontline protection, service provision, monitoring,
fact-finding and documenting cases of sexual violence
and empowering survivors of sexual violence in conflict
to pursue judicial and other remedies. The Group of
Friends strongly encourages Member States to take
steps to ensure that women's human rights defenders
are afforded greater protection to carry out their work
without risk.

On behalf of the Government of Canada, I wish to
thank the Rwandan presidency for convening this open
debate on conflict-related sexual violence.

(spoke in French)

Canada welcomes the Secretary-General's recent
report and thanks the Secretary- General and his Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict for their
briefings. Canada supports the Special Representative's
activities to ensure the prevention of and response
to conflict-related sexual violence and to ensure the
health, security and dignity of survivors and their
access to justice. Conflict-related sexual violence is of
great concern to Canada. Canada places high priority
on advancing women's full participation at all levels of
society - a condition that is essential for maintaining
the health, justice and prosperity of communities.
Because of its devastating and enduring effects on the
women and girls who are subjected to such crimes, as
well as on their families and communities, rape and
other forms of sexual violence in conflict remain a huge
barrier to peace, security and development.
(spoke in English)

Following the harrowing accounts of sexual
violence in Mali reported by the Secretary-General,
Canada urges the Council to ensure that the Mali
mission mandate specifically addresses sexual
violence. The Council should ensure that preventing and
addressing conflict-related sexual violence is included
in all mission mandates. Perpetrators of sexual violence
must be held to account. We support the prosecution of
those who have perpetrated or who have a command
responsibility for such crimes. We call on the Council
to adopt a systematic approach to addressing reports
of conflict-related sexual violence and to ensure that
Sanctions Committees include criteria pertaining to
acts of rape and other forms of sexual violence.

We welcome the recent agreement between
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the United Nations to strengthen efforts
to tackle conflict-related sexual violence. We urge
its implementation and look forward to seeing
improvements on the ground very soon.

(spoke in French)

Canada's contribution to the prevention of sexual
violence in conflict situations includes $18.5 million
over the next five years to support victims, as well
as to contribute to investigations and prosecutions
of perpetrators in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, where rape has been used as
a weapon of war. Canada has also supported special
training investigators of sexual violence, who can be
rapidly deployed to post-conflict areas around the world.
On 11 April, Canada's Minister for Foreign Affairs,
John Baird, announced an additional contribution of
$5 million towards tackling sexual violence against
women and girls.

We welcome the Government of Afghanistan's
efforts to implement a law on the elimination of
violence against women. However, more must be done
to increase understanding and awareness of the law
and its application and to end practices that imprison
victims of sexual violence while allowing perpetrators
to go free.

(spoke in English)

In conclusion, allow me to reiterate that Canada
is committed to working with the international
community on preventing and responding to conflict-
related sexual violence in all of its forms, including
rape as a weapon of war and early and forced marriage,
in order to advance human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all, including women and girls. We call on
the Security Council to strengthen its response in that
regard as well.

