Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): First of all, I would
like to thank the Japanese presidency for organizing
this very important debate on a core subject of our
work. I would like to welcome Ms. Margot Wallstrom,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, to her first briefing to the
Security Council and to thank her for her very
important presentation, which clearly shows her strong
personal commitment. We are encouraged by how
quickly she and her Office have become operational
and by the information that she has given us on her
recent visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

I would also like to thank Assistant Secretary-
General Rachel Mayanja for her presentation here
today, for her strong commitment to the issues we are
discussing today and for the important report
(S/2010/173) she has introduced to the Council today
on the set of indicators for tracking the implementation
of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000). I would
like to thank Ms. Mayanja for her kind words regarding
the events that we were pleased to co-host with her and
the United Nations Development Fund for Women
during the consultation process. She can rest assured
that we will continue to fully support her efforts. By
the way, we were also encouraged by the broad support
this work received both from Member States and
within the United Nations system, and we hope to see
further progress in October, when the Security Council
will hopefully endorse a comprehensive set of
indicators following a broad consultation process in the
weeks and months ahead.

We were pleased to see that this consultation
process has thus far been able to build on existing
indicators and that it has included all relevant
stakeholders. Let me underline our understanding that
these indicators are a comprehensive set reflecting all
relevant aspects under the body of resolutions
following resolution 1325 (2000).

We expect that the Secretary-General's report on
the indicators will reflect the results and input from
upcoming inclusive consultations. We are looking
forward to the report being submitted to the Security
Council for its consideration in time for the meeting to
mark the tenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) in
October 2010.

We thank Japan for its very fruitful efforts in
finding agreement on the draft presidential statement
before the Council today. Austria believes that this
presidential statement provides a good starting point
for the Council's further work, and we fully support the
draft statement.

The meetings in recent days have also provided
us with an excellent opportunity to start a process of
thinking about what United Nations Member States,
and the members of the Security Council in particular,
want to achieve as an outcome of a review of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000). There seems to be
wide agreement among United Nations Member States
that a merely ceremonial gathering of the Council
would be a lost opportunity for women around the
globe, as well as for the Council, and that the Security
Council should rather seize the opportunity to renew its
commitment to the issue of women and peace and
security and strive for concrete results, in particular
with a view to strengthening accountability for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

Part of a success in October will clearly be due to
the fact that we will bring together representatives of
the United Nations system, the Advisory Panel and
Member States to discuss the way forward and the
ongoing planning process. We know that a lot of
activities are already under way. We think it will be
crucial to carry out the preparations for the tenth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) with a maximum
of transparency and cooperation, including, of course,
the important role that civil society can play in this
matter.
10

We are grateful to Uganda in particular for having
decided to make this issue a priority of its presidency
of the Council during the anniversary month of
October. We will be ready to support our Ugandan
friends in the efforts to make this an important and
meaningful exercise. Let me also thank the Secretary-
General, the Deputy Secretary-General and
Ms. Mayanja for their commitment towards making the
tenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) a
beneficial opportunity for women around the globe.

Austria fully supported the establishment of the
position of a Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict. Resolution
1888 (2009) has placed a number of tools at the
disposal of the Special Representative, such as teams
of experts. We would be keen to hear more about the
Special Representative's plans in future discussions on
implementing this resolution.

I would like to concentrate on a number of
practical proposals for how the Security Council could
further improve its action on this important matter.

With the expansion of the monitoring and
reporting mechanism in resolution 1882 (2009) to
situations where parties to armed conflict engage in
rape and other sexual violence against children,
coordination between the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
and the new Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict is crucial.

More consistent and comprehensive reporting on
sexual violence in the Secretary-General's country-
specific reports would enable the Council to address
the protection of civilians, in particular women and
children, from sexual violence in a more systematic
manner. To that end, the Council should include
specific reporting requirements in resolutions
establishing or renewing mandates.

In many conflict situations, perpetrators who
systematically commit serious violations against
women and girls still go largely unpunished.
Allegations of sexual violence need to be thoroughly
investigated and perpetrators need to be brought to
account, including not only through prosecution but
also through the screening of armed and security
forces. Victims of sexual violence need to receive
assistance and adequate forms of reparation.
10-33085

This situation demands further action by the
Security Council to strengthen the rule of law and to
end impunity. Where necessary, the Council should
consider appropriate measures to encourage and ensure
the accountability of those responsible for widespread
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law, including through the imposition of targeted
measures as reaffirmed in resolution 1894 (2009), the
establishment of commissions of inquiry and referrals
to the International Criminal Court. Sanctions regimes
need to include designation criteria pertaining to acts
of rape and other forms of sexual Violence. Sanctions
committees need to receive relevant information to that
end, including through exchanges with other subsidiary
bodies of the Security Council.

We would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for briefing us
on the situation in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The Council has already shown
strong commitment to the very problematic situation
there when it comes to violence against women. We
hope that this message will be repeated when the
Council undertakes its next visit to the region in the
coming weeks. As I have said, the upcoming visit of
the Security Council will be an important opportunity.
We appreciate the best practices developed by the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) to date,
such as joint protection teams, infrastructure support
and providing patrols for women on their way to
market.

We are in full agreement with the assessment of
the Special Representative that sustainable and
comprehensive security sector reform is a prerequisite
to fulfilling MONUC's priority task of protecting
civilians, in particular women and children. Reform of
the judiciary, the military and the police in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is still in the early
stages. But that is also an area where the European
Union is trying to be helpful and providing support.

My delegation wishes the Special Representative
success and all the best in her future work. We hope to
be able to welcome her to the Council on a regular
basis.

