Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I join in the
expressions of gratitude for the statements that we
have heard today. I particularly want to thank you, Sir,
for holding this debate, and the Secretary-General,
the Executive Director of UN Women, Ms. Mlambo-
Ngcuka, High Commissioner Pillay and Ms. Balipou for
their valuable briefings. I think it is right that we have
applauded them. I would also like to thank everybody
who has come to participate in and to bear witness to
the debate today. For those who cannot see, the debate
will also be recorded on camera. The Chamber is full
and their presence adds weight to what we have decided
and to what we will discuss in the Chamber throughout
the day.

I want to welcome the adoption today of resolution
2122 (2013) on women, peace and security. The
resolution reinstates and reiterates the central role
of women in resolving conflict and helping to build
a sustainable peace. I want in particular to highlight
three aspects of the resolution.

First, it places women, peace and security front and
centre in the Council's work. The Secretary-General
has outlined what that means for the Council and his
own personal commitment to this, but it also means in
a very practical sense that the Council will now receive
more regular briefings and more updates from United
Nations bodies and officials on this subject. That means
that it is central to our work.

Secondly, the resolution highlights the need for
women's participation in areas affected by conflict.
We have asked that special representatives and special
envoys in all United Nations missions regularly consult
women's organizations early on in their deployment.
Their voices must be heard and needs taken into account
in all conflict-resolution and peacebuilding processes.

Thirdly, the resolution makes clear the Council's
commitment to a meaningful review of the
implementation ofthis agenda in 2015, as the Secretary-
General emphasized in his remarks earlier. The
review must be based on clear data. We have therefore
requested the Secretary-General to commission a
global study on the remaining gaps and challenges. I
welcome the constructive work of all Council members
on the resolution and hope that we will continue to
work in a productive manner as we move towards the
2015 review.

I now turn to the theme of the debate, "Women,
rule of law and transitional justice in conflict-affected
situations". Throughout the world, security and justice
systems fail women time and time again. In conflict
and post-conflict settings where institutions break
down and violence is rampant, existing injustices
are often exacerbated. However, transitions out of
conflict provide opportunities to strengthen women's
leadership, empowerment and rights, while restoring
the rule of law and governance systems. Rebuilding
justice and the rule of law if fundamental to protecting
women's equal rights and creating a more stable, secure
and just society.

As the Secretary-General has highlighted, women's
representation in the justice sector is crucial and helps
increase the reporting of crimes. Barriers must be
removed so that women can access justice in formal and
traditional settings. For example, we have seen success
through the use of mobile corts in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and paralegal support groups
in Nepal. In addition, the most basic needs must be
provided for, from access to safe public transportation
to the effective delivery of services, such as water and
electricity, as Ms. Balipou so eloquently highlighted in
her statement earlier.

The United Kingdom has established a team of
experts on the rule of law. That team, which includes
lawyers, gender advisers and experts in the protection
of witnesses, provides training and mentoring to
national authorities to help them develop appropriate
laws and build their capabilities. The teams also worked
on the front line with grass-roots organizations, local
peacebuilders and human rights defenders. They have
already been deployed to the Syrian borders, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Libya, Mali and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

The United Kingdom welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2013/525) and the important
recommendations that it makes. We welcome the
ongoing work of UN Women, and we recognize that the
continuing challenges in implementing the agenda lie
beyond the topic of today's debate.

In conflict settings worldwide, women continue to
be seen merely as victims of violence rather than as
the leaders of change, as those to be protected rather
than respected and included as equal participants in all
decision-making processes. As Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka
said, women are central to leadership.

Since the end of the Cold War, women have
represented only 4 per cent of signatories to peace
agreements, less than 3 per cent of mediators of peace
talks and less than 10 per cent of anyone sitting at
the table to negotiate on behalf of a party to conflict.
Excluding 50 per cent of society will never lead to
stable and lasting peace. Peace can be achieved only
with women's active participation and leadership.

The United Kingdom welcomes the Council's
consultation with women's organizations during its trip
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo earlier this
month. We also commend the recent work of Ms. Mary
Robinson. I agree with the Secretary-General that
hers was an excellent appointment on engaging with
women's civil society in the Great Lakes region. I hope
others will follow by example.

We have two years before the Council's high-
level review, in 2015, to demonstrate our collective
commitment to the agenda. Ahead of that, let us all,
Member States, the Council and United Nations entities,
invigorate our efforts and give the issue the attention it
deserves and take the action that we have committed to
at the Council today.

