Mr. Antonio: On behalf of the Commission of
the African Union, allow me, Madam President, to
start by commending you for convening this timely
and very important debate, and also to thank you for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council and
share our views on a matter of great importance to
the African Union. Your presence here to preside over
today's discussion highlights the critical importance
of this debate and bears witness to your personal
commitment and that of the Republic of Angola to the
fundamental purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations. It also serves to highlight Angola's
determination to make a substantial contribution to the
work of the Security Council. I also thank the previous
speakers for their insightful presentations.

Today's debate provides an excellent opportunity
that we must seize in order to demonstrate our
commitment to take forward the ambitious
recommendations emerging from the recent United
Nations policy reviews on peace and security issues.
The role of women in preventing and resolving conflicts
must be made a reality, rather than allowed to remain
a mere statement that dates back several decades. Our
discourse on this issue must include no longer looking
at women merely as victims, but rather recognize and
encourage their demonstrated capacities to be part of
peace and development efforts.

The experiences of many countries have clearly
shown that lasting peace cannot be achieved, and
reconstruction will never succeed, with half the
population excluded and marginalized. To cite an
example, members may recall the decisive role played
by the women of Liberia in the signing of the 2003
Accra Comprehensive Peace Agreement through the
efforts of the Women of Liberia Mass Action for Peace.
Africa cannot afford to ignore the role of women if we
are to realize the vision of an integrated, prosperous
and peaceful continent. The Republic of Angola, which
you represent today, Madam, is another example.
Angolan women not only played a critical role in the
liberation of the country from colonialism, but they
also stood for peace and demonstrated pan-Africanism
in the early years of the country's independence.
In fact, we all remember that the country that you
represent today, Madam, hosted the headquarters of the
Pan-African Women's Organization in the early years
of independence.

The issue of women and peace and security
remains a priority, both on the agenda of the African
Union Assembly of Heads of State and Government as
well as on the agenda of the African Union Peace and
Security Council. Indeed, the African Union declared
2010-2020 to be the African Women's Decade, with
the overarching theme of gender equality and women's
empowerment. The year 2015 was the Year of Women's
Empowerment and Development towards Africa's
Agenda 2063, while 2016 is the Year of Human Rights,
with particular focus on the rights of women. By
choosing to put women at the centre of the continent's
deliberations, the African Union sought to reinforce the
continent's resolve to bring down all types of barriers
that impede the emancipation of women and girls in
Africa and to strengthen their agency and rights,
especially in priority areas such as education, health,
participation in decision-making at all levels, economic
empowerment and peace and security.

In January 2014, the African Union became the
first continental organization to appoint a Special
Envoy on Women, Peace and Security, with the
specific mandate to ensure that the voices of women
and children, particularly those affected by conflict,
are heard and to advocate at the highest levels for the
rightful participation and contribution of women in
conflict resolution and peacebuilding.

To enhance the protection of women's rights,
the AU seeks to promote international and regional
commitments on peace and security, as well as to
strengthen women's participation in peace and security
efforts through the AU Peace and Security Department,
the Peace and Security Council and the Panel of
the Wise.

Starting with the leadership of its own paramount
continental institution, Africa adopted the principle of
parity and acted on it. Indeed, the AU Commission has
achieved parity in its leadership and is now moving
towards 50/50 workforce parity, in line with the AU
gender policy adopted in 2009.

Furthermore, to enhance the role of women in peace
and security, the African Union Commission launched
a five-year gender, peace and security programme. The
programme is designed to serve as a framework for the
development of effective strategies and mechanisms for
the increased participation of women in the promotion
of peace and security. It also aims to enhance the
protection of women in conflict and post-conflict
situations in Africa.

The African Union has also conducted training
with Member States on women peace mediators,
women election observers and gender advisers, and it
has succeeded in deploying female peacekeepers and
female police in peace-support operations such as the
African Union Mission in Somalia.

Despite the progress made so far, a great
deal remains to be done to ensure women's equal
participation in conflict prevention, management
and conflict resolution as well as in post-conflict
peacebuilding. Policies are plentiful; where we fall short
is in their implementation. It is from this perspective
that the African Union is developing a continental
results framework to strengthen the monitoring of the
implementation by Member States of their commitments
on the women and peace and security agenda.

In our view, more efforts are needed from both
the United Nations and the African Union in the
following areas.

First, the proportion of the women in the police
component of peace operations must be increased.

Secondly, we must ensure that the terms ofreference
of mediation and peacebuilding processes have a clear
component of women's participation as the basis of their
delivery and accountability towards the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda.

Thirdly, training programmes on women and peace
and security must be made mandatory. The AU has
already begun to integrate such training into its African
Standby Force programme.

And, fourthly, we must invest more in conflict
prevention and in women's prevention initiatives.

