The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
France.

I warmly thank everyone for their concrete and very
useful interventions, which reflect a consensus - a
unanimous will - to halt the unacceptable and revolting
phenomenon of sexual violence and trafficking in
women and children in conflict situations. I would like
to recognize in particular the efforts of the Secretary-
General and the personal engagement of his Special
Representative, Ms. Zainab Bangura. She has not
only met victims of conflict in the field, but has also
had the strength to propose ways of combating sexual
violence in situations of crisis or conflict. The insight
provided in that context by the Special Rapporteur
on trafficking in persons, Ms. Giammarinaro, on the
particular plight of women and girls was particularly
striking. Finally, the testimony of Ms. Davis here in
the Council called for intensified efforts to address the
causes and consequences of the various forms of gender-
based violence.
The consequences of sex trafficking in women and
children in conflict have been clearly identified and
recalled today. On the one hand, they destroy lives, entire
families and community social ties and serve to cast
out the victims and children born of rape. On the other
hand, sex trafficking directly fuels terrorism, not just
by increasing the financial resources of such groups but
also by attracting new recruits through forced marriage
promises or "sexual compensation" - abominable acts
carried out by the likes of Da'esh.

Faced with those well-known tragic consequences,
the causes of trafficking for sexual purposes should
be better taken into account. They are based on
gender inequality, which is the first stage towards
commodifying the bodies ofwomen and girls. To remedy
that situation, among other things, the empowerment of
women must be strengthened in the areas of education
and health, where they must have access to appropriate
services. That includes in particular access to abortion
in cases of rape in conflict situations, including in
refugee camps. It is an essential right for every woman
to make her own decision, which France has made a
priority. It is each Member State's responsibility to
take all necessary measures to give women autonomy,
political and economic power, and control of their
bodies. That decision-making power and freedom of
choice cannot be nuanced or relativized by culture or
customs in any country or society.

The Security Council also has a collective
responsibility in the fight against sex trafficking.
The Council's inadequate treatment of gender issues
owing to disagreements among its members hinders
the improvement of the status of women in conflict.
Similarly, sexual violence in conflict situations and the
women and peace and security agenda are too often
considered separate from the threats to international
peace and security considered by the Council daily.

In reality, sexual violence is among the strategies
used by terrorist groups, such as Da'esh or Boko
Haram, and poses a short- and long-term threat to
international peace and security. We see that in Syria,
Iraq, Afghanistan, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Somalia and elsewhere. Children born of sexual
violence today may become the criminals or terrorists
of tomorrow. That is why I would like to present four
proposals for action by the Security Council and the
Secretariat on this topic.

First, we must strengthen the protection of civilians
mandates for peacekeeping operations through
the establishment of specialized monitoring units,
comprised of human rights experts and police and
judiciary cooperation in order to better identify risks
through patrols, detect the markets for women and
dismantle trafficking networks. The open debate to be
presided over by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
France, Jean-Marc Ayrault, on 10 June, will provide an
opportunity to talk more about that possibility.

Secondly, we should better integrate the issue of
human trafficking into Council discussions. Presidential
statement S/PRST/2015/25 of December last year was
an important step in that regard, as is the report of the
Secretary-General that the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime is currently working on, which will
be presented to the Council in December 2016. Further
work to identify individuals and entities who, through
their involvement in trafficking for sexual violence,
finance terrorist groups is also necessary, including
through the activities of the Sanctions Committees.

Thirdly, we need to more systematically integrate
crimes with a sexual dimension into the mediation and
negotiation efforts of peace or ceasefire agreements.
They must be considered a breach of ceasefires, just
like other atrocities.

Finally, we must strengthen the role and
participation of women in strategies to combat
trafficking and terrorism, particularly in the context
of the tenth anniversary of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Particular attention should
be paid to combating the real and virtual markets in
which women and children are traded and sold with
impunity. Combating impunity in this field is a priority
in and of itself, and our mobilization in that regard
is essential.

Let me conclude my remarks by welcoming the
Secretary-General's commitment to zero tolerance of
all forms of sexual violence, including sexual abuse
and exploitation. We must all serve as an example, in
the context of United Nations-mandated missions and
elsewhere. It is crucial that the United Nations, just like
Member States, adopt concrete measures to prevent and
fight against all forms of sexual violence. France has
already implemented a broad spectrum of measures in
that regard and has reported on them to the Security
Council and the General Assembly. Our determination
on that issue is unwavering.

Today's debate is crucial for identifying the
challenges and solutions regarding sex trafficking. The
Security Council now has the collective responsibility
to implement the most effective solutions and to remain
mobilized on those issues. The first commemoration
of the International Day for the Elimination of Sexual
Violence in Conflict is to be held this month on
19 June. It will provide an opportunity to maintain the
mobilization of the international community on this
priority issue for France and for the United Nations.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I wish to remind all speakers to limit their statements
to no more than four minutes in order to enable the
Council to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations
with lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate
their texts in writing and to deliver a condensed version
when speaking in the Chamber. I would like to appeal
to speakers to deliver their statements at a normal speed
so that interpretation can be provided accurately.

I now give the floor to the representative of Sweden.

