Mr. Hoeeg (Denmark): I should like first of all to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency. I should also like to associate my
delegation with the statement made by the Permanent
Representative of Sweden on behalf of the European
Union.

I should like specifically to thank the presidency
for having convened this meeting and thereby once
again directing the attention of the Security Council to
the indispensable and vital role of women in all efforts
to build and maintain peace and security.

The increased awareness of gender across the
United Nations system is indeed encouraging. In this
respect, Denmark welcomes the recent decision of the
General Assembly to establish a United Nations gender
entity. We hope that the entity will bring about the
much needed improvements to the work of the United
Nations, including in the area of international peace
and security. We look forward to receiving a proposal
on the details of the entity, as well as the early
appointment of the new under-secretary-general. We
must not lose momentum on this topic.

The report of the Secretary-General on women
and peace and security (S/2009/465) presents an
overview of achievements, gaps and challenges, as
well as recommendations for further actions to
accelerate the implementation of Resolution 1325
(2000). The report introduces its conclusions thus:

"The significance of resolution 1325 (2000)
lies in the way it links the impact of war and
conflict on women on the one hand, and promotes
their participation in various peace and security
processes such as in peace negotiations,
constitutional and electoral reforms and
reconstruction and reintegration on the other"
(S/2009/465, para. 72. 
That link between the impact of war on women and the
possibility of using the potential of women in peace
negotiations and reconstruction is precisely what we
must focus on in our implementation of the resolution.

Resolution 1325 (2000) is the very backbone of
Security Council resolutions on women and peace and
security, highlighting the necessity of addressing the
issue of women as peacebuilders as well as victims of
war. Women's empowerment and respect for women's
rights are among the prerequisites for sustainable peace
and stable, democratic development.

Let me highlight three key areas for future work
in this field. First, we must work to achieve greater
active participation of women in peacebuilding and
reconstruction. Secondly, we must enhance recognition
of the special needs and rights of women and girls
before, during and after armed conflict. Thirdly, we
must provide for the protection of girls and women
against violence, including gender-based violence such
as rape and sexual abuse, and we must end impunity
for gender-related crimes. Allow me in this respect to
take this opportunity to welcome the Council's
adoption last week of resolution 1888 (2009), which
Denmark co-sponsored.

These three objectives are also those that
Denmark is prioritizing in its new national action plan
for implementing resolution 1325 (2000). In order to
be able to monitor progress, we have developed
indicators for each objective. Last year, Denmark
revised its national action plan. The new plan for 2008-
2013 is based on experience from our first plan.
Among the lessons learned is that we need to ensure
the full cooperation of all stakeholders in the
peacekeeping and security processes, in all phases and
at all levels. In the new Danish plan, a stronger
emphasis is placed on using the untapped potential of
women and on involving them actively and on an equal
basis in peacebuilding processes and decision-making
at all levels and with a focus on visibility at the country
level.

The Danish national action plan was formulated
in a participatory manner involving all relevant
national stakeholders. An annual dialogue with civil
society is planned and an inter-ministerial working
group is responsible for reporting on the plan's
implementation. I have elaborated in some detail on the
Danish national action plan and its objectives, since
resolution 1325 (2000) in itself will not do the trick. It
must be implemented. Action plans must be formulated
and actions undertaken and monitored. We fully share
the Secretary-General's concern over the resolution's
slow implementation, as implementation is obviously
the key to any resolution's being worth the effort put
into finding the right words.

Resolution 1325 (2009) is a strong resolution,
and we all have an obligation to implement it
effectively. We see the adoption of today's resolution
1889 (2009) as a step towards strengthening our joint
efforts in that respect. Some progress has been made
and should be recognized. Incorporation of gender
perspectives into peace processes is emerging, but
slowly. United Nations agencies and an increasing
number of Governments have developed action plans.
International cooperation is also increasing. That is
positive, but not enough.

Denmark fully agrees with the recommendations
of the Secretary-General on ensuring accountability.
We also emphasize the stated need for concerted efforts
to collect data. At the end of the day, it is results that
count. It is the responsibility of the United Nations
system, as well as of national Governments, to increase
the visibility of the results of initiatives undertaken to
ensure that the resolution has a genuine impact on the
role and status of girls and women in conflict.

We hope that we will soon come much closer to
full and equal participation of women in peace
processes, at all levels of negotiation and decision-
making, and that we can not only effectively protect
the rights of women but also dramatically reduce and
eventually eliminate sexual violence. We have cases
that show that progress is possible. Rwanda is an
excellent example of how a country can emerge
successfully from conflict when women enjoy equal
rights and decision-making power. Resolution 1325
(2000), if and when it is effectively implemented in
other conflict situations, can provide similar, positive
results.

