Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): The progress
achieved in addressing the issue of sexual violence
in conflict since the International Criminal Tribunals
for the Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda placed sexual
aggression on the agenda of post-conflict justice is
undeniable. The relevant Security Council resolutions
have created an extensive toolkit for tackling conflict-
related sexual violence.

As horrendous assault on individual bodies and
human dignity, sexual violence in conflict goes far
beyond common banditry and has been repeatedly
used in the imposition of wider political agendas, the
destruction of opponents, ethnic cleansing, forced
displacement and clearing of access to resources and
territory.

My delegation therefore congratulates the Rwandan
presidency of the Security Council for holding this
important debate. We welcome the recommendations
by the Secretary-General contained in his most recent
report (S/2013/149). We also commend the work and
personal dedication of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura.

Speaking elsewhere earlier this year, Ms. Bangura
insisted that sexual violence as a tactic of war was as
effective as any bomb and as destructive as any mine,
and that it needed to be addressed with the same
determination as any other deadly weapon used in
war. Indeed, we cannot stern conflict-related sexual
aggression unless we are determined to prevent,
protect and prosecute. For as long as the perpetrators
know they can get away with it, that barbaric tactic
of warfare will continue, with inevitable peace and
security implications.

While we associate ourselves with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union, I shall
limit myself to the following points at this stage.

When it comes to conflict-related sexual crimes,
my delegation urges the Security Council to use the
full range of means at its disposal to tackle impunity,
including systematic referrals to the International
Criminal Court, mandating commissions of inquiry
and explicitly and vocally condemning such crimes.

Lithuania supports the full implementation of
the provisions of resolution 1960 (2010) on rape and
other forms of sexual violence as designation criteria
when adopting or renewing targeted sanctions in
situations of armed conflict. We expect such criteria
to be consistently applied in sanctioning entities and
individuals identified in the Secretary-General's
reports and those named by the Special Representative.

My delegation would welcome enhanced interaction
between the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and the relevant
Security Council Sanctions Committees and expert
groups, as well as between the Special Representative
and the Council as a whole. Furthermore, we call for
the inclusion of provisions regarding conflict-related
sexual violence in all the mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping and special political missions.

Tackling impunity is hard to imagine without a
robust monitoring and reporting system. That may
be easier said than done, however, especially where
technical capacities are inadequate or where a critical
lack of confidence in transitional justice create serious
impediments. If the perpetrators of sexual violence are
free to return and establish themselves among those they
have abused, victims will continue to live in fear and
countless abuses will remain unreported. Developing
the requisite capabilities and restoring victims' trust
in justice are essential for the purposes of prevention
and deterrence. Providing better support for victims,
including through women's protection advisers,
reparation mechanisms and women's systematic
inclusion in all aspects of conflict resolution, post-
conflict reconciliation and transitional justice, is key
to restoring victims' trust and ensuring that crimes will
not go unpunished.

The Council and individual Member States have an
important role to play in those matters. My delegation
welcomes the recent declaration by the Group of Eight,
including the provisions on improved investigation
and documentation of sexual violence in conflict. The
Council in particular should see to it that security
sector reforms and disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration processes are fully responsive to
the sensitivities arising from conflict-related sexual
violence and provide rigorous vetting and training
of national security institutions. We welcome the
Secretary-General's recommendation that blanket
amnesties should not be applied where conflict-related
sexual Violence is in question.

With respect to a zero-tolerance policy, my
delegation firmly supports the inclusion ofprovisions on
a zero-tolerance policy vis-a-vis sexual misconduct by
United Nations personnel in all the mandates of United
Nations peacekeeping operations and peacebuilding
missions. For the time being, that is not the case, and
we hope that the gap will be redressed as mandates are
renewed.

On a broader scale, however, we as the international
community should be using all means and opportunities
available for stemming sexual violence as a tool of war.
The combined power of women's full participation;
consistent support and protection to victims, human
rights defenders, activists and journalists who expose
the crimes; education and global awareness-raising
campaigns; and the personal engagement of world
leaders, spiritual authorities and community leaders
are essential in fostering a global zero-tolerance
environment for those heinous crimes. We expect no
less from the Council, as the most authoritative body
on peace and security matters, but to take the lead
in raising the stakes for all those who think they can
engage, unchallenged, in rape or sexual abuse to a
prohibitive degree.

