The President: I thank Ms. Anywar for her
briefing.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. I
shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.

A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
Argentina, Australia, Azerbaijan, China, France,
Guatemala, Luxembourg, Morocco, Pakistan,
Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Togo, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and United States of America

The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 2106 (2013).

I shall now make a statement in my national
capacity as Foreign Secretary of the United Kingdom.

I should like to thank the Secretary-General and
some of my fellow Ministers for attending this debate;
the fact that more than 50 countries wish to take part
in this open debate once the Security Council members
have spoken shows the growing global interest and
determination to act on this issue.

I pay tribute to Zainab Bangura for the energy,
determination and vision that she has brought to her
role; to Angelina Jolie for her inspirational work on
behalf of the world's refugees and for campaigning
with me to end rape and sexual violence in conflict;
and to Jane Adong Anywar for her courageous work
and powerful testimony.

In conflicts in nearly every corner of the globe,
rape is used systematically and ruthlessly in the almost
certain knowledge that there will be no consequences
for the perpetrators. If the international community
does not address this culture of impunity, millions more
women, children and men could well be subjected to
the same appalling treatment, now and in the conflicts
of the future. The lead we set and the action we take
therefore has the potential to save lives and change the
course of events around the world; nothing less than
that should be our ambition.

As the international community, we curbed the
development of nuclear weapons, heading off a once
threatened and unstoppable wave of insecurity. We
have binding Conventions against the use of torture
and on the treatment of prisoners. We have outlawed the
use of chemical weapons and imposed a global ban on
cluster munitions. We have made progress in choking
off the trade in conflict diamonds, which undermines
many fragile countries. Here in the Security Council
we adopted historic resolution 1325 (2000) on women,
peace and security, and this year we agreed a historic
Arms Trade Treaty, to stem the illegal arms trade that
exacerbates conflict and causes such human misery.

No country could tackle those vast problems alone,
and we have shown that we can confront them together.

Today we face another burning need to unite to
improve the condition of humanity; together it is time
to say that rape and sexual violence used as a weapon of
war is unacceptable, that we know it can be prevented
and that we will act now to eradicate it, shouldering
our responsibilities as national Governments, and
collectively as the Security Council.

Sexual Violence is used to destroy lives, tear apart
communities and achieve military objectives, in just
the same way that tanks and bullets are.

Like others here I have witnessed the terrible life
sentence of trauma and illness inflicted on victims,
and the devastating impact on their families and
communities.

I am appalled that the vast majority of survivors
never receive justice, support or recognition despite
years and even decades of waiting, and that it is the
victims, not the perpetrators, who still bear the shame
and stigma.

I have also seen the devastating impact that sexual
violence has on prospects for peace and reconciliation,
undermining our efforts as the Security Council to
advance peace negotiations and agreements.

We have seen the world over that unresolved
grievances fuel further cycles of violence and conflict.
Where there is no justice or dignity, the seeds of future
violence are sown. A new consciousness of this issue
and strong action to protect women and children must
run throughout all the Security Council's peacebuilding
efforts.

I pay tribute to the organizations and individuals
who have worked for years so that the world knows
and understands the scale of rape and sexual violence
in conflict, and have helped persuade Governments to
take it seriously, as many of us are now doing. I applaud
the local organizations that are on the front line of
efforts to support survivors and achieve accountability,
and which need our active support and assistance.
Their efforts, allied with new attention from
Governments and efforts by the United Nations,
means that we are at last poised to be able to make
unprecedented and historic progress on confronting
wartime rape and sexual violence.

We have made important progress. In London in
April, the States members of the Group of Eight (G-8)
pledged to address sexual violence in conflict as a
threat to global peace and security. I am grateful for
the commitments they joined the United Kingdom
in making and for the work that is flowing from that
agreement.

For example, the United Kingdom is now taking
the lead in developing a new international protocol on
the investigation and documentation of rape and sexual
violence in conflict, working with experts from all over
the world. Its aim is to increase the number of successful
prosecutions by setting out practical standards for the
investigation and documentation of such crimes, so
that the strongest possible evidence is collected and
survivors are cared for sensitively.

We have also set up a team of over 70 United
Kingdom experts, including doctors, forensic scientists,
police and gender experts, which can be deployed to
reinforce United Nations and national efforts. It has
already been deployed in Bosnia, to the Syrian border,
and to Libya, Mali and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo this year. Later this year we will carry out
further deployments to support Syrian survivors, and
we will return to Bosnia, Mali and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

We are determined to continue and build on
those efforts as the United Kingdom and to build new
partnerships with countries also working in this area.
But we need global action if we are to shatter the culture
of impunity.

That is why we have put this issue at the heart of
our presidency this month, and why I also intend to
convene a global gathering on this issue during the
session of the General Assembly in September.

Resolution 2106 (2013), which we have just
adopted today, sends a powerful signal to the world
of leadership from the Security Council. It recognizes
the commitments made in the G-8 declaration, which
will add to the international momentum that has begun
to gather but which must now become unstoppable. It
recognizes the responsibility of national Governments
to uphold human rights and the rule of law in their
countries, and it will expand the tools available to
Ms. Bangura to work with them, notably the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Somalia, which have shown
great courage in signing joint communique's with the
United Nations.

The resolution also recognize s that effective
investigation and documentation of sexual violence
in armed conflict is Vital to bringing perpetrators to
justice and ensuring recourse to justice for survivors,
and I hope that the new international protocol will be
able to make a difference in that area.

I hope that there will also be new commitments by
countries around the world support the deployment of
professionals with expertise in the way I have described.

These and other steps listed in the resolution, if
fully implemented, will represent vital new advances.
But it is only a beginning. We need action on all fronts,
from the Security Council and the United Nations as
a whole, and from Governments in conflict-affected
countries. We need to begin to demolish impunity,
create a new culture of deterrence, and at the same time
focus on long-term care and support for survivors.

We need to home in on lack of accountability as
one of the root causes of rape and sexual violence in
conflict, but at the same time not forget that women's
political, social and economic empowerment across all
societies is essential and that our goal must be the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

We need the Security Council to keep showing
the determined leadership that we have called for, and
at the same time must listen to, involve and support
local organizations. Indeed, I strongly support the
development of a network of regional champions to
support their efforts.

Of course, all countries must do more to address
violence against women in all its forms, and not just in
conflict situations.

We can and must do all those things but must never
lose sight of our overriding objective: to consign the
use of rape as a weapon of war to the pages of history.
I believe that has to begin, above all, with a focus on
ending impunity and by bringing to bear the weight,
authority and leadership of the Security Council.

Building on today's debate, I have new hope that
this will at last be possible.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.


