Ms. Montserrat (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank everyone for their insightful contributions
and their commitment to combating the trafficking in
persons. Putting an end to the trafficking in persons
in general and in conflict situations in particular goes
beyond the efforts of one specific region or country.
It requires the efforts of all. As the President of the
Government of Spain stated here at the Security Council
in December 2016 (see S/PV.7847), the trafficking in
persons is the commercialization of the bodies and
the dignity of the human being and a reincarnation of
slavery in the midst of the twenty-first century.

When Spain convened an open debate on this very
topic last December and put forward the first Security
Council resolution on the trafficking of persons in
conflict situations (resolution 2331 (2016)), it did so
on the basis that national justice systems can crumble
in conflict situations, making action by the Security
Council necessary in such circumstances. With today's
debate, we are contributing to the development of a
counter narrative to oppose those criminal networks,
armed groups and terrorist groups that use trafficking
in persons in conflict situations as a form of financing
and as a recruitment tool or forced labour, which
prolong conflicts.

Resolution 2331 (2016), put forward by Spain here at
the Security Council, strengthens the legal framework
in various areas, including with regard to sanctions,
accountability, financial flows, and protection and
assistance to victims, paying special attention to
women and girls, especially when trafficked for sexual
exploitation - and without forgetting that men and
boys are also victims of trafficking.

Trafficking in persons in conflict situations has
sparked immense media interest, particularly when it is
used by terrorists groups such as Da'esh, Boko Haram
or Al-Shabaab. Nonetheless, civil society has reiterated
on numerous occasions that the response of the United
Nations remains fragmented. That is why I would like
to highlight the fact that our States are gathered today
because an open debate was convened by the United
Kingdom as President of the Security Council. I would
therefore like to thank the United Kingdom for the
opportunity to address a subject of this magnitude. In
that regard, I would like to congratulate our neighbours,
the United Kingdom, for the recent establishment of
the Group of Friends on Modern-day Slavery, which
will surely continue to contribute to the joint efforts of
all countries.

Let me now focus on three specific issues.

First, more information and coordination are
required with regard to the use of trafficking in persons
by armed groups in conflict situations. We must work
together with all stakeholders. In that way, we could
paint as detailed a picture as possible of the routes
or hotspots of a conflict in which there are signs of
trafficking in persons in all its forms. The findings
would set out the road map of practical measures that
should be adopted.

Secondly, above and beyond the Security Council,
all Member States must respond to trafficking in
persons in conflict situations in a coordinated and
consistent manner, both through cooperation among
our intelligence, police and justice units, and with the
private sector and civil society, as well as within the
United Nations framework. It is crucial to pay special
attention to the source of financing for trafficking. A
good way to address the scourge in all its complexity
is through national plans and legislation. At the end
of 2015, Spain adopted a comprehensive national plan
to combat trafficking in persons, which strengthens
coordination in all areas. Spain is committed to the
fight against trafficking in persons and sexual slavery.

Thirdly and lastly, I would like to highlight
the fact that victims must be the focus of any policy
we develop to combat the trafficking in persons in
conflict situations, in terms of both assistance and
accountability. In that regard, Spain will support any
initiative that promotes the preservation of the proof
that would make accountability possible.

The next five years is a historic opportunity for
the fight against one of the worst forms of exploitation
and slavery to be at the centre of the priorities of the
United Nations. Spain is committed, and every one of
us here is aware of the path and the direction that we
must take. All that is left for us to do is to agree on
the effective practical measures to be taken, and that is
within everyone's reach. Let us work together.

