Mr. Charwath (Austria): Let me begin by
thanking Bolivia for convening this open debate
on the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda.

Austria aligns itself with the statements to be
made shortly on behalf of the European Union and the
Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security. In our
national capacity, I would therefore like to highlight just
a few additional points. In the interests of time, I will
deliver a shortened version of our statement. The full
statement will be uploaded on the PaperSmart portal.

As Austrian Foreign Minister Karin Kneissl stated
in her speech to the General Assembly during its
general debate at its seventy-third session (see A/73/ PV.14), gender equality and the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda are about more
than legal provisions. It is about the daily practice in our
countries and societies. And we need to carry our work
further. Eighteen years after the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), that is as urgent as ever. In that context, I
would like to highlight three important points:

First, in our view, local grassroots organizations
play a key role in advancing the women and peace and
security agenda. Austria has therefore pledged€1 million
to support the Women's Peace and Humanitarian Fund.
The Fund provides an opportunity to build partnerships
among the United Nations, Member States and civil
society to support women's organizations in building
peace and in providing humanitarian responses. We are
convinced that, through our financial support, we will
be able to assist in boosting the activities of grass-roots
organizations on the ground. We hope that others will
join us in supporting that important instrument.

Secondly, Austria is convinced that the absence
of violence is a prerequisite for peaceful societies. In
the context of fighting gender-based violence, Austria
has scaled up its engagement against female genital
mutilation and in 2018 has earmarked more than
€1 million to help victims of such mutilation.

Thirdly, Austria acknowledges the crucial
interlinkage between human rights and conflict
prevention. We therefore call on the Council to
recognize the importance of the work of Women
Human Rights Defenders for the implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda. Within
that context, Austria supported Amnesty International
in organizing a discussion on the theme "Defending
Women - Defending Rights: Women Human Rights
Defenders' Perspectives and Challenges" on the
margins of the informal European Union Foreign
Ministers' meeting in Vienna on 28 August.

Finally, let me conclude by stressing that Austria is
deeply committed to the women and peace and security
agenda and its implementation, continues to promote
gender equality and women's political and economic
empowerment and stands up for the fight against
gender-based violence.

In the light of the upcoming twentieth anniversary
of resolution 1325 (2000), Austria acknowledges that
there is still much to do to ensure the full participation
of women in all phases of conflicts, including in
particular in their prevention.

