Mr. Umemoto (Japan): First of all, Japan welcomes
the Secretary-General's recent report (S/2013/l49). We
reiterate our full support for the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, and
for her priorities of fostering political leadership and
action and deepening national ownership, leadership
and responsibility. We welcome the work of the Team
of Experts and strongly support their efforts, especially
those aimed at strengthening the capacity of national
rule-of-law and justice institutions. We would also like
to underline the important role played by United Nations
Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict, the network
of 13 United Nations entities, including UN-Women,
chaired by Special Representative Bangura. Greater
coordination is vital to improving global efforts to meet
this challenge.

I would like to touch on Japan's primary policy.
Conflict-related sexual violence should be tackled by
the international community as a whole. Japan places
great emphasis on this issue. As our Foreign Minister
stated in a recent speech on foreign policy, Japan will
continue to address this issue, and will participate
actively in international initiatives on human rights
issues, including the protection of women's rights.
Last month, Japan announced a new contribution of
$4.5 million for programmes aimed at preventing
sexual violence and supporting victims in countries
such as Libya, Somalia, the Central African Republic
and Mali.

Japan condemns attacks on women's human rights
defenders and emphasizes that Member States should
take steps to ensure the protection of such defenders.
We also recognize the importance of multisectoral
services for victims of sexual violence. In that regard,
our recent contribution addresses various needs of
Victims, including, for example, the establishment
of relief and recovery systems for legal support and
mental-health care in camps for refugees and internally
displaced persons.

Japan strongly supports the idea of shifting the
stigma attached to crimes of sexual violence off the
victims and onto the perpetrators. We also support
efforts to comprehensively address cultures of
impunity. In that regard, Japan has, for instance, been
supporting Afghanistan's Ministry of Women's Affairs
in implementing its law on the elimination of violence
against women.

As was pointed out in the Secretary- General's report,
addressing sexual violence in the context of security
sector reform processes is of key importance. Over the
past five years, Japan has provided $900 million to help
support the Afghanistan National Police, part of which
has been used for employing and training female police
officers. So far, more than 1,400 female police officers
have been hired. And in Africa, for example, Japan
has been supporting capacity-building and training for
Somalia's security officers in the areas of sexual and
gender-based violence and the abuse and exploitation
of children.

Before concluding, I am very pleased to announce
that Japan has begun to develop a national action plan
based on resolution 1325 (2000). We are hard at work
on the plan, which includes our commitment to further
strengthening our efforts to help protect women's rights
in humanitarian settings. We are in close consultation
with United Nations organizations such as UN-Women,
and hope to complete the plan as soon as possible.

