Mr. Khandakar (Bangladesh): The delegation of
Bangladesh aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security.

Our thanks go to the delegation of South Africa
for originating this debate and for highlighting the
issue of women and peace and security at the Security
Council once again by proposing a new resolution
(resolution 2493 (2019)), which, what is more, was
adopted unanimously.

In October 2000, as a non-permanent member of
the Council, Bangladesh played a leading role in the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security. The resolution was followed by
several others designed to strengthen the process,
create consensus about women's extreme vulnerability
in conflict situations and promote women's ability
to participate in peace negotiations, peacebuilding
and peacekeeping.

The Secretary-General's report this month on
women and peace and security (S/2019/800) reflects
some progress. But many challenges remain, particularly
with regard to women's participation in United Nations
peacekeeping operations and the increasing political
violence targeting women. All of us, the States
Members of the United Nations and the Security
Council, can facilitate the actions recommended in
the report with regard to areas such as accountability,
the meaningful participation of women - particularly
in decision-making processes - and human
rights violations.

The Declaration and Programme of Action on
a Culture of Peace calls for the empowerment of
people, particularly women and young people, which
is a major element in strengthening international
peace and security. That is clearly complementary
to the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda.

Bangladesh's growing contribution of female
peacekeepers is consistent with its commitment to the
United Nations. We strongly support the Secretary-
General's Action for Peacekeeping initiative and laud
his efforts towards ensuring gender parity in senior
appointments under his system-wide strategy on
gender parity.

One particular situation in Bangladesh that is
directly relevant to the women and peace and security
agenda and which bears mentioning is that of the
devastating accounts of rape, sexual violence and abuse
perpetrated against women and girls of the Rohingya
community when they fled Myanmar's Rakhine state
in August 2017. We thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Pramila Patten, for keeping the Council informed
on issues of sexual violence against Rohingya women
and girls. Members of the Council should take decisive
action in response to the various reports on justice
and accountability in that regard. That should feature
prominently in the Council's future deliberations.

Bangladesh is working to prepare its first national
action plan on resolution 1325 (2000). The proposed
plan recognizes the adverse effects of conflict on
women and girls, prioritizes women's human rights
and gender equality in all aspects and ensures
women's equal participation and leadership roles in all
peacebuilding processes. In preparing their national
action plans, many countries face gaps, challenges
and limitations. That process could be helped by firm
political commitments to transform rhetoric into reality
and strong stakeholder partnerships to implement the
Secretary-General's report. Commitments in those
areas could also form part of the overarching objectives
for the twentieth anniversary of the women and peace
and security agenda.

Despite our continued best efforts to enhance
women's empowerment and participation in all spheres
of our lives, much more needs to be done. The increased,
sustained and coordinated mobilization of financial
resources, including through earmarking, remains of
key importance to the implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda.

