Mrs. Pejanovie Durisic' (Montenegro):
Montenegro aligns itself with the statement made by
the observer of the European Union (EU). In addition,
as a member of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace
and Security, Montenegro joins in the statement made
by the representative Canada on behalf of the group of
56 States. I would, however, like to make a few remarks
in my national capacity.

Next year we will mark the twentieth anniversary
of the adoption of the landmark resolution 1325
(2000), on women and peace and security. Although
numerous activities have been undertaken, they
have not translated into real changes on the ground.
Practical and institutional barriers continue to prevent
women from fully and meaningfully participating in
all peace processes. In today's globalized world, with
very complex and fast-changing security threats and
strategic challenges, the active and equal participation
of women and men is a prerequisite for overall security,
lasting peace and stability.

As emphasized in the latest report of the Secretary-
General (S/2019/800), this is a critical time for bold and
urgent action to ensure that next year's anniversary
gives rise to concrete commitments and impactful action
rather than empty rhetoric. We must reinvigorate our
efforts to address persistent obstacles causing failures
with multigenerational consequences. In that regard,

Montenegro supports the recommendations contained
in the report of the Secretary-General and calls upon all
stakeholders to take steps towards accelerating progress
in implementing that important agenda.

Montenegro is strongly devoted to the
implementation of all resolutions derived from the
women and peace and security agenda. Greater
attention has been paid to ensuring women's full and
meaningful participation in the security sector. As
a result of numerous reforms in that area, the overall
strategic framework has been improved, for example
by bringing the army into closer proportion with the
younger female population.

Last August, the Government of Montenegro
adopted its second plan of action for the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) for the period 2019-2022. The
action plan clearly defines measures and actions for
achieving three priorities: increasing the participation
of women in decision-making and peacekeeping
processes, the protection of women and girls in conflict
zones and the integration of gender perspectives and
gender education in peacekeeping operations, as well as
mechanisms for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and its accompanying resolutions. In addition,
the Government of Montenegro adopted its third action
plan for achieving gender equality for the period 2017-
2021; it defines additional integration of resolution
1325 (2000) into the security sector.

An informative page on women in the armed forces
has been established on the website of the Ministry of
Defence, containing all activities on achieving gender
equality. In addition, media campaigns and open-door
events, including school visits for making the armed
forces more visible to young men and women, have been
conducted. Those activities have resulted in increasing
interest among young female candidates in military
academies and voluntary military services.

At the level of the defence sector, the total number
of women employed is 12.82 per cent. At the Ministry
ofDefence, that number is 42.48 per cent, while 9.19 per
cent of the members of the armed forces are women.
Those numbers are not sufficient, but they reaffirm
our strong commitment to addressing societal gender
stereotypes and the low interest of women in military
professions, on the one hand, and to fulfilling United
Nations, NATO and EU standards and pursuing overall
reforms and transformational changes of the defence
sector, on the other.

In the coming period, a multisectoral approach will
be strengthened in order to ensure the realization of
defined goals by addressing societal gender stereotypes
that are not exclusively related to the security and
defence sector but affect all professions. That is
above all our moral and human obligation, apart from
implementing international standards and successfully
conducting military operations.

As we approach a landmark year for the women and
peace and security agenda, let me once again confirm
our readiness to fully implement the agenda, thereby
ensuring women's meaningful participation in peace
and security processes.

