Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): Ms. Bangura's task
is indeed a tough one, but her leadership provides a
lifeline for many affected by monstrous crimes such
as these. Our appreciation also goes to Ms. Hamsatu
Allamin for her contribution to today's debate.

Brutal and barbaric sexual Violence as a weapon
of war is scarily cheap and effective. It is used to
intimidate, change local demographics, attack ethnic
and religious minorities, seize land and clear access
to scarce resources and force entire communities into
submission. With the emergence of Da'esh and Boko
Haram, public gang rape, sexual slavery, the sale of
women and girls as young as pre-teens and forced
impregnations and abortions have become trademarks
of the wanton and depraved reign of terror. A report
released by Amnesty International in December details
the abominable suffering of Yazidi women and girls
under Da'esh. A girl is quoted in that report describing
her attempt, with a fellow captive, to take her own life.

"We tied scarves around our necks and pulled
away from each other as hard as we could until I
fainted. I could not speak for several days after
that."

Like her, many captives of terrorist groups prefer
suicide to suffering the savage abuse and consequences
of rape. Even in modern societies, rape victims can
be slow to speak out, and rape is often underreported.
With all the care and services available, it takes
years for victims to heal. Imagine rape victims in
countries where services are non-existent and social
norms ostracize and punish the Victims of rape, not
the perpetrators. Of course, rape victims will choose
to keep Silent when those who rape them are from
the ranks of local authorities, police or armed forces;
where reporting a crime may expose the Victim and
her family to additional attacks; where rape victims
are forced to marry their rapists and punished for
moral crimes or where sexual abuse is committed by
peacekeepers - those who by their very definition
are expected to protect, not to abuse. The Secretary-
General's reports and those of various human rights
bodies repeatedly point to such problems, and while in
many cases significant progress has been made at the
normative level, both nationally and internationally, the
gap between the law and reality on the ground remains
wide.

We all agree that the responsibility to protect
civilian populations, including from rape and sexual
violence as a tactic ofwar, lies first and foremost with the
State. Having judicial and penal frameworks adequate
to that end is essential, as is making sure that national
civilian and military justice systems comply fully with
international legal and human-rights standards. But
where that responsibility is not lived up to, whether
for lack of resources, capacity or political will, it
is imperative that the perpetrators of mass-atrocity
crimes, including those involving sexual violence, be
held to account through existing international justice
mechanisms, including the International Criminal
Court (ICC). Human rights monitoring, reporting
of peacekeeping mission human rights and gender
components, independent commissions of inquiry, and
rapid deployment of the United Nations Team of Experts
on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict to
situations of particular concern can all be instrumental
in bringing perpetrators to account. As a founding party
to the ICC, Lithuania calls for the universal application
of the Rome Statute, as it recognizes sexual violence
offences as crimes against humanity.

Ensuring accountability for conflict-related sexual
crimes and for sexual and gender-based crimes in
general is key to prevention. The perpetrators must
know their heinous acts will carry consequences.
The Council should be more vocal and systematic in
its condemnation of conflict-related sexual violence
and demand credible investigations of all allegations
of sexual Violence committed in conflict zones, be
they allegations against Government-affiliated forces,
armed groups or United Nations peacekeepers, and use
sanctions to this effect. When signals of rape reach us,
we cannot afford to ignore them or brush them under the
carpet. Our silence and equivocations inflict additional
wounds on the Victims and only serve to embolden the
perpetrators.

On the protection side, the deployment of
women protection advisers, the provision of human
rights and gender-awareness training for staff to be
deployed in peacekeeping missions and the inclusion
of sexual violence issues in the drafting or renewal of
peacekeeping mandates have proven useful and should
be further expanded. To change the calculus, more
women peacekeepers need to be deployed. While the
Secretariat's efforts to address this gap merits our full
support, respective troop- and police-contributing
countries can contribute a great deal.

A policy of due diligence must be applied and
fully implemented. The much-too-easy availability
of small arms and light weapons in conflict and post-
conflict situations adds to the already high risks faced
by civilians, including an increased threat of sexual
violence. Lithuania intends next month to hold an open
debate on the human costs of small arms and light
weapons that will aim to identify means by which the
Council could more systematically take into account
small arms and light weapons-related threats, including
their exacerbating effect on sexual and gender-based
Violence.

Ensuring that gender considerations are given due
attention, the creation of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration and security sector reform
programmes; the systematic integration of gender-based
Violence into designation criteria of sanctions regimes;
and improving the collection of disaggregated data
are just a few examples of where further advances are
needed. In a wider context, the provisions of the Arms
Trade Treaty that oblige States to take into account the
risks of arms being used to commit or facilitate gender-
based Violence before issuing export licenses must be
robustly implemented.

One should also bear in mind that while women
and girls are usually the first victims of conflict-
related sexual violence, rape as a weapon of war is also
used against men and boys to humiliate, break down
the morale, intimidate and subjugate. Taking into
consideration the distinct roles of women protection
advisers and gender advisers, systematic deployment
of both in conflict zones remains essential. Male rape
victims should also be accorded all necessary support
and treatment. In particular, the stigmatization and
integration of children born out of conflict-related
sexual Violence and rape need to be addressed delicately
but seriously to prevent lingering marginalization and
animosities that may ultimate explode in unrest and
renewed conflict.

As Special Representative Bangura noted, national,
regional and subregional cooperation mechanisms
are very important. They should continue to actively
engage in promoting effective responses to conflict-
related sexual crimes, including through awareness
campaigns, action plans, cooperation frameworks,
capacity-building and shared good practices. Next
week, Lithuania will host a regional conference together
with the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and UN-Women on the review of the women
and peace and security agenda, providing a good
opportunity to address these issues as well.

Finally, prevention requires inclusion - inclusion
ofwomen, minorities and vulnerable groups - in a full
and meaningful way in all conflict resolution, post-
conflict reconciliation and peacebuilding processes as
active contributors and not merely as a token presence
at the negotiating table. Their equal participation will
contribution significantly to building the enduring
peace that will break the cycles of violence, including
gender-based violence.

