Ms. Kabua (Marshall Islands): This is the first
time I have spoken on behalf of the Pacific Islands
Forum States in this Chamber. On their behalf, I want
to first offer our sincere congratulations to you, Sir,
on assuming the presidency, as well as to thank you
and the members around the table for convening and
holding this important meeting.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the Pacific
Islands Forum States represented at the United Nations:
Australia, the Federated States of Micronesia, Kiribati,
Nauru, New Zealand, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Samoa,
Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu and my small
atoll nation, the Republic of the Marshall Islands. The
Pacific Islands Forum members stand on the leading
edge of evolving security issues - situations in which
women play a critical role to play in working towards
stability. At the same time, despite some very positive
overall gains, progress in the region towards gender
equality is slow, with only mixed results since the
Forum issued the Pacific Leaders Gender Equality
Declaration last year.

Despite some positive steps, including the number of
women serving in important and very senior Government
positions, women's parliamentary representation in the
Pacific is the lowest ofany region in the world. The region

has recently witnessed and continues to be affected by
armed conflict, civil unrest and local-level conflicts
over resources, as well as increasingly violent crimes
and political crises. Women and children constitute a
disproportionate number of those affected. Women face
a variety of security challenges in the Pacific, including
water and food security, loss of land, Violence, and
economic empowerment. A range of potential drivers
is apparent, rangining from economic inequalities,
land, governance, alienated youth, urban migration and
inter-group tensions, with results that inevitably disrupt
the lives of women and their families and increase the
risk of sexual and gender-based Violence.

More recently, the Forum leaders have recognized
climate change as the greatest threat to the livelihood
and well-being of the peoples of the Pacific. Climate
impacts can lead to forced displacement, with clear
implications for women, and raise security questions
that have no simple solutions or easy precedents. In
times of natural disaster, which are increasing in the
Pacific region, women and girls are more prone to sexual
violence in the context of displacement due to the loss
of their homes or traditional protection mechanisms
though their family or clan structures.

In many Violent situations in the Pacific region,
women have demonstrated their capacity to contribute
to solutions as mediators, providers of safe havens, or
in working to improve local communities. Women and
young women have also played an important part in
conflict prevention, management and recovery in the
region. Women have generally been first to actively
work across ethnic divides, despite considerable risks.

The Pacific region is working to achieve better
participation in formal conflict prevention and
management and post-conflict recovery efforts, as
well as oversight and accountability mechanisms for
the security sector. The region recognizes the value
of having women at the negotiating table in leadership
roles and the need to provide sufficient recognition and
resources to ensure that they are able to do their work.

In December 2010, as part of the tenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), a Pacific
regional working group on women, peace and security
was established. In June 2011, the Forum Regional
Security Committee gave the group the policy task
of developing a regional action plan, which has been
formally recognized by our leaders. Earlier this year, a
regional reference group was established to oversee the
regional action plan's implementation.

The action plan provides a detailed regional
framework to enhance women's and young women's
leadership in conflict prevention and peacebuilding,
mainstream gender and ensure the protection of
women's and girls' human rights in humanitarian
crises and in transitioning from conflict, disaster or
post-conflict situations - all with a mechanism to
accelerate the implementation of existing international,
regional and national commitments on women, peace
and security.

The action plan assists in addressing gaps and
advancing solutions. A range of further means may
be considered, including the United Nations regional
gender architecture, United Nations in-country
assistance - which is highly lacking - and resource
allocation decisions. The Biketawa Declaration sets
out the framework for regional conflict prevention and
management of political crises. Our regional action
plan is a key platform to better integrate gender into
that security framework and thus represents a specific
response to relevant Security Council resolutions.

In conclusion, the countries of the Pacific Islands
Forum are committed to work with like-minded
countries to ensure that our necessary local efforts and
our contributions to the United Nations will always
encourage and support resolution 1325 (2000).

