The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity as the representative of India.

At the outset, I would like to thank the Deputy
Secretary-General for his remarks at this important
open debate under the agenda item on women and peace
and security. The fact that more than 50 countries have
expressed their interest in speaking in today's debate
reflects the importance and resonance of this issue.

I would also like to thank the Under-Secretary-
General and Executive Director of UN-Women,
Ms. Michelle Bachelet, and the Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Herve
Ladsous, for their detailed briefings. I also thank
Ms. Bineta Diop, President ofFemmes Africa Solidarite,
for sharing their insights, and other Council members
for their contributions to this debate.

Resolution 1325 (2000) highlights the impact of
armed conflict on women and the need for effective
institutional arrangements to guarantee their protection
and full participation in peace processes. India has
consistently held that the greater participation of women
in the areas of conflict resolution, peace negotiations,
peacekeeping and post-conflict reconstruction is a sine
qua non for lasting peace and security.

My full statement is being circulated, and I shall
therefore, in the interest of the efficient and effective
use of time, merely make a few remarks by way of
conclusion.

The promotion and protection of the human rights
of women and girls in armed conflict continues to pose
a pressing challenge. There should be zero tolerance
for gender-based violence. All cases of gender-based
violence must be promptly investigated and the
perpetrators prosecuted.
We agree with those who call for the increased
deployment of female military and police personnel
in United Nations peacekeeping operations and for
appropriate training to enable them to effectively
discharge their responsibilities.

India is the largest troop-contributing country in
United Nations history. India was the first country to
deploy a full female peacekeeping unit of 100 personnel
in Liberia, in 2007. We have offered to contribute more
such units. We are very proud of the exemplary record
of our peacekeepers, both men and women, in the
protection of women, children and the weak in conflict
situations.

In conclusion, let me reaffirm India's commitment
to positively contribute to United Nations efforts in
the area of women and peace and security. We also see
civil society and local communities as valued partners
in that endeavour.

I appeal to speakers to limit their statements to
four minutes in order to enable the Council to carry
out its work expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy
statements, like the delegation of India, are requested to
circulate the text in writing and to deliver a condensed
version when speaking in the Chamber.

I wish also to inform all concerned that we will be
carrying on this open debate right through the lunch
hour, because it is our intention to finish the debate by
6 p.m., as we have a very large number of speakers.

I now give the floor to the representative of Egypt.

