Mr. Skoog (Sweden): First of all, I thank you,
Sir, for organizing the open debate today, which
builds on the significant efforts undertaken by the
Security Council over the past years, and for the very
concrete suggestions, that you just put forward in
your intervention.

I speak on behalf of the five Nordic countries:
Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and my own
country, Sweden.

I want to thank the briefers for their briefings
today, but more importantly for the work they do on this
very important topic. I also want to express our strong
support for the work of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Bangura, and her Office, including the Team of
Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict. Their support to Member States in ensuring
support to victims and strengthening the capacity to
address conflict-related sexual violence, as well as
impunity, is crucial.

In spite of our joint efforts and the outrage that we
feel, the scourge of sexual violence continues, with its
many different aspects and manifestations. A common
denominator, however, is that no region is spared. That
compels us to work together in partnership so as to
forge appropriate responses.

We live in a time of extraordinary flows of migrants
and refugees. People fleeing are often desperate and
vulnerable, becoming easy prey for human trafficking,
exploitation and abuse. That compels us to provide
protection to those in need. In our countries, asylum
seekers are supported in various ways, including
basic financial support, health-care services and
accommodation. That is not only an issue of human
rights and preserving dignity, but also a way to combat
the exploitation of vulnerable people.

However, we need to put our national efforts in the
context of a broader agenda to build and sustain peace
and achieve long-term development globally. That
includes addressing the root causes of conflict, fighting
poverty and building national capacity, supported by
the allocation of resources that are sustainable over the
long term.
To render such an approach successful, a change in
perspective is needed at various levels. First, we need
to devote more attention to prevention. To that end,
we must shift focus from women as victims to women
as agents of change; we must strengthen the linkages
between women's economic empowerment, women's
equal political participation and their full enjoyment
of their human rights; we must transform institutions,
norms and behaviour; and we must engage men and
boys in achieving gender equality.

Secondly, we need a more holistic and coherent
institutional approach. We need to pursue action against
trafficking and conflict-related sexual violence at all
levels. We need to build more dynamic partnerships
with all relevant actors, including within the United
Nations system, and with regional and subregional
organizations. And we need to build capacity and foster
national ownership and inclusive processes. In that
context, we are proud to be among the top contributors
to the United Nations Action against Sexual Violence
in Conflict and the Team of Experts in their work to
strengthen national capacities for prevention and
response efforts.

We also support peace processes where women are
present at the peace negotiating table and where women's
organizations contribute. Non-State actors also need to
be engaged in that effort. The potential of traditional
and religious leaders should also be harnessed. In that
context, I would like to welcome the fact that Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Bangura,
and her Office are working with non-State actors to
combat conflict-related sexual violence.

My third and final point is related to the preceding
one. We need to find the resources and secure strong long-
term commitments. The international community needs
to stay generously engaged and to provide predictable,
sustainable and long-term financing for peace and
development efforts, including for strengthening the
capacities of States to address the challenges posed by
trafficking and conflict-related sexual violence. The
Nordic countries provide long-term financing for peace
and development in a wide variety of ways, recognizing
and advocating for the role of women as agents for
peace. Our Nordic Women Mediators' Network, which
aims to contribute to United Nations mediation efforts,
is one of many expressions of that commitment, as
are our generous non-earmarked contributions to the
relevant United Nations funds and programmes.

On 19 June, we will commemorate the International
Day for the Elimination of Sexual Violence in Conflict
for the first time. That date will mark an occasion for
the international community to increase accountability,
raise awareness and demonstrate its resolve to redouble
efforts to address the scourge of sexual violence
in conflict.

