Mr. Winid (Poland): Let me begin by thanking
Uruguay for organizing this timely debate.

Poland aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union, but I would like to
add some comments in my national capacity.
Since the adoption ofresolutions 1820 (2008), 1888
(2009), 1960 (2010) and 2106 (2013), which recognize
rape and other forms of sexual violence as war crimes
and crimes against humanity, there have been several
positive developments in addressing those issues.

First of all, combating sexual violence has been
included in the mandates of peacekeeping operations,
while the international community has begun to deploy
gender advisers and female protection officers trained
in sexual violence issues.

Secondly, the availability and quality of data on
sexual crimes has improved and many perpetrators have
been brought to justice, as happened in Colombia, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Iraq and Uganda.

Thirdly, awareness-raising campaigns and greater
involvement by the international community have
played a key role in legislative reforms in conflict-
affected countries where rape had not been previously
recognized as a crime.

Finally, since 2010, the number of national action
plans has increased, with many countries havikng
implemented national strategies aimed at providing
assistance to victims and survivors of sexual violence.

Yet, unfortunately, sexual violence is still used as a
weapon of war and a systematic tactic of terrorism and
torture and, in some cases, continues to be widespread
and to go unpunished.

There is still silent consent with regard to sexual
violence in some conflicts, which continues to be
underreported, mainly due to the sociocultural stigma
it represents and a general lack of awareness, but also
because of the fear of reprisals and the lack or weakness
of institutions and services.

There is an urgent need to hold perpetrators
accountable and to provide victims and survivors
with basic services, such as health care, psychological
support, financial aid, legal assistance and
socioeconomic reintegration services.

The international community faces multiple
challenges with regard to conflict-related sexual
violence. New trends, including an increase in
violent extremism and mass migration, may trigger
incidents of trafficking in persons for purposes of
sexual exploitation and violence. Such incidents
disproportionately affect women and children from
ethnic and religious minorities. In that regard, let
me thank Spain for bringing forward resolution 2331
(2016), which establishes the link between human
trafficking and conflict-related sexual violence.

There is in fact political will to address the issue
of conflict-related sexual violence, but more needs to
be done to fight the culture of impunity. Combating
sexual violence in conflict is an integral part of the
wider conflict-prevention agenda, and we should spare
no effort to tackle the problem holistically. Raising
awareness about the scale of sexual violence in conflict
and its impact on societies is the first step. One
example is the successful initiative of Argentina and
its General Assembly resolution 69/293, proclaiming
19 June as the International Day for the Elimination
of Sexual Violence in Conflict. It draws the attention
of the international community to the problem while
honouring the victims and survivors and paying tribute
to all of those involved in eradicating those crimes.

Secondly, there must be training for medical staff,
military and police personnel, lawyers, prosecutors
and judges in gender sensitivity and ways to better
prevent, recognize and respond to sexual violence and
other forms of violence against civilians. They must be
trained in facilitating the reporting of crimes related
to sexual violence. Such programmes must include
predeployment training, the deployment of more female
gender advisers and measures for ensuring greater
representation of women in national police services in
order to facilitate survivors' reporting about cases of
sexual violence.

The allocation of adequate financial resources is
another important point. As a proof of our commitment,
the Polish Government last year contributed 2.5 million
zlotys to the UNICEF operation in Mosul, Iraq,
providing assistance to thousands of Christian and
Yazidi women and girls fleeing from the horrors of
trafficking, forced marriage and sexual enslavement
perpetrated by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
Last but not least, cooperation among conflict-
affected Governments, civil society and the
international community cannot be underestimated.
One of the best examples of fostering collaboration
among various stakeholders is the Preventing Sexual
Violence Initiative, which was launched five years ago
by the United Kingdom.

Let me conclude on a positive note by commending
Colombia for developing an exemplary legal framework
for addressing conflict-related sexual violence, and the
Government of C6te d'Ivoire for its policies to provide
services, justice and reparations for survivors. Their
commitments could serve as an example for State and
non-State actors from other conflict-affected area on
ways to address this difficult issue.

