Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this very necessary discussion. As we all
know, women are particularly vulnerable to the effects
of conflict, but can be very powerful in ending it.
Durable peace requires the specific needs of women
and girls to be addressed. We must recognize women as
potent agents of peace. This tenth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000) obviously provides an
opportunity to review what we have done well over the
past decade, to look ahead and, more importantly, to
see what more can be done, must be done and how it
can be done better.

We have achieved much over the past 10 years,
but nowhere near enough. Over 20 countries have
finalized national action plans on women, peace and
security. Many more, including Australia, are currently
developing plans. We should not underestimate the
importance of those plans. They encapsulate political
will. They set out concrete steps that countries will
take to translate the ideals of resolution 1325 (2000)
into action. They are, in fact, a meaningful and
practical way to achieve progress on the ground.

We have seen some improvements in the capacity
of women at the local level to engage in peace
processes that affect them. For its part, Australia
continues to be active in this field. In our own
immediate region, we have supported women who are
themselves mobilizing in Solomon Islands,
Bougainville, Fiji, Tonga and elsewhere to end conflict
and foster peace and reconciliation in their own
communities. The narrative a few moments ago from
the Permanent Representative of Solomon Islands is
encouraging testimony to what can be done, but of
course equally a stark statement of how hard the actual
task is. Australia certainly will continue to work with
United Nations partners, civil society and national
Governments to ensure that women in the Asia-Pacific
region and elsewhere play a central role in
peacemaking.

The past year witnessed a rapid rise in the
collective will to address sexual violence in conflict,
although such Violence continues abhorrently.
Resolution 1888 (2009) did break important new
ground. We welcome the appointment of Margot
Wallstrom as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict. Her
views on how the United Nations system could
improve its handling of the protection of civilians in
this area should be considered very carefully.

Despite the achievements - limited though they
are in some areas - of the past decade, there is
widespread recognition that much more remains to be
done to realize the promise of resolution 1325 (2000).
Ten years on, far too many gaps remain. Resolution
1325 (2000) still needs to be addressed in a
comprehensive and strategic way. Although many
activities have been undertaken over the past 10 years,
a comprehensive analysis of the impact of these
initiatives is yet to be conducted. To do so will require
data. That data will need to be assessed against reliable
and relevant indicators to evaluate results, determine
the impact and identify best practices and lessons
learned. That must then form the basis for new and
effective policy responses.

We welcome the comprehensive set of indicators
developed for use at the global, regional and national
levels to track implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), as outlined in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2010/498), and we would ask the Security Council
to endorse those indicators and put them to use,
particularly where they are relevant to the Council's
work. The indicators should be deployed by all
relevant parts of the United Nations system to collect
data and inform policy and programmatic responses,
particularly at the country level. They should also be
used as one method to inform policy at the national
level.

The recent mass rapes in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo obviously highlight to all of us
the challenges still faced in ensuring that sexual
violence in conflict is addressed comprehensively
throughout the entire United Nations system,
particularly as part of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. There remains a gap between our collective
expectations of what the United Nations system should
be able to do and the actual capacity of peacekeepers
on the ground. Operational guidance, training and
resources need to be provided to mission leadership
and peacekeepers so that they are prepared to take
action in response to threats against civilians.

Australia was pleased to support the joint
analytical inventory developed by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the United Nations
Development Fund for Women, under the auspices of
the inter-agency network United Nations Action
against Sexual Violence in Conflict. The inventory was
released this year. It is a key tool for the United
Nations to use in improving its ability to protect
civilians from sexual violence in conflict as a part of
peacekeeping operations. We are committed to working
with our United Nations partners to fully operationalize
this tool, including by incorporating it into
predeployment training for peacekeepers.
I am also pleased to announce that Australia will
fund the roll-out of the scenario-based training
materials for peacekeepers to prevent and respond to
sexual violence. We will also continue our funding to
the Gender Standby Capacity and the Protection
Standby Capacity Project to better ensure that the
broader protection needs of women are addressed in
humanitarian crises.

The establishment of UN Women provides real
opportunities to move forward on women, peace and
security. We commend Ms. Bachelet's commitment to
this goal and are of course ready to support her efforts.
Effective and tailored in-country programmes,
formulated on the basis of data analysed against the
global indicators, will be essential. We look forward to
UN Women working with all relevant partners to
develop a comprehensive framework to guide the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

To conclude, we know that our common resolve
to take effective action on women, peace and security
must not abate with this tenth anniversary. Australia
will continue to work with others on how best to
improve our collective response in this critical and
vital area. We all have an irreducible obligation to do
much better than we are doing.

