Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein: I am
honoured once again to brief the Security Council on
this important subject and I am grateful to you, Sir, for
having arranged this meeting. I will try, for the most
part, not to repeat the points presented to the Council at
our last briefing, and so request that my comments be
viewed as an update to what was stated here on 31 May
2005.

I believe it is safe for me to conclude that, of all
the items on our reform agenda, sexual exploitation
and abuse by United Nations peacekeeping personnel
are the one item we - the Member States, acting with
the Secretariat - have been able to treat quietly,
without much fuss and with some measure of success.

That assessment may seem out of place, in View
of the continued receipt by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) of a high number of
allegations relating to sexual exploitation and abuse -
a matter I will touch on shortly. Nevertheless, I believe
it to be the correct assessment.

The Secretariat and the Member States have by
and large completed or are about to complete the
changes called for by the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations - the Committee of 34 -
following the latter's review of the report submitted by
my team, entitled "A comprehensive strategy to
eliminate sexual exploitation and abuse in United
Nations peacekeeping operations". Members heard
6
from Under-Secretary-General Guehenno on those
achievements this morning.

What remains before us now, in rounding out the
work of the last 10 months, is to finalize the revisions
to the 1997 model Memorandum of Understanding, to
reach an agreement between Member States on the
national investigations officer concept - a concept
being refined currently by the Office of Internal
Oversight Services (OIOS) - and to receive two rather
sophisticated documents: the product of the group of
legal experts relating to the de facto impunity enjoyed
by some civilian staff members, and the United Nations
policy statement and comprehensive strategy on
assistance and support to victims.

When I had the honour of addressing the
Committee of 34 on 4 April 2005, I said that I expected
the entire reform effort, where sexual exploitation and
abuse are concerned, to last two or so years, and I
advised then that it would be wise for the Committee to
treat the simpler, more practical proposals immediately
and to confront those more complex legal, technical
issues at a later date, once the preparatory work had
been achieved.

We will therefore proceed soon to tackle the
second phase of our work. The Committee of 34 will in
due course be invited to revisit the recommendation,
contained in the comprehensive strategy, that the troop-
contributing countries conduct their courts martial in
the mission area itself. That topic was not given more
than a cursory reading last year and was put aside
because some countries said they could not exercise
their jurisdiction extraterritorially. Nevertheless, over
the last few months, two major troop contributors have
in fact completed courts martial in a mission area, and
have done so successfully. And, as expected, in
rendering justice before the local populations they are
there to serve, the troop contributors and the United
Nations were able to retain the confidence of those
local populations. More Member States need to be
encouraged to follow that example, and the Committee
of 34 should, through the General Assembly, invite all
those countries that are able to conduct courts martial
in the mission area to in fact do so. The Committee of
34 should also establish modalities for that purpose.

Turning to individual civilian staff members and
the question of impunity for crimes of a sexual nature
committed on mission, the difficulty for the United
Nations arises whenever grounds for an investigation
into suspected criminal conduct begin to emerge, but
neither the host State nor the sending State are in a
position to exercise their jurisdiction, either because of
circumstances in theatre - that is, when there is no
functioning judiciary - or because of legal constraints
on the part of the State whose national is under
suspicion. The Committee of 34 therefore asked the
group of legal experts

"[t]o provide advice on the best way to proceed
so as to ensure that the original intent of the
Charter... can be achieved, namely that United
Nations staff and experts on mission would never
be effectively exempt from the consequences of
criminal acts committed at their duty station, nor
unjustly penalized, in accordance with due
process" (A/59/19/Rev.l, part two, para. 40 (a)).

The group has, as I understand it, a full draft
ready before it, requiring only its final review, and
once the experts have adopted their text, it will
eventually be sent to the Sixth Committee. The
Committee of 34 also required the group of legal
experts to answer the question as to whether the
standards drawn up in the Secretary-General's bulletin
could bind contingent members prior to the conclusion
of a memorandum of understanding. It also requested
the group to propose a way of standardizing norms of
conduct applicable to all categories of United Nations
personnel. Regrettably, our current experts are unable
to assume that undertaking, owing to their other
commitments, and a new group of experts will
therefore be assembled shortly for that purpose.

The Secretary-General is also about to release a
United Nations policy statement and comprehensive
strategy on assistance and support to victims. That
document is a thoughtful proposal, prepared carefully
over the last nine months by members of the
Secretariat, and it will likely contain some bold
recommendations. Once that text is presented to the
Committee of 34, sometime over the coming days, it
will be important for Member States to remain
cognizant, in the course of their ensuing discussions
and negotiations, of a sense of responsibility towards
the victims of United Nations abuse.

As I noted at the outset of this brief presentation,
the number of allegations being lodged against United
Nations peacekeeping personnel remains high, and
unacceptably so. But, as we have made clear to all
Member States repeatedly over the last year, that is not
entirely unexpected. Until we are able pin down all
four corners of our strategy - and, as I said earlier,

our work is not yet complete - we should expect at
least some allegations. Moreover, with every
improvement in the mechanisms designed to facilitate
complaints, it is likely we will see occasional spikes in
the number of accusations.

Nevertheless, the numbers of allegations
currently being registered in some locations still cause
us considerable concern. We, the Member States, must
therefore, together with all personnel serving in the
field, exert even greater efforts in all the missions
concerned to drawn those numbers down. We also need
to ensure that more resources are provided to OIOS, so
that it can carry out its preliminary investigations
efficiently, in conjunction with troop contributors.
Ultimately, we must continue to view sexual
exploitation and abuse in United Nations peacekeeping
operations not as some ephemeral issue simply of
passing importance, but as the serious issue it in fact is.

I must also acknowledge, however, how hard it is
to change a culture of dismissiveness, long developed
within ourselves, in our own countries and in the
mission areas. We can often legislate a response swiftly
when reacting to crises of this sort, but our rate of

absorption - absorbing these changes to the point
where we can say we have changed our attitudes or a
culture - is, as we all know, still problematical. Yet

that cannot, of course, be held up as an excuse for the
persistent nature of these alleged abuses, because there
can, of course, be no excuse for such phenomena.

DPKO, OIOS and OLA have all responded to the
challenges imposed on us by sexual exploitation and
abuse in a manner deserving of our acknowledgment
and gratitude. Despite what I have just noted about
current allegations, Member States - and in particular
troop-contributing countries - have also been
supportive as regards the agreements reached in the
General Assembly last year and the implementation
thus far of the first phase of our work.

Finally, one cannot - must not - forget that
there are peacekeepers, representing all parts of the
world, who are dying every year in pursuit of the
objectives being established by the Council. They and
their surviving colleagues perform a service to the
international community of immense worth, a fact that
must never be lost in all of this. It is because we know
that that it is all the more urgent for us to remove the

blight of sexual exploitation and abuse from what is
otherwise distinguished and appreciated performance.

