Mr. Mendoza-Garcia (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): Costa Rica thanks the presidency of Jordan
for convening this open debate. The recent trend of
using sexual violence as a tactic of terror, described in
the Secretary-General's report (S/2015/203), is a source
of great concern for us because that abhorrent practice
annihilates in the cruellest way possible social cohesion
and the ties that bind communities, as well as dignity
itself and the autonomy of victims.

As stated in the concept note (S/2015/243, annex),
throughout history sexual violence has been widespread
in armed conflict. Unfortunately, throughout history
there are also many examples of various religions
being used as justification in power struggles and
the ideological background for conflict, and the
domination and dehumanization of other human beings
arejustified merely on the basis oftheir being different.
The irrationality of violence and hatred can rise to
heights that put humankind to shame. The inability to
see ourselves reflected in the other as human beings
is an artificial construct derived from fanaticism that
alienates us from our own humanity.

We have previously discussed the alarming
expansion of restrictions on the rights of women and
girls promoted by extremist groups, how the control
of those rights is at the very core of the conflict and
the emergence of terrorist acts specifically directed
against them. Additionally, the report makes clear
that sexual Violence is intrinsically linked to ideology,
strategic objectives and the funding of those groups.
The phenomenon that today repels and alarms us is just
one more element in the process of the radicalization of
ideologies based on exclusion and which subordinates
of women and girls. It is no coincidence that sexual
Violence takes place against a backdrop of structural
gender-based discrimination. As the report points out,
"the disempowerment of women that attends the rise
of violent extremism is not incidental, but systemic"
(S/2015/203, para. 11).

An appropriate response involves first not
compromising with such world views. As underlined in
the recommendations presented, in order to address the
root causes of sexual violence we must promote gender
equality and women's empowerment and transform the
harmful social standards, particularly at the community
level. Engagement with faith-based leaders and other
opinion makers to counter unacceptable religious
justifications for violence and reduce the stigma faced
by Victims is also essential.

It is also necessary for conflict prevention and
peacebuilding efforts to have a strong gender focus,
including the consideration of sexual violence in
negotiations and peace agreements. The approach
in the fight against terrorism and violent extremism,
including the work of the sanctions committees, should
be revised in order to integrate gender issues and the
question of sexual violence. Similarly, greater efforts
should be made in order to prevent impunity, including
the referral of cases to the International Criminal Court
when necessary. It is also important to ensure, in the
Organization's peacekeeping missions, the inclusion
of stronger mandates in this area and the necessary
provisions in their budgets to finance posts for gender
and women protection adviser.

The United Nations represents the last glimmer of
hope for many communities and we cannot fail at this
crucial time in the victims' lives. Sexual exploitation
and abuse committed by personnel of the Organization
damage perceptions of the United Nations and its
credibility, and prevent the implementation of mandates.
We urge the departments responsible and countries that
contribute troops, police and civilian personnel to abide
strictly by the zero-tolerance policy. In that regard,
we support the protection measures described in the
report on special measures for protection from sexual
exploitation and sexual abuse (A/69/779) and proposals
to enforce the prohibition of such conduct, contained in
staff regulations.

On the twentieth anniversary of Beijing, the
international community must send a strong message
about the empowerment of women as a prerequisite for
building lasting peace.

