Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
The commemoration in July this year of the twentieth
anniversary of the Srebrenica genocide, described by
Secretary-General Kofi Annan as "the worst crime
committed on European soil since the Second World
War", in which more than 8,000 people were killed and
more 25,000 women and girls were forcibly deported,
many of them after being subjected to rape and torture,
is not only a sad reminder but also a deep commitment
to the principle of "never again". That is why the debate
you and your delegation have called, Mr. President, is
so timely.

I welcome each of the briefings made by the
different persons invited to inform us at this meeting of
the Security Council on the protection of civilians with
a special focus on the situation of women. I recall the
most recent briefing to the Security Council, in October
2014, by Executive Director of the United Nations
Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women, Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka, in which she discussed
the chasm that exists and persists between what is and
what should be, between the facts and the law (see S/PV.7289).

IfI may, I would like to evoke an initiative of the
current president of Chile when, in her first term, she
invited Chilean society to make a new social contract, a
new covenant, a covenant that will have equality as its
substance and point of View, including the fundamental
equality between men and women. In that same spirit, I
want to draw the Security Council 's attention to what
is being discussed in other organs.

The post-2015 agenda is not just a set of good
and clear ideas; it is the substantive pressure brought
to bear by the ideal of our time. And that is why this
agenda is destined to become a new social, economic,
environmental contract at the global level which we all
need. This agenda will certainly have an impact on the
international peace and security the Council is charged
with overseeing. This agenda, based on an ideal that
is known and felt to be urgent, complex, ambitious, is
a political ideal etched with compassion and insight
with respect to the geography of this global, uncertain,
interdependent, fearful, dynamic, violent world. It is a
necessary agenda because if humankind were content
and the world were full of wonders then this agenda
post-2015 would have no justification whatsoever.

And we are acting with awareness of how far we
have come far but also, and to a greater extent, of how far
we still have to go. This year, in which our Organization
celebrates 70 years of existence, whose ideal embodied
in the Charter and in the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, adopted on 10 December 1948 by the
General Assembly tells us that freedom, justice and
peace in the world are based on the recognition of the
inherent dignity of all members of the human family
and of their equal and inalienable rights. The people
of the United Nations have reaffirmed in the Charter
their faith in fundamental human rights and dignity and
value of the human person and the equal rights of men
and women.

We will not go through all the articles, but without
fear of error we could affirm that the ideals in the Charter
and the Declaration of Human Rights are contained
in the post-2015 goals, in particular with respect to
the cause of women, which is none other than that of
equality and freedom. When we proposed to make
poverty a priority, we did so not because we believe
or think that all poor people are good but because the
poor are poor. In that context, we also have to work
for freedom and equality for women not because we
believe that women are blameless but because they are
human and have the right to dignity.

If we were to make equality and freedom as the
right of all people, there would have no place for
violence against women neither in conflict or post-
conflict situations or in peacetime. Until now, however,
we have not been able to prevent forced marriage from
affecting more than 400 million women worldwide,
nor have we been able to innovate ethically. We will
not be able to prevent it from extending to more than
142 million girls during this decade. Until now, it has
been very difficult to prevent 86 million girls around
the world from suffering mutilation of their external
genitalia from here to 2030 if the practice continues
at the current pace. Until now, world hunger does not
spare women, who represent a little more than half of
the world population; in fact, of the 842 million people
who are hungry more than 60 per cent of them are
women. About half of all pregnant women have anemia.
Until now, and beyond the progress made, if we take a
snapshot picture of the state of education worldwide the
image we would get would show us that of the number
of children not attending school, around 93 million,
most of whom are girls.

With regard to the world of work, in particular
the world of paid work, if we exclude women in the
agricultural sector we find that more than 60 per
cent of female workers are in informal employment.
And what can be said of human trafficking? It is a
big business, as is that of weapons, amounting to
$32 billion dollars annually. And who tends to be the
victims of that trafficking? We are - women and girls.
We have been unable to save 66,000 women per year
from falling victim to femicide; the over 500,000 whose
lives are repeatedly put in danger; or the 70 per cent of
women who will experience violence at some point in
their lives; or prevent the abuse of a woman every 18
seconds somewhere in the world. And why have been
unable to prevent all of this? It is because women's
equality and freedom need to be more than just an idea;
they have to be a reality, a feeling, and an expression
of will. If gender equality and freedom could be the
mere manifestation of an idea, then the statistics Ijust
shared, which highlight the suffering and humiliation
of millions of women in times of conflict, post-conflict
and peace, would not exist.

We have come together here today to say that we did
not choose to be born women, but once we were born,
we came to learn that we needed to act collectively to
prevent the de facto entrenchment of the idea that being
a woman is equal to being nothing, that our bodies can
be used as weapons of war. We are discovering little
by little that throughout the world this emanicpation
involves efforts to prevent any and all attempts to make
our lives, be it in times of conflict or peace, a constant
punishment, a source of shame and inequality simply
because we are women.

All women and many men feel that this is the case.
While there is a single woman who lives in terror due to
the simple fact that she is a woman, those who are more
fortunate will not be at case. We know this not because
we are good, but because since our births we have had
this reality and perpetual disgrace before our very
eyes. We know it is possible and plausible to humiliate
women with impunity everyday in conflict and post-
conflict situations and in times ofpeace. The world will
not be viable, economically fairer, environmentally
sustainable or more socially inclusive if it is ethically
regressive.

Some of those present might ask, "Well, what
innovative ideas have you brought?" To that, I would
say "none". And that is the worst part. I am repeating
what has already been said in the Charter of our
Organization. I am saying what has already been said
in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. I am
repeating what the victims have said in conflict and
post-conflict situations and in times of peace.

The World Food Programme launched an amazing
programme that has provided fuel-efficient stoves to
more than 2 million people over the past few years
and improved the living conditions of all families it
has touched in those countries where it operates. Did
it launch that programme so that men and women could
prepare their meals with greater peace of mind and
in relative comfort? No. Does anyone know why the
World Food Programme was launched? It was launched
in situations of conflict because those fuel-efficient
stoves made it possible for women to avoid leaving
their shelters for a number of days in search of fuel,
where doing so would have ended in their rape and
humiliation.

The Council and this world can do much. We
acknowledge the pioneering role played by resolution
1325 (2000), but we should all move beyond ideas that
are merely clear or different, and toward a set of ethics,
and the will to transform those ideas about gender
equality and the freedom of women into a reality. The
dignity of the human race, as well as international
peace and security, are at stake.

