Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): Belgium of course fully aligns itself with
the statement just made by the observer of the the
European Union, and I would like to add the following
observations in my national capacity.

First, we would like to begin by congratulating Dr.
Denis Mukwege and Ms. Nadia Murad Basee Taha, who
were awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in recognition of
their fight against sexual violence as a weapon of war.
Belgium has been fortunate enough to work closely
with both Dr. Mukwege and Ms. Murad and remains
firmly committed to supporting their cause.

The women and peace and security agenda has

been one of the pillars of our foreign policy for almost
20 years and will therefore also be an important priority
during our forthcoming term on the Security Council
for the next two years. It is essential that we continue to
translate the Council's resolutions into concrete action.

Belgium shares the view of the Secretary-General
on the importance of women's active participation in
conflict prevention and resolution. That is why we
advocate for more women at the negotiating table,
in peace processes and mediation efforts - in Syria
and Yemen, for example - as well as in elections.
Peace agreements and processes that take into account
women's voices and examine the impact of conflict on
women are more sustainable in the long term, as many
speakers before me have said. Women must be more
involved so that they can become agents for peace in
their communities and countries. In that regard, we
would like to recommend some concrete actions.

First, the Council itself should listen more
carefully to the voices of women, for example by
increasing the number of statements by representatives
of women's organizations during Council discussions
on peacekeeping operations, and by meeting with
women's organizations during the Council's country
visits. Secondly, we need more women in peacekeeping
operations and in security-sector reform. We must
also continue to support gender advisers under current
mandates. Thirdly, we must encourage women's
participation in peace processes and agreements and
consider how to involve them at an earlier stage of the
process. Belgium hosted a seminar in April devoted to
the issue in collaboration with the African Union.

Finally, we can all act at the national level. Belgium
is currently implementing its third national action plan
on women and peace and security. An example of
concrete action within its framework is our support for
a five-year civil-society programme in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo on women's participation in
conflict-resolution mechanisms.

