The Secretary-General: The women and peace
and security agenda is clearly one of the top priorities
of the United Nations as a whole. We see that in the
adoption of a great many resolutions by the Security
Council, including landmark resolution 1325 (2000)
and its many follow-up decisions. We see it in the global
recognition of the central role that women must play in
preventing and resolving conflicts. And we see it when
we gather to discuss the issue. That is always when the
Chamber is at its fullest and the list of speakers is the
longest. We have exactly that same situation today.

Given such strong support and common
understanding, an observer might be forgiven for
thinking that things are substantially improving. But
the sad fact is - and we must be blunt about it - that
the commitment that is always reflected around this
table is not translating into real change around the
world. It is not coming fast enough or far enough.
Change is coming at a pace that is too slow for the
women and girls whose lives depend on it, and for the
effectiveness of our efforts to maintain international
peace and security.

Nearly two decades after resolution 1325 (2000)
was adopted, women still face exclusion from many
peace and political processes. Peace agreements are
adopted without provisions that consider the needs and
priorities of women and girls. A pitifully small 0.2 per
cent of bilateral aid to fragile and conflict-affected
situations goes to women's organizations. The number
of attacks against women human rights defenders,
humanitarians and peacebuilders continues to increase.
Sexual and gender-based violence continues to be
used as a weapon of war, with the survivors of such
violence often left without justice or support. This year
alone, millions of women and girls were in need of
life-saving sexual and reproductive health services, and
millions more required interventions to prevent sexual
and gender-based violence. There is also a growing
number of armed groups for which gender inequality
is a strategic objective, and misogyny part of their core
ideology. And, of course, we know that women and
girls continue to suffer the consequences of conflict in
general. To cite just one example, in north-east Syria,
we saw thousands of women and children fleeing the
latest violence. But despite this grim litany, we will not
give up. This, for me, is an absolute priority.

We can report at least some progress. In Yemen,
where women were absent from the formal rounds
of consultations, my Special Envoy established a
Yemeni women's technical advisory group to ensure
that the perspectives of Yemeni women are included.
In Guinea-Bissau, women played a direct role in
breaking the political impasse last year, supported
by the Peacebuilding Fund. They led unprecedented
mobilization for parity laws requiring a minimum of
36 per cent of women on the ballot, and they were key
to the success of the elections this year. There were
record numbers of women candidates and voters, and
the country achieved parity among ministerial posts. In
Syria, women make up approximately 30 per cent ofthe
new Constitutional Committee, including some from
the Women's Advisory Board that has been working for
peace all these years.

Within the United Nations itself, the Department of
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and the Department
of Peace Operations are implementing a new and stronger
policy on women and peace and security. All heads of
special political missions and my Special Envoys have

been instructed to report regularly on their efforts to
promote women's direct participation throughout all
stages of peace processes, in ways that ensure they have
influence over the outcomes. An objective related to
women and peace and security has now been included
in all senior managers' compacts related to peace and
security mandates. In our peacekeeping operations, we
are working to end sexual exploitation and abuse and
increase women's participation. Incidents of sexual
exploitation and abuse have been reduced by half, and
we are finally moving the needle on the percentage of
women in the military and the police components of
our operations. I have appointed many more women as
heads and deputy heads of missions, and we are pursuing
emergency measures to achieve gender balance.

Women and peace and security is one of the
eight priority pillars of our Action for Peacekeeping
initiative, endorsed now by more than 150 countries. I
have also requested peacekeeping and special political
missions to improve their monitoring and reporting of
threats and violence against activists, including women
human rights defenders, and for that to be built into
early warning signs of escalating conflict or instability.
Without a gender analysis, we are operating on partial
information and are unable to anticipate and respond
effectively to early warnings.

Today we recognize both progress and how much
more we must do. When we fall short, women, girls
and all members of society suffer the consequences. A
failure to act on women's rights and the principles of
the women and peace and security agenda bring about
enormous costs. Let us work together to change the
narrative and improve, through implementation, the
situation on the ground.

