Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): On behalf
of France, I would like to begin by expressing our
deepest condolences and sincere sympathy to all those
who have been struck by the tragic terrorist attacks
over the past two days.

Allow me to warmly thank the Spanish presidency
for organizing this especially important debate and to
congratulate it for its tireless efforts that have led to
the adoption of resolution 2331 (2016). It is an excellent
illustration of the outstanding Spanish presidency and
the exceptional work carried out by its Ambassador to
the United Nations and his team. I would also like to
express my gratitude to the Secretary-General for his
presence here and for his commitment to the topic,
as well as to Ms. Bangura and Mr. Fedotov for their
always enlightening briefings. Finally, I would also
like to particularly thank Ms. Ameena Saeed Hasan
and Ms. Nadia Murad Basee Taha for their moving
testimonies, the reminder that they have offered us and
their fight, which is also our fight.

France aligns itself with the statement that will
be made by the Anti-Trafficking Coordinator of the
European Union.

Trafficking in persons is one of the most profitable
and widespread means of trafficking around the world.
The actions committed by Da'esh and Boko Haram
dramatically illustrate the link between trafficking of
persons, often related to sexual violence, and terrorism.
For those terrorist groups, the first victims claimed
are generally women and children. And trafficking
in persons is not only a way of sowing terror among
civilian populations, but it is also used as a source of
financing or recruitment tool.

In Syria women suffer the worst types of
atrocities - rape, forced marriage and prostitution are
the daily lot for the people who live in the areas controlled
by Da'esh. Da'esh has established an actual market in
Iraq, where women and girls from minorities, such as
Yazidis or Christians, are sold to be used as sexual
slaves. The United Nations Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic
confirmed in its June 2016 report to the Human Rights
Council that crimes against humanity and crimes of
genocide were committed by Da'esh against young
Yazidi women. In West Africa, particularly in Nigeria,
Boko Haram has tortured, raped and held as prisoners
hundreds of women and children.

Those acts are not only unacceptable from a
moral point of view, but they constitute war crimes,
crimes against humanity and, in some cases, crimes of
genocide. Terrorist groups that commit such atrocities
take what it means to be human to new lows. Those
responsible for such crimes will be held accountable
before the court of law. To confront such crimes, we
must act in the name of protection - protection of
civilians, obviously, especially of women and children,
but also protection of international humanitarian law
and the very principles of our Organization.

For France, the fight against trafficking in persons,
especially in women and children, and the fight against
sexual violence committed against them in situations
of conflict, is an absolute top priority. Such priority
has led France to take action on the various fronts in
this important fight. France is involved in numerous
bilateral and regional cooperation efforts to help the
most vulnerable States in confronting such a scourge.
France also actively participates in capacity-building
programmes of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC), particularly in West Africa. And my
country has been the largest contributor to the UNODC
funds for human trafficking since its establishment
in 2010.

France has spared no effort, and will spare no
effort, to mobilize the international community in
this fight. Following the conference that took place
in Paris in September 2015 on the victims of religious
and ethnic violence in the Middle East, during France's
presidency of the Council in June we organized a debate
(see S/PV.7704) on trafficking in persons and sexual
violence in conflict situations. We commend the fact
that some of the recommendations formulated during
that debate were reflected in resolution 2331 (2016),
presented by Spain. Finally, UNODC will present
tomorrow, with the support of France, its biennial
global report on trafficking in persons.

The Security Council shoulders a collective
responsibility in the fight against trafficking in persons
in conflict situations. We have at our disposal the
relevant international legal framework - the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and its protocols, including the protocol dedicated
to combating human trafficking. It is within that
framework that we need to strengthen our engagement.
Human trafficking and sexual violence committed
in situations of conflict are too often considered as
separate from the threats to international peace and
security that are reviewed by the Security Council. In
fact, those practices are part and parcel of the strategies
of such terrorist groups as Da'esh and Boko Haram, and
indeed are a threat to international peace and security.
As the threat of terrorism evolves, we must evolve with
it.

I would therefore like to conclude by echoing
one of the main messages of the resolution: the need
to better take into account the link between human
trafficking, sexual violence and terrorism, which for the
very first time has been clearly recognized as a threat
to international peace and security - a potentially
crucial breakthrough. Following presidential statement
S/PRST/2015/25, adopted in December 2015, the
Council has taken a major step forward today. On
that basis, a more in depth analysis of the threat and
identification of the individuals and entities that,
through their actions, are involved in human trafficking,
is necessary. That work should be carried out jointly by
the entities in charge of the fight against terrorism in
the United Nations: the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and the Office of the Special Representative
on Sexual Violence in Conflict.

In the face of such appalling crimes and challenges
to human conscience, it is our collective responsibility
to act in order to put an end to those crimes and
prosecute those responsible for such actions without
let-up. The resolution that we have adopted today gives
us additional legal instruments to move ahead in that
direction. Let us unite our efforts to make the best
possible use of those instruments.

