Mr. McNee (Canada): On behalf of the
Government of Canada, I would like to thank Japan for
having convened this open debate today. I would also
like to thank today's speakers for having demonstrated
how important our continued commitment is in moving
the women, peace and security agenda forward.

Canada fully endorses the statement to be made
later today by the representative of Slovenia on behalf
on the Human Security Network.

As we mark the sixth anniversary of the adoption
of Council resolution 1325 (2000) and welcome the
Secretary-General's in-depth study on violence against
women (A/6l/l22/Add.l), Canada calls on the Security
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission to
intensify efforts to address all acts of gender-based
violence against women and girls and to eliminate
impunity for such violence so that women can play a
full role in the reconstruction of their communities and
benefit from the dividends of peace.
In this respect, we have seen some positive steps
forward. In April of this year, the Council adopted
resolution 1674 (2006), on the protection of civilians.
That resolution includes strong provisions for
prioritizing civilian protection as part of peace support
operations and for addressing sexual and gender-based
violence.

As with many issues that come before the
Council for action, the women, peace and security
agenda is not an abstract political concept. In Burundi,
we have witnessed the positive impact of women's
participation in peace negotiations. In Afghanistan, we
have witnessed the strength and commitment of women
who fought to enshrine equal rights in their
constitution. In post-genocide Rwanda, women have
captured a record number of seats in the elected
assembly. Such gains need to be protected and built
upon so as to ensure their long-lasting positive effects.

The Council is well aware, however - as is the
wider international community - that effective and
sustainable peace, justice and security will not be
achieved if we do not consider all the related activities
through a gender lens. In order for peace consolidation
to integrate gender equality and women's rights
effectively, we need to focus both on the increased
direct participation of women in peace processes and
on institutional reform that is aware of gender. Without
this two-pronged approach, peace consolidation will
not be realized.

Last week, Canada co-hosted a panel discussion
with the United Nations Development Fund for Women
to discuss women's priorities in peace consolidation,
especially in the areas of gender justice, security-sector
reform and good governance, and to discuss the critical
nature of operationalizing resolution 1325 (2000) in its
work. Canada warmly welcomes the recent
appointment of Carolyn McAskie as Assistant
Secretary-General, Peacebuilding Support Office, and
would like to thank her for her deep commitment and
her continuing engagement on this important agenda.

The Council's direct role in ensuring that women
participate at all levels in peace consolidation and that
gender equality is integrated throughout all peace and
security activities is now well established. The
Peacebuilding Commission also shares this
responsibility and recently reaffirmed - at its first
country-specific meetings on Burundi and on Sierra
Leone - the centrality of resolution 1325 (2000) to its
work.

Canada welcomes the Council's pledge, and that
of the Peacebuilding Commission and the wider
international community, to take steps to promote
gender equality and support the empowerment of
women. However, Canada is also aware that, as noted
by the Secretary-General in his current report to the
Council on women, peace and security (S/2006/770),
attention to gender equality has not been systematically
integrated. In this regard, Canada would like to stress
the increasing need for effective monitoring systems,
including systematic sex-disaggregated data collection,
and more concrete accountability and reporting
mechanisms in all areas related to resolution 1325
(2000).

(spoke in French)

In addition, it is important that we build an
effective international capacity to prevent and respond
to situations in which civilians, particularly women,
are at high risk. Canada will continue to monitor the
implementation by the Council of its commitments,
particularly in country-specific contexts, and to support
work that enhances the efforts of the Council and the
wider international community in this area. Such
efforts include ensuring that gender-equality concerns
are integrated into Council resolutions establishing or
extending peacekeeping missions and are included in
terms of reference for Council missions and mission
reports.

In addition, Canada urges the Peacebuilding
Commission to develop modalities to ensure the active
participation of civil society and representative
women's organizations in all areas of its work and to
make sure that women's groups actively contribute to
peacebuilding and long-term development strategies
from the outset.

Canada also calls on the Peacebuilding
Commission to adopt an internal policy on gender
mainstreaming in its structure and operations. This
could include integrating a gender-based analysis in its
arrangements for the management, disbursement and
use of the new Peacebuilding Fund. Additionally,
Canada believes strongly that the Peacebuilding
Support Office would benefit from a permanent gender
adviser position at the senior management level.
The Council can succeed in establishing
sustainable peace and security only if it fully
recognizes the contribution that women make to their
future and to the future of their nations.

