The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Viet Nam.

This debate is of great significance in preparing
for the review of 10 years of the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, adopted by the Security Council in 2000. That
resolution has the profoundly humane objective of
protecting women and children, including girls, who
are the most vulnerable and most heavily affected in
conflicts and wars. It is also aimed at promoting more
effective implementation of the Council's primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security.

Viet Nam values the support of Council members
for its proposal that this debate be convened on the
need to protect the rights of women and girls and to
promote the role of women in post-conflict situations.
With this debate, United Nations Members,
international organizations and other stakeholders will
jointly take stock of and set out measures to enhance
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). In
preparing for this undertaking, Viet Nam and
Switzerland jointly organized a seminar on women,
peace, security and development, held in Hanoi in July
2009, with the participation of United Nations
representatives and Vietnamese and international
non-governmental organizations.

The enormous international efforts, including
those of the United Nations, to promote the
implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008) and of the relevant presidential statements of
the Security Council have produced positive results. Of
primary significance is the greater recognition that the
maintenance of peace and security requires measures to
meet the needs of women. It is also necessary to ensure
their full and equal participation in reconciliation and
negotiation processes, in all stages of peacekeeping, in
the management of humanitarian aid and in post-
conflict reconstruction.

Activities carried out by the United Nations and
by many countries have brought about noticeable
changes in a number of specific areas. However, there
are problems and challenges, especially in the post-
conflict period. This includes women's limited
contributions to peacebuilding owing to the lack of
opportunities for their participation in policymaking
and to the shortage of financial resources required for
an effective response to their pressing needs.

In order to achieve tangible results, resolution
1325 (2000), resolution 1820 (2008) and resolution
1888 (2009), which was just adopted on 30 September,
should be implemented in a coherent and comprehensive
manner. Viet Nam supports the Secretary-General's
recommendations included in his report to the Council
dated 16 September 2009 (S/2009/465) and shares
many of the views expressed during this debate.

From our own experience in dealing with the
multifaceted consequences of war and in promoting
national development and the rights of women and
children, Viet Nam underlines the following points.

First, we need to fully recognize the primacy of
eliminating the causes of conflicts and preventing and
peacefully resolving international disputes. Measures
to protect the rights of women and girls must be
combined with promotion of their role in ending

conflicts and in post-conflict reconstruction. The early
integration of their priorities into the reconstruction
efforts will create favourable preconditions for the
coherent and long-term implementation of the
necessary measures.

Secondly, the reconstruction process requires
comprehensive efforts to meet people's basic needs in
food, housing, health care, education, dealing with
psychological shocks, restoration of infrastructure and
consolidation of social institutions, including the
important role of the family. The State and society need
to pay full attention to both civilian women and those
who served in armed forces or were otherwise involved
in military activities.

Thirdly, the United Nations system has a special
role to play in conflict settlement and post-conflict
reconstruction, as mandated by the Member States. It
has gained experience and knowledge in various fields.
It is essential to promote local governments and
people's ownership. Assistance may take different
forms depending on the specific conditions of each
country. It is necessary to have close coordination
among United Nations bodies and between the United
Nations and other partners.

In 1977, shortly after the end of the war and
national reunification, the United Nations General
Assembly adopted resolution 32/3 to call on countries
and international organizations to help Viet Nam in its
reconstruction efforts. In the past 30 years, the United
Nations and other international organizations and
countries have effectively carried out many
development projects to assist Viet Nam, including
those aimed at meeting the basic needs of women and
ensuring their equal participation in all aspects of
socio-political life in Viet Nam. On behalf of the
Government and people of Viet Nam, I take this
opportunity to express our deep gratitude to the United
Nations and countries and development partners for
their valuable support in the processes of healing the
war wounds and of reform and development.

As a nation having experienced untold losses
caused by wars, Viet Nam always supports the common
efforts of the international community to prevent wars
and protect peace. This is also the consistent guiding
principle of Viet Nam in its participation in the work of
the Security Council. With that spirit, we are ready to
share experience and play an active role in the
undertaking that we are discussing today.
I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of
Liechtenstein.

