Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): I thank you, Sir, for
conducting this meeting today. I know that, in the next
few days, you will be returning home to a warm, sunny
Namibia - for a while, I hope - and I just want to
pay tribute to you and to tell you before this body that
you have made us proud to be people of southern
Africa and, more importantly, to be Africans. Your
stewardship in the General Assembly and in this body
has made us keep the faith that things could, indeed,
get better. I thank you very, very much for everything
you have done for us during your term of visit in New
York.

In our commitment to dealing with conflicts in a
comprehensive manner, including addressing the root
causes of conflicts, we must acknowledge that the
widespread exclusion of women from political and
economic decision-making is a significant obstacle to
the realization of sustainable global peace and security.
In other words, and as was so concisely summed up in
a very powerful and simple statement in the final
declaration of the All-Party Burundi Women's Peace
Conference, held in Arusha from 17 to 20 July 2000,
"women's rights are human rights".

The significance of women's active contributions
to South Africa's liberation and their relevance to
today's debate go far beyond South Africa, our
subregion and even our continent. Indeed, for South
Africa and the rest of us in the region of the Southern
African Development Community, this topic has
special relevance, bearing in mind the critical and
essential roles played by women in our struggles for
liberation from colonization, apartheid, conflict and
repression. These women, and many others elsewhere
in the world, have demonstrated that women have an
indispensable social, political and economic role to
play in bringing about sustainable peace and security.

It was for this reason that, on 9 August this year,
at our National Women's Day celebrations, the South
African President dedicated a monument in tribute to
the role played by women in shaping a democratic,
non-racist and non-sexist South Africa. In that
ceremony, President Mbeki unveiled the portraits of
courageous and dedicated women leaders, such as
Lilian Ngoyi, Helen Joseph, Raheema Moosa and
Sophie de Bruyn. These leaders were at the forefront of
the struggle for a just society in South Africa. We pay
special tribute to them for their role in leading the mass
defiance campaigns against apartheid legislation and to
the many unsung heroines of that struggle, which
culminated in 1956 with a march by tens of thousands
of women to Pretoria. Thanks to the positive examples
and contributions of pioneering leaders such as these,
South Africa is today committed to achieving and
sustaining equal participation and representation of
women in our Parliament and Government, which
currently stand at about 30 per cent.

It is true that, in today's conflicts, it is civilians,
and women and children in particular, who bear the
brunt of gross abuses of human rights. There is another
dimension, however, and we need to move beyond the
limited approach of portraying women solely as
victims in conflicts.

For all societies in this world, and more so for
societies in conflict, women play a key role in
sustaining both the family and the wider community. In
many developing countries, our communities are
fracturing under the combined weight of internecine
conflicts, poverty, communicable diseases such as
HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria, mass
urbanization, economic restructuring and other effects
of globalization. More often than not, it is the working
women who must quite literally put bread on the table
and hold families together.

Given the central role that women play in the
social, political and economic development of our
societies, it is morally right and logical that the full
realization of equal political and economic rights for
women must be treated as an essential component of
our collective approach to preventing and resolving
conflicts.

In Africa, where there are already signs that there
is a political and economic revival, it is clear that
women have played, must play and will continue to
play a full role in the renaissance of our continent.
Anything less, therefore, would be short-sighted, and
despite our best intentions, our collective commitment
to address the root causes of conflicts will come to
naught unless women are afforded an equal role.

In her address to the General Assembly on 13
September 2000, South Africa's Foreign Minister,
Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, said,

"The founders of the United Nations based the
Charter on the assertion of human dignity, human
rights and the equality of women and men and the
aim of promoting better social standards.
(A/55/PV.]3, p.]])

The equality of women and men still
remains a subject of great concern. All we need to
do is look around this Hall to realize how far we
are from realizing the vision of the founding
Members of the United Nations. Secondly, the
feminization of poverty is a big problem. The
marginalization of women, both in their countries
and in the multilateral forums, means that our
countries and organizations, including the United
Nations, are functioning at half-capacity and are
deprived of the unique qualities, energies and
creativity that women would bring." (ibid., p.12)
We have all already agreed that the root causes of

conflict are poverty, disease, lack of education, lack of
human and political rights and a lack of economic
opportunity and justice. We must now equally agree
that we cannot adequately address these problems if we
exclude over half of humanity from enjoying these
rights. Neither can we do so if we continue to prevent
womankind from participating in the process of finding
and implementing solutions.

As a minimum, we suggest that we must pay
special attention to the impact of armed conflicts on the
rights of women and girls and promote and implement
specific strategies to protect and assist women and girls
in armed conflicts. We must promote strategies that
maximize women's participation in domestic, regional
and international conflict prevention, management and
resolution initiatives. The United Nations must set an
example by making sure women are represented
adequately at all decision- -making levels. In addition,
we must promote and strengthen women's participation
in comprehensive post- conflict peace- building
initiatives, including in such areas as electoral,
constitutional, legal and judicial reforms.

In conclusion, let me say that it is my
delegation's hope that today's debate in the Security
Council will strengthen existing efforts in the United
Nations system, including in the General Assembly and
in the relevant United Nations agencies, to improve the
status of women globally.

My delegation would like to express its profound
thanks to the presidency of the Council for this month
for placing the issue of women and peace and security
on the agenda. We also welcome the transparent and
participatory approach adopted by the presidency this
month in arranging today's debate. The imaginative use
of the Arria formula to hold yesterday's consultations
between Council members and non-State actors from
international women's rights organizations and other
human rights organizations is further welcome, as they
have much to offer our deliberations and decisions.

This is further evidence of the positive trend
towards the adoption of more open working methods
and procedures in the Security Council. We indeed
appreciate that.

