Ms. Murad (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Secretary-General, the Government
of Germany and you, Mr. President, its Minister for
Foreign Affairs, as well as the members of the Council,
for giving me the opportunity to participate in this
important open debate on the crimes of sexual violence
committed against women all over the world, which
have become a dangerous problem that requires all of
us to respond and find solutions to. I am happy that
today the Council has decided to discuss the issue,
which concerns us all.

When we speak about systematic sexual violence
crimes in modern times, we cannot fail to discuss what
Da'esh did to Yezidi women in Iraq and Syria, enslaving
thousands of Yezidi women and girls in front of local
and international communities while no one intervened
to stop them. The genocide against Yezidis is still
ongoing, and the social fabric of an entire community
has been torn to shreds. Da'esh has crushed the hopes
and aspirations of entire generations and has prevented
us from practicing our customs and traditions. It has
forced the people who survived the genocide to live in
camps without the most basic means of subsistence.
There are dozens of mass graves across our entire
region. Yezidi women were captured and sold as slaves
and used as a weapon against our community.

Having been unable - or to be more accurate,
having failed to protect women and children from
sexual slavery and a small minority population from
genocide - we, as an international community and
as human beings, should take on the responsibility
of rescuing and freeing those who have been missing
since 2014 and are still in captivity. We have repeatedly
demanded that the international community, States and
Governments establish a working group to save Yezidi
women and children, but to no avail. Our appeals fell on
deaf ears. The result has been our collective failure. We
know very well that these women have been subjected
to sexual violence and have been bought and sold by
Da'esh in Iraq and Syria. What is stopping us from
saving them? Thousands of victims and survivors are
living today in deplorable conditions in displacement
camps, traumatized and suffering from the sexual
violence that was inflicted on them. What I want to
say is that while there are some steps that we can take
to prevent crimes of sexual violence, when we do not
prevent them we must shoulder our responsibility to act
by providing every possible support to those who have
faced sexual violence.

My Yezidi women colleagues who were subjected
to sexual violence at the hands of Da'esh broke the
barrier of silence, stigma and fear and told their
stories openly, in the hope that this would bring them
justice and support and encourage the international
community to put an end to such crimes. However,
so far not a single person has been tried for sexual
enslavement crimes against Yezidi women, and more
than 350,000 Yazidis are still displaced in camps. That
is nearly 80 per cent of Iraq's Yezidi population. Almost
five years after the genocide of my people occurred in
front of the international community, no serious steps
have been taken to save those who are left. We make
statements at the United Nations, but there have been no
practical measures, such as reconstructing our regions,
bringing perpetrators to justice or returning victims
and displaced persons to their homes. We need serious
action on the ground, not slogans.

We were hoping that our testimonies would bring
members of Da'esh to justice. But thousands of them
are still free today and thousands more have been
detained but not tried. What we are demanding today
is that the perpetrators of genocide and those who used
Yezidi women as a weapon of war be brought to justice.
They must be brought before a specialized international
tribunal and prosecuted for perpetrating genocide and
crimes of sexual violence against women and children.
That would send a message to others and help to prevent
similar crimes in future.

Lastly, the Security Council's adoption of resolution
2379 (2017), establishing an investigative team to
investigate crimes committed by Da'esh, support
accountability and achieve justice for the victims, was a
step in the right direction, even if it came late. We hope
that the Council will continue to support Mr. Karim
Khan and the United Nations Investigative Team for the
Promotion of Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da'esh/ISIL in Iraq as they continue to collect evidence.
It is also the duty of the Council and the international
community to draft a resolution that guarantees full
support for the victims of sexual violence, including on
the material, psychological and health fronts.

