Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I thank you,
Madam, for convening today's important debate.
I would like to express my delegation's sincere
appreciation to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
Special Representative Zainab Hawa Bangura and
non-governmental organization representative Rhoda
Misaka for their briefings and statements.

We have made progress over the past several years
in combatting conflict-related sexual violence. Since
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) in particular,
a gender perspective has been increasingly integrated
into key United Nations mandates.

In spite of those institutional gains, sexual violence
in conflict remains one of the most egregious forms
of human rights violations. Its impact goes far beyond
an individual victim's pain and stigma. Even more
troubling is the fact that sexual Violence is often used
as a tactic of armed conflict. As noted in the report of
the Secretary-General (S/20l4/181), sexual violence is
wielded to attack specific ethnic and religious groups,
used to displace civilians and unleashed to encourage
predatory behaviour. The international community
must scale up its collective efforts to combat the
scourge, especially in the three areas of prevention,
protection and prosecution.

First, we must strengthen the prevention of conflict-
related sexual violence, establishing legal frameworks,
promoting improved governance and the rule of law and
raising public awareness; those are just some examples
of the concrete actions we need to take. In that way, we
believe that the Global Summit to End Sexual Violence
in Conflict, to be held in London in June, will provide
an opportunity to mobilize political commitments and
promote public awareness. In addition, the participation
of women together with the mainstreaming of a gender
perspective in conflict resolution and peace processes
should be ensured. Women can and must play multiple
roles during periods of armed conflicts, as they often
demonstrate resilience and ingenuity in the face of
extreme adversity.

Secondly, we should pay increased attention to the
protection of women facing rape, sexual slavery and
other forms sexual violence in conflict. Building the
capacity of national institutions and promoting relevant
legislation and resource allocation are prerequisites
for providing sustainable assistance to victims
and survivors. At the same time, we must enhance
international frameworks and tangible measures to
protect women suffering from sexual violence in
conflict. In that regard, we recognize the crucial role
of peacekeeping operations and women protection
advisers.

Thirdly, the politics of impunity should be
terminated through the investigation and prosecution
of perpetrators of sexual Violence. We cannot eradicate
conflict-related sexual violence completely without
bringing those responsible to justice. We note the
contributions of the Team of Experts-Rule of Law/
Sexual Violence in Conflict in building national
capacity and expanding expertise in addressing
impunity. The international justice system, including
the International Criminal Court, should also play a
leading role in ensuring accountability.

To conclude, the Republic of Korea as a strong
supporter of resolution 1325 (2000) and the preventing
sexual violence initiative reaffirms its commitment to
international efforts to combat sexual-related violence.

