Mr. Sparber (Liechtenstein): We thank you,
Mr. President, and Minister Von der Leyen for convening
this open debate on an important and timely topic.
Stronger political will and leadership are needed
to empower women to participate fully in all stages
of building peace, particularly in times of political
transition. It is therefore important that women's
representation in peacekeeping contingents increase
rapidly. The inclusion of women at all stages of the
conflict cycle must be one element of a broader change
towards a system based on full equality and free from
gender stereotypes that have historically kept women
away from police and military roles.

Women peacekeepers improve the operational
effectiveness, accessibility and credibility of
peacekeeping missions by providing contingents
with diverse perspectives and a broad range of skills.
According to studies, women peacekeepers help
strengthen relationships with communities, including by
being able to access information from populations and
venues that are closed off to men. Strong relationships
with communities lead to more successful dispute
resolution and strengthen the ability of missions to fulfil
their mandates, including the protection of civilians.

Women's participation in the security sector is
associated with fewer misconduct complaints and
improved citizens' perceptions of force integrity.
Women help to mainstream a gender perspective
across all components and operations of a mission and
facilitate a cultural change that disrupts harmful gender
stereotypes. A visible presence of female peacekeepers
empowers women and girls in host communities and
can raise women's participation rates in local police
and military forces, improving the capacity of national
forces to take over security responsibilities. Women's
participation in peacekeeping also contributes to
achieving Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 5, on
gender equality, and SDG 16, on peace, justice and
strong institutions, both of which are catalysts for the
successful implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.

We note the importance of resolution 2242 (2015) in
encouraging the deployment of women and the precedent
it sets, particularly in its endorsement of incentives to
bolster numbers of female peacekeepers. We support
the measures aimed at implementing its provisions as
part of the Secretary-General's system-wide strategy
on gender parity. At the same time, more consistent
mission mandates are needed on issues pertaining to
women and peace and security. In 2017, only 16 per cent
of the 25 gender advisers deployed to field missions
or the offices of special envoys were at senior level.
Missions should better incorporate gender advisers into
their work as part of the mission leadership structure
and provide them with all the resources necessary to be
able to carry out their functions.

Member States should increase their efforts to
encourage female police and military personnel to
participate in peacekeeping operations and eliminate
barriers to women's full inclusion. Improving conditions
of service and targeted recruitment strategies towards
women, in particular through the media, can contribute
to those efforts. Moreover, female peacekeepers can be
effective agents of change only in environments that
are free from discrimination and unfair social norms
and attitudes, and where they are not deprived of their
rights and opportunities.

Finally, Liechtenstein welcomes and supports
your call, Mr. President, for questions for the briefers,
as a way of making our debates more interactive. We
are aware that the briefers have already left, but we
would be interested in their views on the following
two questions. First, how can peacekeeping operations
better follow up with women who leave missions, in
order to learn lessons from their experiences? Secondly,
why do police- and troop-contributing countries often
deploy women to the United Nations at levels lower
than their proportion in their domestic security forces?

