Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): We are grateful to the
Secretary-General for his insightful briefing and strong
leadership in advancing the women and peace and
security agenda. We also welcome the briefin made by
the Executive Director of UN-Women and the important
civil-society perspective that we were provided with
this morning.

The 2015 high-level review on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), mandated under resolution
2122 (2013), provided an important opportunity not
only to reflect on the progress made towards the
implementation of the resolution, but also to calibrate
our collective ambition to promote our shared goal of
strengthening the role of women in conflict resolution,
peacebuilding, peacekeeping and transitional
justice systems.
Resolution 2242 (2015) reaffirmed our strong
commitment to the normative framework that views
women as a pivotal element of the conflict-resolution
paradigm. We also welcome resolution 2250 (2015),
on youth and peace and security, as an important
complement and reinforcement of the women and peace
and security agenda.

Women across the world, from Columbia to
Uganda to Burundi to Tunisia, have emerged as leaders
and consensus-builders, thus inspiring hope of peace
and prosperity amid conflict, chaos and violence.
Yet millions of women and girls remain among the
most vulnerable in situations of armed conflict. The
perpetrators of crimes against women and girls include
Da'esh and Boko Haram, as well as States that use
sexual abuse as a weapon of war. In our region we
have seen thousands of women fall victim to brutal
oppression; countless others have suffered rape and
sexual abuse - the worst and the most traumatic form
of violence.

We agree with the Secretary-General that, despite
the momentum for change, support must go beyond
words. Renewed focus on the implementation of the
common agenda is therefore crucial. That is key to
overcoming operational gaps and challenges and to
delivering on our promise of peace and security. As
agents for peace, women also have a vital role to play in
achieving sustainable development, because peace and
development, as we all agree, are inextricably linked.
The empowerment of women is therefore also essential
for achieving the Sustainable Development Goals,
including those on poverty eradication, health care,
education and inclusive development.

Women's special skills in mediation make them
particularly suited as Special Envoys and Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General, yet they
have had very few such missions. That clearly needs
to change.

Pakistan fully supports the objectives of the women
and peace and security agenda and has played an
important role in advancing those goals as a major troop
contributor to United Nations peacekeeping missions.
Pakistani women peacekeepers have served as police
officers - brave police officers - and as doctors and
nurses in missions in Asia, Africa and the Balkans.
Gender sensitization is a mandatory part of training
for our peacekeepers. My country stands ready to share
our experience by conducting training programmes for
women security officers so as to enhance their capacity
to respond to crisis situations.

As host to the largest protracted refugee population
in the world, Pakistan has allowed unhindered access
by Afghan refugees, including women and girls, to
free education and health care and has enabled them
to secure employment. It is gratifying to note that the
core skills acquired by our Afghan sisters in Pakistan
are being used for the welfare of their homeland,
Afghanistan.

Pakistan firmly believes that the best way to
promote and safeguard the interests of women in
conflict situations is to address the root causes of
those conflicts and address cross-cutting issues of
governance. That would require synergy of efforts
towards conflict prevention and resolution. We also
believe that the Security Council should continue
to address the issues of the women and peace and
security, in accordance with its primary responsibility
of maintaining international peace and security. Any
digression from that mandate, or proliferation of new
mandates, runs the risk of undermining the consensus
around the vital issue.

