Mr. Aisi (Papua New Guinea): I speak on behalf
of the Pacific Islands Forum group based in New York:
Australia, Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji,
Marshall Islands, Nauru, New Zealand, Palau, Samoa,
Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu and my own
country, Papua New Guinea.
Pacific Islands Forum members continue the
important task of implementing resolution 1325
(2000). This year, the Forum secretariat convened a
Pacific regional workshop on gender, conflict, peace
and security, which emphasized the need to strengthen
partnerships among key Government portfolios and
their respective ministries, civil society, regional and
international organizations and the donor community.
Organized in partnership with the United Nations
Development Programme, the United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM), the
Australian Agency for International Development
(AusAID), femLINK Pacific and the International
Women's Development Agency, the workshop called
for a number of measures, including an annual update
on gender, peace and security issues; the
commissioning of research on the gender dimensions
of regional conflict and peace processes; the
development of a database of Pacific women
peacemakers; audits of compliance with resolution
1325 (2000) by regional assistance missions and peace
agreements; technical assistance to Forum members for
national implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
including capacity-building in the area of gender
awareness; support for women's non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) working on resolution 1325
(2000); and improved gender-sensitive early warning
systems.

Those outcomes were subsequently endorsed by
the Forum Regional Security Committee, and follow-
up action has been integrated into the Forum
secretariat's work plan. Other action is progressing.
AusAID is funding a programme in Solomon Islands,
Papua New Guinea and Fiji to train key civil and
governmental representatives on the importance of
resolution 1325 (2000) and to translate the resolution
into local languages. A number of vibrant women's
NGOs in our region - including femLINK Pacific and
the Ecumenical Centre for Research, Education and
Advocacy, in Fiji, and Vois Blong Mere, in Solomon
Islands * are working on promoting the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

That progress illustrates what is possible when
local and regional initiatives are supported by the
international donor community. This was never more
apparent than when the Women, Peace and Security
programme, established by UNIFEM. in Melanesia,
established committees on women, peace and security
in Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands, Vanuatu and
Fiji. In addition, UNIFEM. piloted a valuable gender-
sensitive early warning indicator pilot project in
Solomon Islands in 2005. Regrettably, I have to report
that some of those projects have stagnated of late or
even ceased to function.

The analysis undertaken in these countries as part
of this initiative continues to be used and built on by
development organizations. It provides valuable
information for building national strategies and action
plans for conflict prevention, peacebuilding and post-
conflict reconstruction and, more important, for
ensuring that the instrumental role that women can and
do play in those processes is recognized and taken into
account. The sustainability of funding is vital to ensure
the success of all our programmes related to resolution
1325 (2000).

Efforts to implement resolution 1325 (2000) in
the Pacific are part of a long-term commitment. In
2000, the Biketawa Declaration mandated the Pacific
Islands Forum to respond to issues of security at the
regional level and reaffirmed the liberty of the
individual under the law; the equality of rights for all
citizens, regardless of gender, race, colour, creed or
political belief; and the individual's inalienable right to
participate, by means of a free and democratic political
process, in framing the society in which he or she lives.
Moreover, the landmark Pacific Plan, adopted by
Pacific leaders in October 2005, adopted a broad
definition of security to include human security as one
of four priority goals for the region, and included the
cross-cutting strategic objective of improving gender
equality.

Next year, women from all over the Pacific
region - including from non-Forum countries and
territories - will come together at the Tenth Triennial
Conference of Pacific Women and the Third Pacific
Ministerial Meeting on Women, to be held in Noumea,
New Caledonia, to review progress made on the Pacific
Platform for Action on Advancement of Women and
Gender Equality 2005-2015. In 2004, this gathering of
Pacific ministers, Government officials and civil
society representatives recognized peace and security
as a critical and emerging issue and added it to the
Pacific Platform for Action on Women. They called on
Governments to promote peace by integrating content
on peace and conflict resolution into educational
programmes; to implement Security Council resolution
1325 (2000); to promote peace by integrating
traditional methodologies of reconciliation into the
peace process; to recognize and enhance women's
inclusion in early-warning systems, conflict prevention
peace processes and negotiations and post-conflict
reconstruction; to recognize the need to address the
processes of peace and justice in decision-making and
conflict resolution; to make use of regional and
international organizations in conducting gender-
sensitivity training for peacekeepers to ensure that they
are sensitive to issues on the ground; to utilize the
provisions of the Biketawa Declaration to proactively
monitor national security situations with a view to
averting potential conflicts and resolving possible
conflicts by peaceful means; and to develop and
finance national disaster mitigation and response plans
to protect against loss of life and property in the event
of natural disasters. The meeting to be held in May
2007 will provide an opportunity for Pacific women
leaders to review progress made towards those goals.

While those processes continue, it is important to
ensure that countries in our region embrace resolution
1325 (2000) as a framework for the development of
national peacekeeping policies, given the reputation of
some of our member countries as quality providers of
international peacekeeping forces and the increasing
involvement of Forum member countries in regional
assistance missions. Additionally, at their recently
concluded summit, held on 25 October 2006, leaders of
our Forum agreed that greater attention needed to be
given to implementing international conventions on
human rights. Here, I wish to note that one of the
Pacific Plan's initiatives refers specifically to
resolution 1325 (2000). Our leaders said that such
conventions are essential tools for underpinning
improvements in institutional governance. They also
supported the recommendations of the Forum Regional
Security Committee and other regional bodies working
to enhance regional safety and security, including a
focus on broader political and human security issues,
and emphasized the need to match those
recommendations with national efforts.

Finally, I should like to take this opportunity to
congratulate one of our members, Fiji, on its recent
election to the newly formed Peacebuilding
Commission, which we trust will provide further
impetus for the full implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) in the Pacific. In that regard, we also welcome
the creation of a senior gender adviser position at the
Peacebuilding Support Office to ensure that gender is
mainstreamed into all aspects of the Peacebuilding
Commission's work.

I thank my colleagues for their presentations this
morning.

