Mr. Crowley (South Africa): My delegation thanks
all of the briefers for the insightful statements they
delivered here today. We also thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened this important debate.

South Africa is fully committed to pursuing an
integrated, gender-oriented approach in the areas of
conflict prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding,
in recognition of the powerful role of women as agents
of change.

The report of the Secretary-General on women and
peace and security (S/2012/732) shows that Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000) has provided for the
establishment of an enabling framework for the creation
of opportunities and spaces for women to be at the
centre of processes affecting their safety, security and
development, in equal partnership with men. However,
the report highlights the fact that 12 years after the
adoption of the resolution, despite some positive gains,
its implementation remains slow and uneven in many
cases.

My delegation notes that much work still needs to
be done to strengthen the role of women in preventive
diplomacy, formal peace processes and mediation.
We therefore remain fully committed to working,
in cooperation with the United Nations system and
Member States, towards the removal of barriers
impeding the full and effective implementation of the
resolution.

In that regard, we welcome the role played by
UN-Women to integrate a gender perspective under the
women, peace and security agenda, in keeping with the
broader United Nations system-wide mandate.

We note with concern the continuing
underrepresentation of women in formal peace
processes. We therefore call for a more regular review of
the status of implementation within the United Nations
system and in Member States of the proposals made
by the Secretary-General on the inclusion of women in
conflict prevention and mediation, the nomination of
women to lead negotiation processes, and an increase
in the number of female police and troop personnel in
United Nations missions.

Equally, we urge the Secretary-General to give
specific attention to the appointment of women to
senior positions, including chief mediators and heads
of political, peacekeeping and peacebuilding missions.
We maintain that greater effort needs to be expended
towards the deployment of greater numbers of female
military and police personnel to United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

South Africa is pleased to note the valuable
contribution that gender advisers in post-conflict
settings continue to make through the provision of
training to and awareness-raising of peacekeepers and
assisting in the capacity-building activities of national
Governments and of civil society.
However, we remain concerned at the slow
deployment of women protection advisers to
peacekeeping missions. This presents a serious
protection gap, and every effort must be made to ensure
that the progress made in the protection and promotion
of the rights and empowerment of women and girls is
not lost.

We are supportive of the efforts undertaken by
the Council to ensure that more systematic attention
is given in all its work to the implementation of
commitments in the area of women, peace and security.
The integration of appropriate gender perspectives into
the mandates of the relevant peacekeeping missions and
in other thematic areas related to peace and security
would positively advance efforts in that regard.

We welcome the focus of this open debate on
giving prominence to the role of women's civil society
organizations in contributing to the prevention and
resolution of armed conflict and to peacebuilding. From
our ownperspective, SouthAfricacontinuesto contribute
to the popularization of resolution 1325 (2000) through
such structures as the Southern African Development
Community, the African Union and the Pan-African
Women's Organization.

We remain conscious of the fact that women and
children are the most vulnerable members of society.
They suffer disproportionately from conflict and State
incapacity. Their experience of conflict, violence and
repression, and their particular needs in such contexts
usually differ from those of men. Unfortunately, women
tend to be sidelined from formal conflict resolution and
peacebuilding processes. We must therefore create the
space for women to assume positions of leadership and
decision-making in peacemaking and peacebuilding
processes. Better still, we need to focus more on
preventing conflicts from breaking out in the first
place.

Post-conflict recovery and reconstruction
programmes often overlook women's security needs,
which ultimately compromises the inclusiveness and
sustainability of peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding efforts. Access to justice for women
in post-conflict States through deliberate policies of
inclusion is essential to building fair, equitable and
equal societies. Women suffer disproportionately
from poverty, and the risks they face are heightened in
armed conflict and post-conflict situations. The United
Nations system and the international community must
therefore provide sufficient assistance to countries
emerging from conflict to build their national capacity
in terms ofjustice and security institutions, especially
in the police, prosecutorial, judicial and corrections
sectors and to ensure that women are well represented
in all of those structures.

Finally, much work needs to be done to narrow
the substantive implementation deficits that remain.
The burden of responsibility rests on the membership
of the Council to ensure measurable progress on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in the broader
context of the women, peace and security agenda and
the laudable objectives that it aspires to achieve.

