Mr. McNee (Canada): The reports before us
demonstrate that the United Nations is prepared to
move forward with the concrete implementation of an
effective peacebuilding agenda. The ultimate test will
be whether the United Nations system deploys
resources and technical expertise in a timely and
targeted manner. In that light, I would like to make a
few brief comments about each report in turn.

First, Canada supports the seven-point action plan
contained in the Secretary-General's report on
women's participation in peacebuilding (S/2010/466).
At a time when the United Nations is reviewing its
efforts to implement resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, the action plan's pragmatic,
coordinated and sustained approach to addressing
women's and girls' post-conflict needs and the
constraints on women's participation in peacebuilding
is most welcome. It encourages troop- and police-
contributing countries to address the participation of
women in peace operations and in training for those
operations. It also provides concrete targets for
enhancing women's participation in all aspects of the
peacebuilding continuum and the availability of
relevant expertise.

Canada also agrees that monitoring of the action
plan can be facilitated by the global indicators on
resolution 1325 (2000), which we call on the Security
Council to endorse on 26 October. In that spirit,
Canada was pleased to announce earlier this month the
launch of its new Action Plan for the Implementation
of United Nations Security Council Resolutions on
Women, Peace and Security. Canada's Plan is intended
to guide the Government in its implementation of those
resolutions and to improve Canada's capacity to
safeguard and support affected populations in fragile
States and conflict-affected situations.

Canada is also pleased to note the progress made
since the publication of the Secretary-General's report
on peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of
conflict (S/2010/386). Advances in supporting senior
leaders in the field and in existing planning and
assessment processes are particularly welcome. Canada
also concurs that capacity remains a critical issue and
looks forward to the important recommendations
emerging from the review of international civilian
capacities, which we have been pleased to support
financially.

Yet enduring challenges also remain. Despite
much discussion, roles and responsibilities in critical
sectors such as the rule of law, security sector reform
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration still
require clarification. The relationship between the
United Nations and the World Bank should also be
deepened if broader progress is to be made.

(spoke in French)

Member States still need to consider modalities
for delivering rapid, responsive and risk-permissive
post-conflict financing. In order to meet that objective,
the United Nations and Member States must invest in
monitoring and measuring the outcomes of our
peacebuilding initiatives. In that way we can better
determine the areas where our efforts most effectively
advance the interests of sustainable peace.

Finally, I would also like to raise an issue related
to this debate. Canada welcomes the co-facilitators'
report on the 2010 review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture (S/2010/393, annex). The
review proved very useful, for it reaffirmed the
importance of the Peacebuilding Commission. It also
brought out the need to see that its action produces
more tangible results the countries on its agenda.

While full implementation of the
recommendations is a longer-term task, Canada agrees
with the report's assessment that the Commission
needs to maintain a flexible approach and align closely
with national priorities. Likewise, there is also a need
to reduce administrative burdens. The outcome of that
thinking will largely be put into practice in country-
specific configurations.

In that regard, Canada is of the view that a closer
relationship between the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission is advisable. Such a
relationship would better define what the Council
expects on specific peacebuilding issues and clarify
what the Commission can contribute.

Capacity-building as a key concept is only in its
infancy. Peacebuilding is a work in progress, and that
evolution has significant implications for peacekeeping,
peacemaking and early recovery. It also affects how the
United Nations system organizes itself to deliver
results in the field that benefit all those affected by a
conflict and to ensure the sustainability of efforts to
prevent relapse into violence.

Finally, the reports considered today give us a
look at the state of affairs and at the work remains to
be done. As always, Canada stands ready to play its
part.
