Ms. Moreno: As this is the first time that the
United Nations International Research and Training
Institute for the Advancement of Women (INSTRAW)
addresses the Security Council, let me thank you,
Mr. President, and through you the members of the
Council, for the opportunity to join in recognizing the
importance of the full implementation of resolution
1325 (2000).

As the international community redefines security
in the twenty-first century, women's contributions and
gender considerations are now, thanks to resolution
1325 (2000), an integral part of the process, and no
longer a silent presence.

INSTRAW launched a profound restructuring this
year. The Executive Board has approved a strategic
framework and programme of work for 2005. We are
reconstructing our relations with stakeholders and
building synergies and alliances within the United
Nations system, especially with the Division for the
Advancement of Women and the United Nations
Development Fund for Women.

INSTRAW considers gender-based violence to be
the largest threat to women's security in conflict and
post-conflict situations. The need to fully implement
international humanitarian and human rights law to
ensure the protection of women and girls, as
established in resolution 1325 (2000), is therefore
crucial.

Zero tolerance for rape, beatings, assault,
harassment and sexual violence in times of armed
conflict, as well as for trafficking and abduction into
modern slavery and towards the spread of HIV/AIDS
through violence, is crucial. Regional and national
action plans, legal provisions and law enforcement
capacities must be strengthened. It is essential that we
realize our collective responsibility and raise the level
of political will, cooperation and coordination.
INSTRAW has addressed this topic by publishing
Partners in Change: Working With Men to End
Gender-based Violence, which is available on our new
web site and is at the disposal of the Council.
Further contributing to the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), INSTRAW is launching areas
of research and capacity-building that include gender
and security sector reform and gender and conflict
prevention and resolution. We are also undertaking
collaborative activities towards the elimination of
trafficking in women and girls. Through e-discussions,
research and consultations, INSTRAW is identifying
the most urgent gaps within those fields and building
collaborative projects to address them.

INSTRAW is contributing to the design of a
process of capacity-building to facilitate the
participation of women and civil society in peace-
building activities in Haiti. We are also engaged in the
process of developing an action plan on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in the
Dominican Republic.

INSTRAW highlights the recommendations of the
non-governmental organizations Working Group on
Women, Peace and Security, and Kvinna till Kvinna.
Initiatives that deserve consideration and support are
the call for a focal point and an expert-level working
group on the integration of resolution 1325 (2000) in
the Security Council's work, the establishment of a
United Nations system-wide action plan, annual
reporting and the need to develop national action plans
on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

INSTRAW is certain that the Council will ensure,
through those and other initiatives, the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). INSTRAW
will continue to contribute within its mandate to that
effort and looks forward to cooperating with the
Council on those issues.

