Ms. Andot (Philippines): At the outset, allow me
to report to the Security Council that Marawi City,
in the southern part of the Philippines, has just been
liberated from terrorist forces inspired and aided by
the Islamic State terror network, having been captive
for the past five months. However, the liberation is no
cause for celebration. Marawi City was destroyed by
the fighting and 700,000 people have been displaced
by the conflict - more than 50 per cent of whom are
women and children.

There have been casualties on both sides, as well
as within the civilian population. The damage and
losses as a result ofthe conflict are still being assessed,
but conservative estimates are between $1 billion
and $2 billion. Cognizant of that, President Rodrigo
Roa Duterte has declared that the reconstruction
and rehabilitation of Marawi City is a Government
priority. In fact, as early as June, the President
issued Administrative Order No.3, creating the Task
Force Bangon Marawi, an inter-agency mechanism
that is spearheading the recovery, rehabilitation and
reconstruction of Marawi City and affected localities.

I am happy to share that our agency, the Office
of the Presidential Adviser on the Peace Process,
which also serves as the focal point on women and
peace and security, sits as one of the members of that
Task Force. We are in the process of coming up with
a comprehensive rehabilitation plan, informed by a
rigorous post-conflict needs assessment and a rapid
recovery and peacebuilding assessment, with the help
of various stakeholders ranging from community
members to national and international partners, such
as the United Nations Development Programme and the
World Bank.

Throughout the process, the Government has been
keen to observe conflict-sensitive and peace-promoting
approaches, with a particular focus on mainstreaming
gender and observing cultural sensitivities in its various
interventions. After almost two decades of Government
interventions to implement the resolution 1325
(2000) - and its related resolutions - the Philippines is
most proud of the three national action plans on women
and peace and security that it has delivered. Now in
its third cycle for the 2017-2022 implementation period,
allow me to briefly share the salient features of our new
national action plan on women and peace and security.

At its crafting, the Philippine national action plan
on women and peace and security, which incorporates
the lessons learned from the previous cycles of
implementation, adopts a broader framework to address
the situation of women in armed conflict and recognize
their contributions to conflict transformation. It
primarily aims to embed the language and precepts of
gender equality, as provided for in the Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women (CEDAW) and, in particular, CEDAW General
Recommendation No. 301 with regard to ensuring
women's human rights before, during and after various
conflict contexts. It also takes into account the context
of non-international armed conflicts, such as ethnic
and communal violence, states of emergency and
internal displacement, and the war against terrorism
and organized crime - some of which are situations
of concern in the Philippines at present, as exemplified
by the Marawi crisis and continuing the pursuit of a
final political solution to the Bangsamoro conflict in
southern Philippines.

In pursuit of the peace process with rebel groups,
significant actions are continuously being taken to ensure
the meaningful participation of women, especially
Moro and indigenous women, and that their rights are
protected in conflict and post-conflict situations.

Filipino women have played a crucial role in
responding to the Marawi crisis. For the first time
amidst the fighting, the armed gorces of the Philippines
and the Philippine national police formed and deployed,
on 29 August, a composite all-female civil relations
company to Marawi to assist in the implementation of
rehabilitation and recovery programmes for internally
displaced persons (IDPs) in the battle-stricken city. The
company was organized, trained and developed with a
mission to build a culture of peace and to make every
child and young person a peacebuilder. The company is
composed of 55 enlisted personnel from the army and
40 non-commissioned police officers. Of its members,
36 are Muslim with 22 from the Maranao tribe. The
company is led by four female officers from the army.
Their mission is to assist the survivors of the siege, who
are currently in evacuation centres and communities and
require significant humanitarian and recovery support.

Women-led civil society organizations and local
agencies have also channelled their resources in
providing psychosocial support for healing the trauma
suffered by displaced women and children. We have
been training women in the IDP camps on community
organizing for livelihood generation, as well as actively
engaging them in women and peace conversations.

In a nutshell, the national action plan on women
and peace and security serves as the blueprint of the
Government and civil society efforts to protect women,
prevent violation of their rights and empower them so
that they play a decisive role in conflict prevention,
conflict resolution and peacebuilding. Our Department
of National Defense and its allied forces, as well
as the national police, are part of formulating and
implementing that plan and are required to regularly
monitor, evaluate and report their commitments and
roles within the plan. Those plans will guide the
rehabilitation of Marawi. Our Government is committed
to protecting the affected population - especially
women and children, who are particularly vulnerable,
including to trafficking in persons.
Over the past years, the implementation of the
national action plan on women and peace and security
has seen women helping other women; women leading
peace processes and signing and implementing the
peace agreements; women being deployed as soldiers at
the battlefront defending the civilians from terrorism;
and women working as peacekeepers, both here and
across borders, to help women and children victims of
the conflict.

A training kit on mainstreaming women and peace
and security in development planning processes was
recently developed and launched by the Philippines
with the support of UN-Women. This is an important
tool in further localizing the national action plan on
women and peace and security and recognizing the role
of local Government units in the partnership to protect
all women who may be affected by conflicts at the
grassroots level.

Peace throughout the land, as well as the
rehabilitation of Marawi City, remains a priority for the
Philippine Government. This objective enjoys the full
support of leaders at the highest level of Government.
Sustainable peace and development are the building
blocks of AmBisyon Natin 2040, the long-term vision
of the Philippines.

While some Filipino women have become
victims in the areas affected by conflict, there are
also Filipino women who, in one way or another, are
continuously inspired by their fellow Filipinas to
champion the implementation of gender-sensitive and
peace-promoting policies and programmes. Filipino
women sit among the high echelons of our Government,
including peace panels that are negotiating for and
implementing signed agreements. They sit in two
Government panels for the implementation of peace
agreements with the Moro National Liberation Front
and the Moro Islamic Liberation Front, respectively.

I would say that Filipinos are demonstrating their
resilience now more than ever. As the armed conflict in
Marawi draws to a close, we know that our journey to
its rehabilitation and recovery has just begun. There is
a long way ahead as we build the extrinsic aspect of the
city but also, more important, as we mend the torn fabric

of Maranaw society. It is in this process that Filipino
women - within each basic unit of the Maranaw family
as a child, sister, mother and sometimes a father - will
play a critical role in the rebuilding of relationships in
their respective communities and eventually in Marawi
as a whole. In turn, the Philippine Government remains
committed to preventing violent extremism and
ensuring that such crises will not happen again.

In conclusion, allow me to extend our gratitude to
the United Nations, its agencies and Member States
for their support in the humanitarian response and
peace-based rehabilitation initiatives for Marawi.

