Mr. Thoms (Germany): Let me first of all thank
today's briefers for their insightful presentations, and
Argentina for organizing this open debate.

Germany aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union.

We welcome the presidential statement adopted by
the Council today (S/PRST/2014/21) and the detailed
analysis of the Secretary-General's report (S/2014/693),
which identifies many achievements on the women and
peace and security agenda in the past years, but also
the challenges remaining in order to ensure an effective
and meaningful participation of women in all conflict-
related settings. We share the view expressed by the
Secretary-General that the review processes in 2015
should be used for greater synergies to strengthen the
rights and participation of women.

The plight of refugees and internally displaced
persons (IDPs) is growing ever more alarming, and
women and girls make up more than half of those
displaced. The crises in Syria, South Sudan and the
Central African Republic and the growing number of
people fleeing from the terror of the so-called Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant have given rise to those
numbers.

Over past years, we have witnessed targeted
violence against women and girls, often committed
in front of family members, being used as a tactic of
warfare to terrorize local populations and break down
community structures. That development has forced
many people to leave their homes and their lives behind
in order to protect their families and themselves. We
need to ensure that women and girls - but also men
and boys - who have suffered from violence receive
adequate psychological counselling, especially all the
necessary health-care services, to go from being a
victim of violence to becoming a survivor.

We also cannot forget those refugees who have
spent decades away from their homes, as many Afghans,
Somalis and Congolese have. Their experience shows
us that we cannot just focus on the immediate needs
of refugees, but need to consider the long-term task of
enabling them to lead a life of dignity and determine
their own fate. Education is a key factor for children
who grow up in situations of displacement. Only quality
education can lead to change, enabling future adults to
have a self-determined life and to not simply be defined
as a refugee.

The dire situation ofthe Syrian refugees, especially
women and children, has been the focus of many
debates over the past years. In response to the request
of Syria's neighbours and urgent calls for action by
the United Nations, German Foreign Minister Frank-
Walter Steinmeier invited 20 ministers and heads of
United Nations agencies to a conference on the Syrian
refugee situation, which took place today in Berlin and
was co-chaired with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees. Participants agreed
to strengthen medium-term humanitarian assistance
and to mobilize additional development assistance in
order to increase the resilience of communities and
refugees in the face of what has already become a
protracted situation. The conference has strengthened
the bond between the international community and
the host countries in the region in recognition of their
hospitality towards millions of refugees. Participants
agreed to pay particular attention to the situation of
women and girls.

In addition to taking political leadership, Germany
has financed many concrete projects over the past
years to support women in situations of displacement
and their reintegration into society. To name but a few
examples, we have funded projects for refugee camps
in Jordan, Turkey and Iraq aimed at empowering
women by supporting their common kitchen initiatives
and creating child-friendly spaces. In Lebanon, Syrian
women were trained in health care, hygiene and family
planning in order to enable them to make informed
decisions about their lives. In the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, repatriated women were supported in
their reintegration into economic activities and trained
in organization and management skills.

In Germany itself, where we welcome increasing
numbers of refugees, we have introduced a free
nationwide multilingual helpline for women who are
affected by violence. The specialized personnel giving
initial counselling and guidance include experts on the
issues of violence suffered in conflict settings.

Women in displacement settings have great
potential to be future leaders in their communities and
countries. That potential cannot be wasted. We need
to empower women in those situations and provide
education and vocational training to them, especially
in camps. They should be trained in order to take up
positions in the management of refugee camps.

While we focus today's debate on displacement
settings, we need to keep the full women and peace and
security agenda in mind at all times for all conflict and
post-conflict settings. We cannot emphasize enough
the importance of effective, meaningful and real
participation by women in conflict prevention, conflict
management, peace negotiations, transitional justice
and recovery efforts. It is not enough to merely let
them be observers or beneficiaries of decision-making
processes. The United Nations needs to ensure that
women are involved in all United Nations-led peace and
reconciliation processes. In that regard, we welcome
the new gender forward-looking strategy for 2014-2018
of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
the Department of Field Support. The United Nations
needs to set a good example and include women at
all levels if we want others to follow. Civil society
organizations can also play an important role. They can
connect women's organizations, train representatives
and therefore empower women to take their rightful
place in all decision-making.

We believe that the Security Council can play a
stronger role in this regard and implement the women
and peace and security resolutions directly in this very
Chamber. The Council should start to systematically
mainstream women's issues in all relevant spheres of
its work. Whenever the Security Council is mandating
or renewing mandates for United Nations missions
or requesting briefings from envoys and special
representatives, the issue of women and peace and
security should be a central part of all considerations,
as called for in the presidential statement adopted today.

Germany will continue its support to UN-Women
and all other relevant actors, including civil society
organizations, to ensure that women's roles and their
important contribution in conflict resolution and
peacebuilding are adequately taken into account.

