Ms. Silveira (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to join the numerous delegations that have
taken the floor in congratulating you, Sir, for having
convened this debate and in expressing most heartfelt
thanks to all those, especially the women, who work
every day to promote peace and security in all corners
of the world.
Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
great advances have been made on the women and
peace and security agenda, in terms of both breadth and
depth, in such a way that today it occupies an
important place in the range of legal instruments,
policies and concrete activities of this Organization in
conflict and post-conflict situations.

Despite this progress, women and girls
undoubtedly continue to be the most vulnerable and
most excluded in such situations. Reports from various
conflict and post-conflict zones on physical and moral
violence against women are a permanent reminder of
the enormous gap that exists between our words and
agreements in this forum and the reality of life on the
ground.

However, and while it is impossible to measure it,
we are convinced that the gradual and cross-cutting
adaptation of the United Nations since the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) to address the vulnerability and
exclusion of women has averted many ills and
promoted the gender perspective in many processes
where otherwise this would not have been the case.

I should like to underscore a number of points
that we believe are worthy of further efforts, such as
the need to pay greater attention to the reintegration of
Victims whose rights have been seriously violated, in
particular in cases of sexual abuse or exploitation; the
need to continue fighting against impunity for those
responsible for such violations; and the need to take
better into account the economic and social dimensions
of women's participation in post-conflict situations,
with particular emphasis on access to education and
employment. In that regard, we understand that the
establishment of indicators such as those put forward
by the Secretary-General will make a crucial
contribution to monitoring and evaluating the
effectiveness of our actions.

Uruguay believes that the women and peace and
security agenda is a fundamental part of a larger
agenda that inextricably links the situation of children
in armed conflict and, of course, the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. It is therefore essential to
make progress in the most coordinated manner possible
in order to achieve synergies, avoid duplication of
effort and take advantage in the most effective way of
the instruments available to the Organization on the
ground.
Clearly, peacekeeping operations are one of those
tools, and a very relevant one. Over the past 11 years,
such operations have gradually incorporated civilian
protection mandates, giving special attention to women
and children. Progress has been significant. However,
periodic attacks against civilians, including in mission
deployment areas, demonstrate the Organization's
limitations in meeting the expectations of both local
populations and the international community.

Measures that could overcome many of those
limitations include clear and predictable strategies
tailored to each mission; better coordination with the
various actors on the ground, especially with host
countries, which have the primary responsibility for
protection; and greater material resources, which are
absolutely essential.

We continue to be committed to development and
to the implementation of the agenda for the protection
of civilians in armed conflict, paying particular
attention on women and children, both through our
work at Headquarters and through our Blue Helmets on
the ground. We also reiterate the importance of
achieving the broadest possible support for that
agenda. The high level of participation in today's
debate is clear evidence of that.

The intrinsic complementarity that exists between
participation and protection is probably the main
concept at the heart of resolution 1325 (2000), on
which so much has been built and developed. It is
therefore crucial to continue to promote greater
participation by women in the various forums and areas
linked to peace processes. In that regard, I should like
to conclude by making special mention of the
appointment of Ms. Michelle Bachelet at the helm of
UN Women. We are certain that with her leadership,
that new entity will play a central role in all areas
linked with the women and peace and security agenda
at the United Nations.

