Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): First
of all, I thank the Bolivian presidency for convening
today's meeting. I also thank Secretary-General
Guterres and Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive
Director of UN-Women, for their briefings. China also
listened attentively to the statement by Ms. Siniora
Atallah, the representative of civil society.

More than 60 years ago, Chairman Mao said
that women hold up half the sky. China has today a
population of 1.4 billion people, of whom 678. million
are women. Women play a role in holding up half the
sky in China's socioeconomic development. They
also play an irreplaceable role in terms of peace and
stability stability in the country. The theme of today's
meeting is very meaningful, as it brings to mind the
Chinese female peacekeepers who have demonstrated
their commitment and dedication to the cause of
peacekeeping. In the Mediterranean, in Sector East of
the area of operation of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon Ms. Mao Ping, the first female commanding
officer ever sent to a United Nations peacekeeping
mission, received the Outstanding Female award from
the Lebanese Government in November. The Chinese
peacekeeping medical team led by her is well known in
local communities and beyond for their healing hands
and loving hearts. They have provided medical services
to local people and poor families and are planting the
seeds of friendship and peace in the land of the cedars.
In South Sudan, more than 10,000 kilometres from
China, there is a combat unit of 10 female fighters in the
peacekeeping infantry battalion that China dispatched
to that country. In addition to fulfilling their mandate,
they also pass out stationery to children in the refugee
camps and disseminate knowledge about the protection
ofwomen's rights and interests, bringingjoy and smiles
to the children.

Among the more than 2,000 Chinese peacekeepers
currently serving in United Nations peacekeeping
missions, more than 50 ofthem are women. Since China
began participating in United Nations peacekeeping
operations almost 30 years ago, Chinese female
peacekeepers have served thousands of times. Those
respectable and beloved Chinese female peacekeeping
soldiers are quietly dedicating themselves to their
responsibilities, while contributing to safeguarding
world peace. I would like to take this opportunity to pay
deep tribute to all women peacekeepers contributing
to peacekeeping.

Women are an important force for maintaining
international peace and security. Over a nearly 20-year
period the Security Council has adopted a series of
resolutions on women and peace and security, which
constitutes a positive framework for protecting women's
rights and interests in conflict and promoting women's
increasing role in maintaining peace and security.
Women are vulnerable to harm in war and conflict, and
they are a vulnerable group in general. But they are
increasingly becoming important participants, builders
and contributors to peace processes. Women play an
indispensable role in preventing conflict, maintaining
peace, reconciling differences and integrating social
groups. The international community should strengthen
coordination and cooperation so that women can fully
play their role in maintaining international peace and
security. In that regard, I would like to propose the
following suggestions.

First, we need to strengthen our political resolve
to settle hotspot issues and create a favourable
international environment for the survival and
development of women. The international community
should commit to a vision of peace and development
and win-win cooperation, and help countries in conflict
achieve peace and stability in a timely manner. Given
the responsibilities conferred upon it by the Charter of
the United Nations, the Security Council should actively
encourage the peaceful settlement of disputes through
dialogue and negotiations and provide solid guarantees
for the protection of women. Women should be ensured
of their full participation and roles in decision-making
in peace processes.

Secondly, we must resolutely counter any acts
that violate women's rights in conflict and support
the efforts of the countries concerned to shoulder the
primary responsibility for the protection of women in
conflict. Efforts should be made to stop sexual violence
in armed conflict as part ofa concerted effort to respond
to the threat of terrorism, to adopt comprehensive
measures to protect women from harm by terrorists and
extremist forces, and to provide security guarantees and
humanitarian assistance to women affected by conflict.
The international community should fully respect the
leadership role played by the country concerned in that
regard and provide constructive assistance in view of
its needs.

Thirdly, we must solve the problem by treating
its symptoms, as well as its root causes, and promote
the advancement of women together with economic
and social development. The international community
should actively help the countries concerned with
post-conflict reconstruction, while according priority
attention to the strengthening of their capacity-building,
work to eradicate the root causes of conflict and ensure
that all people, including women, can enjoy the benefits
of development. The international community should
provide support to conflict-affected countries in the
areas of gender equality and women's empowerment
and work to guide women's organizations and civil
society so that they can play a positive and constructive
role in the peace process.

F ourthly, we must ensure that there is synergy among
all the relevant United Nations bodies. The Security
Council, the General Assembly, the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Economic and Social Council, UN-
Women and other agencies should follow their respective
mandates, bring into full play their own advantages and
strengthen cooperation in jointly responding to issues
related to the women and peace and security agenda.
The United Nations should enhance cooperation, unlock
potential and improve efficiencies with regional and
subregional organizations in training and fundraising
in the area of women and peace and security. Recently,
there has been cooperation between the Chinese
Ministry of Defence and UN-Women. Together, they
have jointly hosted international workshops for women
peacekeeping officers to encourage troop-contributing
countries to actively assign and dispatch female officers
to peacekeeping missions, as well as to enhance their
capabilities and skills.

When presiding over the Global Leaders Meeting
on Gender Equality and Empowerment in September
2015, President Xi Jinping stated that without women's
liberation and progress, the liberation and progress of
humankind would not be attainable. China would like
to work with the international community and continue
to push for the realization of the goals of the agenda on
women and peace and security. It wishes to pursue its
unrelenting efforts towards the advancement of women
worldwide in order to jointly build a community - a
shared future - for humankind and create a better world
for women and for all.

