Mr. Yoda (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): My
delegation is grateful to the Security Council
presidency for the convening of this important meeting
of the Council, at which the Council adopted resolution
1888 (2009) to follow up the implementation of
09-53396
resolution 1820 (2008), on sexual violence in areas of
armed conflict.

We greatly appreciate the presence among us of
the Secretary-General and his participation in this
important discussion, as well as the valuable and
unequivocal message he has sent on this topic. The
special attention that the Security Council has devoted
to the fate of women and girls living in areas of armed
conflict reflects the international community's
awareness of the harmful consequences of sexual
violence against women and girls in conflict areas.

The momentum generated by the adoption of
resolution 1820 (2008) has sounded the alarm about
this scourge against the dignity of women, which
undermines their ability to contribute to the
maintenance of peace and social stability. The situation
is grave: especially in conflict areas in Africa, in
particular the Sudan and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, acts of sexual violence against women and
girls in areas of armed conflict are taking on a
worrisome magnitude, which the international
community can no longer tolerate.

Such acts of violence against women fuel hatred
among the warring parties and prevent the full
participation of women in the process of post-conflict
reconstruction.

The resolution the Council has just adopted under
your leadership, Madam President, will enable us to
equip the international community and the protagonists
in armed conflict to better understand the consequences
of this human tragedy and to shoulder their
responsibility to protect human rights during times of
conflict.

Burkina Faso has always endorsed all initiatives
aimed at ensuring respect for human dignity, in
particular the dignity of women, and at establishing a
peaceful society free of all serious violations of human
rights. In accordance with the ideals of peace and
freedom set out in the Charter of the United Nations,
Burkina Faso unreservedly supports the content of the
resolution we have just adopted and reaffirms its
thanks to the delegation of the United States and other
delegations for their effort to achieve a balanced
consensus text which can contribute to eradicating
sexual violence in armed conflict.

