Mr. Gone (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
First and foremost, allow me begin by conveying the
deepest condolences of the Ivorian Government to the
Governments and the peoples of Germany and Russia
for the terrorist attack in Berlin and the assassination of
Ambassador Andrey Karlov, respectively.

I would like to congratulate the Spanish presidency
on convening this high-level open debate on the
important issue of trafficking in human beings in
times of conflict. Allow me also to extend my thanks
to the Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict for their contributions to
today's debate.
The news today, as well as the poignant testimonies
we heard this morning, reveal the extent to which
trafficking in persons in times of conflict, owing to its
magnitude, crimes and irreparable trauma it causes,
constitutes a genuine denial of human rights, and must
as such serve to mobilize the attention of the entire
international community.

Resolution 2331 (2016), which the members of
the Security Council adopted today, is a particularly
relevant instrument to combat this scourge, while it also
serves to bolster existing initiatives such as Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon's zero-tolerance policy.

In addition to the efforts of the the Security Council,
the international commitment against trafficking
in human beings in times of conflict must also be
translated into vigorous regional and national initiatives
based on existing multilateral legal frameworks. Since
2002, the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), to which my country belongs and which
is affected by this phenomenon, has regularly adopted
several action plans, the latest of which covers the
period 2016-2020. Those plans propose, inter alia, the
adoption of national legislation penalizing trafficking
in persons, measures to protect and assist victims and
public awareness campaigns. It should be emphasized
that the strategic and operational support of UNODC
to ECOWAS has made a significant contribution to the
prevention and suppression of trafficking in persons in
West Africa. This is an opportunity for my delegation
to thank the United Nations for its multifaceted support
through UNODC in the implementation of the ECOWAS
Plan of Action against Trafficking in Persons.

In line with that regional strategy, on 25 October
2012 Cote d'Ivoire ratified the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
and endorsed the Additional Protocol to Prevent,
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons. It also
adopted Law 2010-272 on the prohibition of trafficking
in persons and the worst forms of child labour and the
September Law on combating trafficking in persons.
The Ivorian Government also believes that the fight
against trafficking in persons in times of conflict and
in times ofpeace must be a holistic one. To that end, my
country has set up a national multisectoral committee to
combat human trafficking and has drawn up a national
strategy, accompanied by a five-year national action
plan for the period 2016-2020.

Although the correlation between epicentres of
conflict and the surge in trafficking in persons appears
to be undeniable, it is important to bear in mind the
economic and social dynamics that fuel this scourge,
including poverty, unemployment, the lack of prospects
for young people and the shortcomings of judicial and
police institutions. Such deficits call for greater and
more vigorous action on the part of the United Nations
to support the improved coordination of national
and regional strategies and the strengthening of the
human and operational capacities ofjudicial and police
institutions. It is also important to support the affected
States in the creation of databases to better identify
the phenomenon of trafficking in persons, on the one
hand, and on the other to develop appropriate strategies
for dismantling the criminal networks involved and
improving the assistance given to victims.

In closing, I would like to state that accountability
must be the international community's best response
to grave human rights violations in order to prevent
future abuses.

