Mr. Hassan (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): First, I should
like to convey my congratulations to you, Mr. President,
on having organized this open debate on this important
matter, namely, conflict-related sexual violence. I
should also like to congratulate you on your presidency
this month. Many important matters have been drawn
to the attention of the international community of late,
in particular regarding our continent, Africa.

I should like to reiterate the fact that among States
that are particularly involved in protecting women
in conflict and on the question of sexual Violence in
conflict much progress has been made in our country
since 2005. The Sudan has implemented resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, and
has established several specialized centres at the
community level to step up the role of women and to
hold women's consultations on equality.

I should like to mention that special programmes
on disarmament, demobilization and reintegration have
been particularly important in highlighting women's
roles. Those have been carried out in coordination with
the relevant bodies of the United Nations, including
UN-Women. Furthermore, we are combating sexual
violence, and have done so since 2005. To that end, we
have set up a special unit affiliated with the Ministry
of Justice to combat sexual violence against women and
girls.

In the legal and judicial spheres, the Office of the
Prosecutor-General for crimes in Darfur, which was set
up pursuant to the peace agreement, has established an
investigation of reports from victims and complaints
have been made. That is above and beyond the efforts
made by the advisory council on human rights, the
Ministry for Social Planning and the Ministry to combat
violence against women. Those are bodies linked to our
other main body.

This month, we have begun to implement our
lO-year action plan to help promote human rights, in
particular women's rights. That has been commended
by the independent expert, and we would have liked to
see that reflected in the report (S/2014/l81), especially
our efforts in the area of sexual violence against women.

Despite the progress made, paragraph 50 of the
report under consideration refers to the situation in
Darfur and mentions an increase in reports of conflict-
related sexual violence. In these types of discussions,
we are used to the date of issuance and publication of
the report being mentioned. We want to know about
such reports. When we talk about different reports, we
want to know which reports we are talking about.

That is why we are asking for a clear procedure
to ensure the veracity of information and its sources.
In several passages, the report talks about constraints
imposed by the Government on the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). That is a reference to some activities ofthe
security apparatus of UNAMID's military component.
Apparently, UNAMID is being asked not to go to
certain areas. However, when it talks about UNAMID's
civilian component, which has a unit for protecting
women against sexual violence in armed conflict, it
does have permission. Therefore, we did provide access.
In that regard, I think we are talking about erroneous
information in the report.

The report also states that armed men in military
uniforms attacked women and were responsible for
sexual violence. That is not true. I think that we should
ensure the veracity of the information and check
sources before it is put into the report. We did not
prevent the investigator from gaining access. We have a
clear procedure in place when it comes to impunity and
violence against women, which I have already talked
about.

We underscore the need to protect women against
violence, and against sexual violence in particular. My
Government would like to reiterate its readiness to
continue cooperating with the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in
Conflict. We have sought to coordinate her visit but we
have not been able to do so. Despite that, the Special
Representative is very welcome. She can come see what
is taking place and check that the information is true.

This is a very sensitive matter. Once again, I would
like to underscore that the principle of protecting
women during armed conflict is a noble principle and it
should not be politicized.

