Ms. Garcia Gutierrez (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): Costa Rica thanks the presidency of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia for having convened
this open debate and the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2018/900). We also express our thanks for the
briefings provided earlier.
We are pleased that today we are focusing our
discussions on the importance of women's economic
and political empowerment. We have seen that, when
women occupy decision-making positions and are
significantly involved in conflict-resolution and
peacebuilding processes, results are more positive, as
this creates increased trust and social cohesion. We
welcome the efforts of the Secretary-General to reform
the Organization, in particular the reform of the peace
and security architecture, which is a reflection of his
work to rectify factors that have prevented gender
parity from being achieved in peacekeeping operations'
missions. In order to help meet the goal of increasing
women's representation, 80 per cent of my country's
personnel contribution are women. We believe that the
presence of gender and human rights perspectives in
the various areas of work involving peace and security
processes, for example, in commissions of inquiry and
mediation processes, as well as transitional justice
mechanisms, is key.

In that regard, it is important that peace agreements
include gender-related provisions and that women's
meaningful participation in negotiating, drawing up,
followingup andimplementingthembe ensured.Another
key dimension of that work involves addressing the
effects of armed violence on women and the important
role that they can play in disarmament, non-proliferation
and arms control so as to curtail the cycle of violence
created in such situations. In his report, the Secretary-
General highlights the underrepresentation of women
in disarmament efforts, which must be rectified. In
that regard, we welcome his agenda for disarmament,
outlined in the document Securing our Common
Future: an Agenda for Disarmament, and his focus on
the participation of women in that area in line with the
purposes of the women and peace and security agenda.

Peace and stability cannot be achieved without
concrete policies that ensure inclusivity and respond to
gender concerns. Women's meaningful participation in
the political life of their communities and in conflict
resolution and peacekeeping processes will be achieved
only if institutionalized discrimination, gender-based
prejudices, unequal power dynamics and the failure to

fully recognize women's human rights are challenged
and eradicated. Costa Rica recognizes the importance
of institutionalizing those efforts. Consequently, we
have established the 2018-2030 policy for effective
equality between women and men - a multidimensional
and comprehensive instrument whose main goal is
to overcome the structural obstacles that lead to,
recreate and reinforce inequalities between women
and men and impede meaningful progress towards
achieving equality. Similarly, we are implementing
legislation and regulatory changes and making the
relevant budget allocations to strengthen women's
political participation and achieve gender parity in
State institutions at the national and local levels, as
well as in social organizations and political parties. We
have translated those efforts into reality by forming
the current Cabinet, which enjoys gender parity. We
are working consistently in the areas of job training,
gender education and training, leadership development,
political participation and empowerment to increase
women's potential influence in decision-making,
thereby enabling them to actively exercise their rights
as citizens.

Abuse and violence are silent obstacles preventing
women's advancement and their development in all
areas of their lives. In order to combat that serious
and widespread problem, my country has established a
national policy to focus on, prevent and protect women
from violence. In August, our Executive Power declared
that addressing and preventing violence against women
was in the national interest. Accordingly, we reiterate
that the widespread use of sexual violence as a tactic
of terror and a weapon of war is heartrending and
unacceptable, as it is also responsible for the political
and economic marginalization of women and girls.
We welcome the recognition of the importance of that
subject as reflected in the awarding of the Nobel Peace
Prize to Denis Mukwege and Nadia Murad.

Women's economic empowerment has a positive
effect on post-conflict recovery and on communities'
economic growth in general. Discriminatory practices
must be eliminated; women's access to economic and
financial resources and health-care services, including
sexual and reproductive health, must be ensured; and
legal frameworks that include discriminatory provisions
perpetuating gender inequality and an imbalance in the
enjoyment of rights must be rectified. Our priority must
be to involve women in leadership positions, enabling
them to play a role in decision-making and provide a
gender perspective at all levels of participation, as well
as in all activities involving the peace and security
agenda. Such work must share a common denominator
with all efforts aimed at the safeguarding of human
rights. We call for the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda to be prioritized in drawing
up our countries' public policies so as to move forward
decisively in conflict prevention, thereby achieving
sustained peace and sustainable development for every
man and woman.
