Mrs. Gonzalez Lopez (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish): El Salvador thanks the South African
delegation for its presidency of the Security Council
during the month of October and the delegation of the
United Kingdom for its presidency during the month of
November for convening this open debate.

My delegation endorses and associates itself with
the statement made by the representative of Canada
on 29 October on behalf of the Group of Friends of
Women, Peace and Security, of which we are a member.

I stress my country's commitment to the
development and implementation of this agenda. I
reaffirm our conviction that women are active agents
of peace and key players in the prevention of conflicts
and in the search for effective and efficient responses
to current crises.

Resolution 1325 (2000) calls for the fullparticipation
of women in peace processes so that they can contribute
significantly to the maintenance and consolidation of
international peace and security. As one of the lessons
learned from our peace process, we are convinced that,
in order to achieve truly meaningful participation by
women, we must go beyond the simple presence of
women and young women in peace processes. Not only
must their presence be assured, but their voices must be
heard and their suggestions included. That is the only
way to make peace processes transformative, inclusive
and sustainable.
El Salvador has developed a national action plan
on women and peace and security for the years 2017
to 2022, thereby reflecting our readiness to fulfil our
commitments and define objectives in accordance with
the provisions of resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent
resolutions. The plan highlights the role of women in
different social spheres, especially in the consolidation
of peace and human security. It also seeks to integrate
a gender perspective into E1 Salvador's participation
in peacekeeping operations through gender training
for members of the security forces and measures to
increase the representation of women in national and
international security.

As a result of the change in our Government's
leadership and in consideration of current efforts to
combat violence and insecurity, we will conduct an
inclusive dialogue process to update our national action
plan, through which we hope to intensify efforts to
create a more democratic society.

We believe it is important to create more spaces
at the United Nations for countries that have an action
plan for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) to
share their experiences and lessons learned, which will
allow us to not only learn what other States have done
to that end but also to establish cooperation initiatives
to help promote the women and peace and security
agenda at the regional and international levels.

El Salvador has a historic commitment to
peacekeeping operations and has this year increased by
40 per cent the participation of women from our armed
forces and national civilian police. Those women have
specialized training in piloting and crewing helicopters,
institutional strengthening, health activities as
specialized doctors, to name but a few areas. Recently,
we also deployed our very first female military
observer, to the South Sudan mission. We welcome the
creation of different mechanisms to continue increasing
the participation of women in peacekeeping operations.
In that regard, we welcome the innovative leadership of
the Canadian Government's Elsie Initiative for Women
in Peace Operations.

With regard to the latest report of the Secretary-
General (S/2019/800), we wish to highlight the progress
made in advancing the women and peace and security
agenda. However, we are very concerned about the
increase in sexual and gender-based violence, the
exclusion of women from political and mediation
processes, as well as the number of attacks against
women peacekeepers.
Our full statement will be made available online.

