Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2467 (2019),
submitted by Germany, which we thank for its initiative
and efforts. The resolution enables several important
advances, including strengthening the mandate of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila Patten, as well
as recognizing an approach focused on the survivors of
sexual violence and including a request that by 2021 the
Secretary-General produce a report on children born
out of rape. That is my first point.

Secondly, it must be acknowledged that important
concessions were made under pressure from several
permanent members of the Council who did not allow
the text to go as far as we would have liked. We were
particularly shocked that one State demanded the
removal of the reference to sexual and reproductive
health, which had been agreed on in resolutions 1889
(2009) and 2106 (2013). We deplore the fact that
permanent members of the Council should threaten to
use the veto to challenge 25 years ofprogress on women's
rights in situations of armed conflict. It is inexplicable
that access to sexual and reproductive health care is not
explicitly acknowledged for victims of sexual violence,
who are often the targets of atrocities and barbarous
mutilations. The victims clearly need that care. We are
aware of the differences of opinion among members of
the Council on that point, but in the specific context
of sexual violence in times of conflict, that omission
is unacceptable and undermines the dignity of women.

It is also intolerable and incomprehensible that the
Security Council is unable to recognize that women
and girls who have been victims of sexual violence in
times of conflict and have clearly not chosen to become
pregnant should have the right to decide to terminate
their pregnancies. France will maintain its position that
we should ensure that women have full access to sexual
and reproductive health care and rights in every context.
We will continue to support and promote that approach
in the Security Council, in other United Nations bodies
and elsewhere. Women must be able to make decisions
freely about their own bodies.

My third and final point, and I would like to conclude
on a positive note, is that there is no ambiguity. All of
the resolutions adopted by the Security Council on the
women and peace and security agenda, which have
been reaffirmed in the resolution we have just adopted
(resolution 2467 (2019)), constitute the framework
for our collective action, including paragraph 19 of
resolution 2106 (2013) and paragraph 10 of resolution
1889 (2009) on sexual and reproductive health. The
text we have just adopted is therefore a significant
milestone resolution, but it is not the end of ourjourney.
On behalf of France, I would like to issue a renewed
call that we continue together the fight against sexual
violence in conflict.

