The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Armenia, Australia, Bangladesh,
Brazil, Cambodia, Canada, Estonia, Fiji, Greece,
Guatemala, Hungary, India, Ireland, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Mexico, Montenegro,
Morocco, Namibia, Nepal, the Netherlands, Norway,
Pakistan, Paraguay, the Philippines, Portugal, Romania,
Senegal, Slovakia, Spain, Turkey, Ukraine, Uruguay,
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Viet Nam to
participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Major General
Kristin Lund, Head of Mission and Chief of Staff,
United Nations Truce Supervision Organization; and
Ms. Lorna Merekaje, Secretary General of South Sudan
Democratic Engagement Monitoring and Observation
Programme and Women's Representative to the
National Constitution Amendment Committee.

Ms. Merekaje is joining today's meeting via video-
teleconference from Juba.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following to participate in this meeting: His Excellency
Mr. Gerardus Van Den Akker, observer of the European
Union to the United Nations; and Her Excellency
Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent Observer of
the African Union to the United Nations.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/275, which contains the text of a
letter dated 27 March 2019 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
and document S/2019/293, which contains the text
of a letter dated 4 April 2019 from the Permanent
Representative of Germany addressed to the Secretary-
General transmitting a concept note on the item
under consideration.

I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Antonio Guterres, and now give
him the floor.

