Mr. Maurer (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
First of all, I would like to thank you, Sir, for having
organized this open debate and to thank all those who
made briefings this morning.

Following the significant progress made last June
with the adoption of resolution 1820 (2008), our

present debate emphasizes another key step - the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). The
Secretary-General's report offers invaluable

recommendations for all actors on increasing the
inclusion of women at all stages of peace processes.
My country is committed to following up on the
recommendations and is prepared to contribute.

First of all, it is women on the ground who are
the vectors of change. Switzerland is concerned by the
fact that they are not yet sufficiently represented in the
formal structures of peace processes. If we are to
increase their participation at the negotiating table, we
must make their initiatives visible. My country has
supported and will continue to support activities aimed
at achieving such participation, for example, the
International Women's Commission for a Just and
Sustainable Israeli-Palestinian Peace or projects
through programmes to promote peace in Colombia,
Nepal or Burundi, for example.

The United Nations plays a key role in increasing
the inclusion of women. That is why we support the
enhancement of gender capacities in the Department of
Political Affairs and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations by making available personnel and
methodologies. For that same reason, we support
efforts to better mainstream gender equality in
humanitarian activities. In that context, I would like to
mention the specific example of the project of the
Inter-Agency Standing Committee.

Switzerland's 1325 National Action Plan, adopted
a year and a half ago, is a reference document for
mobilizing human and financial resources. It is thanks
to that instrument that we are able to co-finance the
United Nations Stop Rape Now initiative. And we are
relying on that instrument both to increase the
secondment of women to peace operations as well as to
encourage women candidacies for higher-level
positions within the United Nations. We hope that all
contributing countries will succeed in significantly
raising the visibility and the influence of women in that
field.
Finally, the Security Council has the power to
integrate gender issues even more systematically into
its mandates. It could more frequently take the

opportunity to listen to experts of both genders, for
example the High Commissioner for Human Rights,
but also other people within the framework of Arria
Formula meetings. Furthermore, we hope that
deliberations on an effective mechanism for
implementing resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008)
will be successful.

The Secretary-General's report also reveals some
shocking facts. In some conflicts, three out of four
women are raped, and the perpetrators, with very few
exceptions, are never convicted. Such crimes are the
most serious assault on a person's physical integrity
and can constitute genocide, crimes against humanity
or war crimes. It is imperative that the perpetrators are
brought to justice. Such crimes destroy the socio-
economic fabric of communities and prevent women
from becoming more involved in peace processes.
Moreover, they are a major obstacle to achieving the
Millennium Development Goals. That link is a key
element of the Geneva Declaration on Armed Violence
and Development.

We are all responsible for preventing such
unacceptable crimes and for combating impunity. The
international criminal tribunals, and in particular the
International Criminal Court, play a key role in that
struggle. They have the appropriate means to prosecute
those acts of violence.

In your capital, Beijing, Sir, in 1995, 189
countries made a commitment under United Nations
auspices to the vision of a more egalitarian society by
signing a Platform for Action in close cooperation with
civil society. That momentum contributed significantly
to the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). It is high
time that we looked to the future and set new ambitious
aims for the medium term. In 2010, we will mark the
resolution's tenth anniversary. Switzerland supports the
idea of a high-level review conference that could
mobilize decision makers and provide new impetus.

We share the analysis of the Secretary-General
that implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) has
made progress, but we also agree that a considerable
gap remains between reality and political intentions.
We must, therefore, continue to make significant
efforts and thus demonstrate that celebrating the
resolution's tenth anniversary is genuinely merited.
