Mr. Acharya (Nepal): My delegation wishes to
express its sincere appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for organizing this important open debate on women
and peace and security.

Resolution 1820 (2008) and the subsequent
resolutions on women and peace and security
emphasize, inter alia, the importance of working
concertedly for the elimination of all forms of violence
against women and girls, particularly sexual violence
during and after conflict. Some progress has been
recorded in various aspects by Member States, the
United Nations system and civil society organizations
in the implementation of the Council's resolutions on
women and peace and security.

Yet, there is a long way to go to realize the noble
goals laid down in the resolutions. It is unacceptable
that, even in the twenty-first century, women and girls
are abused sexually as a tactic of war to humiliate,
dominate and instil fear in civilian members of a
community. There is a need for a comprehensive,
coordinated and sustained effort to end sexual violence
and to protect and promote women's rights during and
after conflict, as it requires several immediate
measures as well as longer-term reforms in policing,
judicial systems and entire socio-cultural belief
systems to ensure a dignified place for women in
society.

The report of the Secretary-General contained in
document S/2012/33 gives the impression that no
action has been taken against perpetrators of sexual
violence in Nepal. That is not corroborated by facts on
the ground. Perpetrators of sexual violence have been
punished by the judiciary. Although there are some
individual cases, let me also make it clear that sexual
violence was never used as a policy of coercion by
either of the parties during the conflict in Nepal.

Allow me to address the issue of women in
promoting peace and security and what we have been
trying to do to enhance the empowerment of women in
general in the post-conflict situation. Nepal has come a
long way after the signing of the Comprehensive Peace
Accord in 2006 in terms of ensuring women's
participation at the decision-making level. The election
of women to one-third of the seats in Parliament has
sent a very strong signal about the unprecedented
equality and empowerment of women, with deep
reverberations of change in Nepalese society.

Nepal has accorded high priority to the
implementation of the many Security Council
resolutions on women and peace and security as we
move from conflict to durable peace, stability and
economic development. In that context, Nepal is proud
to stand with its distinctive five-year national action
plan for the effective implementation of the Council's
resolutions on women and peace and security. We have
already started the implementation of our national
action plan through a multi-pronged approach whereby
Parliament, Government ministries, judiciaries,
political parties and civil society are involved in their
respective areas. That will ensure the meaningful
participation by women at all levels of the decision-
making process of governance, including in conflict
transformation and peacebuilding processes. We have
also put in place mechanisms at the local level,
together with some strong monitoring mechanisms, to
follow up on implementation. We welcome the genuine
partnership and collaboration of the international
community in our endeavour. In that regard, we
reiterate our conviction that partnership and
cooperation must be forged for building and promoting
national capacity.

Nepal has taken a number of initiatives to take
care of the special needs of women and bring them
forward. It is mandatory that women participate at a
rate of at least 33 per cent in the constitution of local
peace committees at the district level, which are
empowered to address post-conflict-related issues at
the local level. Nepal has been implementing gender-
based budgeting for some years, through which gender
mainstreaming has been getting special attention in all
development activities. Nepal has introduced a policy
of affirmative action in various areas, including in the
civil service, with a View to ensuring that women
participate at the decision-making level in the public
sector.

We have adopted various measures to fight
against sexual and gender-based violence, notably by
establishing of a follow-up office in the Office of the
Prime Minister, a gender violence prevention fund, and
gender violence control committees in all 75 districts
of the country. We are committed to expanding women
and children service centres in police stations across

the country to ensure the expeditious investigation and
the prosecution of cases of sexual and gender-based
violence.

Furthermore, we are committed not only to
increasing the number of women in our army and
police force, but also to contributing an increasing
number of them to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. We have integrated the essential portion of
courses on the protection of women and girls from
sexual violence during and after conflict in our
peacekeeping training package. Nepal is fully aware of
the Secretary-General's zero tolerance policy and has
expressed its commitment to fully supporting the
endeavour.

While moving from conflict to durable peace and
stability, Nepal is taking this transformative phase as
an opportunity for creating and inculcating new values
into Nepali society, where all women and men
participate in the nation-building processes in an equal
footing.

In conclusion, we all have to enhance our efforts
in a coordinated way to end sexual violence and to
ensure the empowerment of women in all spheres of
life. An enhanced level of support, collaboration and
cooperation from the international community would
go a long way towards ensuring the early realization of
our common objectives, as expressed in the Council's
resolutions.

