Mr. Raja Zaib Shah (Malaysia): At the outset,
I wish to congratulate Azerbaijan on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I also
express my thanks for convening today's open debate
on the important issue of women, peace and security.
1 would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
remarks and other invited speakers for their valuable
briefings on the issue.
Malaysia remains concerned about sexual and
gender-based crimes and strongly believes that ending
impunity is crucial in our quest to put an end to sexual
violence in times of conflict. We note that progress
has been made over the years, and we welcome the
continuing work of the United Nations and other
stakeholders, including the Team of Experts on the
Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, which
focuses its efforts on strengthening the capacity of the
national rule of law and justice actors. We feel that the
Team's engagement with relevant Governments would
strengthen their capacity to effectively address sexual
Violence against women and girls.

In our effort to secure peace and security, we
must move urgently to replace the prevailing culture
of impunity with one that promotes the rule of law,
justice and accountability. Underlining the importance
of ending sexual violence, Malaysia is pleased to
report that it has joined many others in endorsing the
Declaration of Commitment to End Sexual Violence in
Conflict, which makes clear the collective view on the
need of greater action to address the issue.

My delegation is concerned with the often
inadequate legal frameworks on women's rights in
post-conflict countries. In that matter, we could take
a page from the lessons learned through established
courts, such as the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda and the International Criminal Tribunal of the
Former Yugoslavia, which offer insightful lessons from
the prosecution of sexual and gender-based crimes.
Those could be applied to future tribunals and domestic
judicial processes. Furthermore, Governments that
have experienced conflict could consider allocating
greater financial resources to investigate cases of
sexual violence. There is also a need to ensure that
international and national courts have adequate
expertise. In that regard, countries in a position to do
so should render assistance to post-conflict societies.

In addressing the issues of women's empowerment
after conflicts, attention shouldbe given to strengthening
the security of women through rules and regulations.
That could be done through setting up institutional
and administrative machinery to plan, coordinate,
implement and monitor development programmes
for women. My delegation cannot stress enough the
importance of increased access for women to education
and employment, as well as the development of policies
and services that offer equal livelihood opportunities
to women. At the same time, we must also remember
the importance of access to health care, especially for
victims of sexual and gender-based violence.
Malaysia welcomes today's adoption of the
resolution 2122 (2013) on the issue discussed. My
delegation hopes that there will be sufficient impetus
toward the actual realization of the resolution and the
landmark resolution 1325 (2000). Malaysia therefore
appreciates the ongoing update on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2013/525) of 4 September. As mentioned in
the report, there remains a deficit in opportunities
for women to exercise leadership, and women are
still underrepresented in conflict prevention, conflict
resolution, protection and peacebuilding processes. My
delegation believes that the greater active participation
of women in peacekeeping and peacebuilding would go
a long way towards including a gender perspective and
allowing women to shape peace.

In that regard, there is a need to increase the number
of women in high-level decision-making positions in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations. Malaysia
is also supportive of appointing more women protection
advisers to monitor and report on sexual violence in all
relevant situations. We appreciate the positive values
they bring in creating greater awareness of sexual
violence issues, reporting incidents of sexual violence
and implementing Security Council resolutions on the
ground.

We strongly believe that the subject of women,
peace and security deserves the Security Council's
sustained attention. Malaysia reaffirms its commitment
to the efforts to address sexual violence in conflict and
post-conflict situations. Nonetheless, we must insist
that gender equality and efforts to encourage and instill
a gender perspective be promoted during times of peace
rather than solely during times of conflict. The respect
and promotion of women's rights must become part of
the culture of every society. In that regard, the Council
can be assured of our continuous engagement and
unrelenting support for the advancement of the issue
in our pursuit of achieving peace and security at the
national, regional and international levels.

