Mr. Emvula (Namibia): 1 would like to put it on
record that it was earlier agreed that Namibia would
deliver two statements during this time slot, but due to
time constraints and to make your task, Mr. President, a
little bit easier, we have agreed to give precedence to
the statement to be delivered on behalf of the Southern
African Development Community (SADC), while our
own will be distributed along with the earlier statement.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
Southern African Development Community member
States - Angola, Botswana, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Lesotho, Malawi, Mauritius,
Mozambique, Seychelles, South Africa, Swaziland, the
United Republic of Tanzania, Zambia, Zimbabwe and
my own country, Namibia.

Allow me first and foremost to congratulate you,
Sir, on having created this opportunity for an open
debate on this very important issue. We also thank the
Secretary-General for his report on women and peace
and security (S/2010/498).

SADC is delighted that today marks 10 years
since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) on women
and peace and security, which was unanimously
adopted during the time of the Namibian presidency of
the Security Council in October 2000. The resolution
sought to ensure women's full and active participation
in conflict resolution, peace processes and post-conflict
reconstruction. It also sought the protection of women
and girls from all forms of violence in conflict and
post-conflict situations. It affirms that women are an
integral part of peace and security.

SADC welcomes the creation of the United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN Women), and the
appointment of Ms. Michelle Bachelet as its Executive
Director. We are confident that UN Women, in addition
to devoting its attention to the economic empowerment
of women at the country level, will also greatly
enhance coordination and coherence on women and
peace and security.

Gender equality and the empowerment of women
is one of the founding principles of SADC, as
enshrined in its Treaty. The 2008 SADC Protocol on
Gender and Development puts measures in place to
ensure that women enjoy equal representation and
participation in all key decision-making positions by
2015. The Protocol also calls upon SADC member
States to take the necessary steps to prevent and
eliminate incidences of human rights abuses of women
and children during time of armed and other forms of
conflict.

As we believe that effective peacebuilding starts
at the national and subregional levels and then
proceeds to the international level, it is of vital
importance that the United Nations works closely
together with regional groups such as SADC. To that
end, the United Nations and SADC signed an
agreement, on 21 September, to work together on
issues vital to peace and security, such as conflict
prevention, mediation and elections. The framework
for cooperation is intended to strengthen and draw
upon the experiences of both organizations and to
allow the Department for Political Affairs to utilize
SADC's knowledge and understanding of the region
and its mediation, peacemaking and peacebuilding
capacities.

SADC is deeply concerned about the widespread
and systematic sexual violence to which women and
girls are subjected in conflict situations. It is our
considered view that all parties to armed conflict
should respect regional mechanisms and international
law applicable to the rights and protection of women
and children.

SADC has devoted a lot of effort to empower and
advance women. However, women still remain largely
underrepresented in key decision-making structures
and in peacemaking and peacebuilding processes. The
region believes that, given the opportunity, women are
active agents of change and play a critical role in the
recovery and reintegration of families after conflicts.
Women are also instrumental in bringing about
reconciliation and democracy in post-conflict societies.
SADC therefore remains fully committed to the full
and effective implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), as well as to ensuring that the rights of women
and children are promoted and protected.

