Mr. Ling (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
delegation of the Republic of Belarus would like to
congratulate you, Sir, the representative of Namibia, on
presiding over this meeting of the Security Council.
Namibia's contribution to the work of the United
Nations this year is indeed greatly appreciated.

The item on our agenda today is rather unusual,
but we deeply believe that it touches on the most
sensitive aspects of the entire contemporary system of
peacekeeping and peace-building in the United
Nations. We are happy to see that the Security Council
is not beginning its consideration of this important item
from scratch. The Council has had very important
debates on its role in the maintenance of international
peace and security, in disarmament and reintegration of
former combatants, and in the area of children in armed
conflict - all of which provided a sound basis for our
consideration today of women within the scope of the
Council's powers and responsibilities in the
maintenance of international peace and security.

The Republic of Belarus appreciates the work
done in the General Assembly on gender equality and
the advancement of women and in involving women
more widely in the political, economic and social
arenas of life.

We believe that there is a very close link between
those endeavours and the work of the Security Council,
the principal organ responsible for the maintenance of
international peace and security, as it considers the so-
called women's issue in the context of armed
conflicts - which directly involve women and from
which they suffer more than anybody else.

The Security Council statement issued on
International Women's Day this year stressed that
women's interests had to be fully taken into account
and that women had to enabled to participate in the
prevention and resolution of conflicts and crises. We
believe that it is important for the Council to take the
proper action to protect women, who constitute the
most vulnerable group within the civilian population.
That is no easy matter in today's conflicts, which are
primarily internal conflicts and which involve a wide
range of political, socio-economic, cultural and other
social issues.

Hence, it is very important to ensure that Council
resolutions and peacekeeping mandates contain
specific provisions relating to the provision of
protection and assistance to girls and women. It is also
very important that there be a reliable mechanism to
ensure that all those who violates the norms of
humanitarian law are held to account.

Belarus believes that United Nations activities on
gender issues have been of particular significance this
year. They have included the June special session of
the General Assembly devoted to women's issues, as
well as today's Security Council deliberations.
Together, these will define the future approach to the
Organization's consideration of women's issues to
ensure peace and security.

The Republic of Belarus attaches great
importance to gender issues, and is fully determined to
make its contribution to those endeavours.

