The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity as the representative of the United
States.

Let me join others in thanking our guest
briefers - Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson,
Executive Director Fedotov and Mr. Grono - both for
their briefings and for their efforts in the real world to
combat human trafficking.

Nadia, I cannot imagine how painful it must be
every time you are asked to recount your experience.
No human being should be forced to endure what you
and your family have gone through - ever. Your being
here and speaking so bravely to all of us is a testament
to your resilience and your dignity, and is of course the
most powerful rejection of what the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) stands for.

We have been here now for two hours and 15
minutes. It is worth remembering that, in that time,
women and kids and others are living in circumstances
just like those that Nadia have described. As we sit
here, they are being terrorized. And they are dreaming
of their escape, desperate to get out but trapped by
brute force and nothing more. We have been talking
about ISIL in the Security Council since at least early
2014. But Nadia, you have humanized the stakes in
a way that I think has been extremely important for
people to hear. I do not think that anyone who was able
to hear you will ever forget what they heard and what
you have been through. We are truly in awe of your
courage. I also agree with the comment that was just
made that, at a time when refugee admissions and the
flight of individuals is being politicized and refugees
are being caricatured in different ways, your experience
and your testimony is a powerful rebuke to those who
would caricature this whole population, when people
are fleeing for their lives, fleeing terror and conflict
and sexual violence. We should never forget that.

Today we as a Council are meeting for the first time
on the issue of human trafficking in conflict. Historic
as this is, it is a bit baffling that the Council has not
taken on this issue before. We have up to now met on
trafficking in arms, oil, antiquities, natural resources
and Wildlife, but this was our first meeting on the
trafficking in human beings. Almost everywhere we see
conflict in the world, as others have said, we see human
trafficking. Human trafficking thrives in conflict, and
conflict is exacerbated by human trafficking.

It is no coincidence that the illicit trade in weapons,
drugs, stolen antiquities and other illegal goods tend to
follow routes similar to those used by human traffickers
and be carried out by the same criminal networks.
These illicit activities sustain armed groups, terrorists
and criminal networks and threaten international peace
and security. In addition, traffickers often force their
own victims to commit crimes, such as participating
in terrorist acts, transporting illegal weapons and
producing illegal drugs, and these crimes themselves,
of course, further undermine our shared security.

We have seen how the Governments, armed groups
and terrorists that treat people as property often show
similar disdain for the rules and norms that ensure
our shared security. Yet, despite persistent efforts to
eradicate trafficking in persons by the United Nations
and other international bodies, Governments and civil-
society groups, this crime persists. The statistics, as
others have noted, are staggering. According to the
International Labour Organization, at least 20 million
people worldwide are victims of forced labour. An
estimated 5.5 million ofthem are children - 5.5 million
children. Making matters worse, as Mr. Grono
observed, the taboo against slavery is being actively and

willfully challenged by ISIL and Boko Haram, which
do not just carry out widespread human trafficking;
they brag about it on social media and in propaganda
materials. ISIL distributes women and girls to fighters
as spoils of war, systematically rapes them and sells
them in markets like cattle. Boys as young as 4 years
old are forced into cub training camps, where they are
reportedly given dolls on which to practice beheadings.
It is barbaric.

ISIL has even gone so far as to issue guidelines
to its followers on how to treat their slaves, providing
a twisted justification for the most depraved acts.
The guidelines state: "It is permissible to buy, sell or
give as a gift female captives and slaves, for they are
merely property which can be disposed of". And they
tell followers, "It is permissible to have intercourse
with a female slave who has not reached puberty". In
other words, raping female slaves is authorized; it is
acceptable; it is encouraged. When we try to describe
evil like this, we find ourselves groping for language;
words fail us. We are amazed that Nadia was able to
speak about the unspeakable and find words, and we
thank her for that.

The stories of Boko Haram's depravity are also
shocking. On 2 October, the group reportedly forced
four girls and a boy to blow themselves up in the
Nigerian city of Maiduguri. Three of them attacked
a mosque during evening prayers. Fifteen people,
including these kids, were killed, and more than 35
were injured. Witnesses estimated that the bombers
were as young as 9 years old.

Martha, age 14, was abducted by Boko Haram along
with her two sisters in September 2014. She was taken
to one of the group's camps, and she later told a reporter,
"They told me not to walk around outside, and when I
did they would beat me. They told me not to talk, and I
would talk, so they would beat me. They told me not to
sing, I would sing, and they would beat me". She was
forced to convert to Islam, assigned a new name and
married against her will to a fighter. Martha said she
was forced to carry extra ammunition for Boko Haram
fighters on two of their operations. "They wanted me to
kill people," she said, "but I could never bring myself
to kill anyone". She said, "Boko Haram members tried
to force my sister to kill an old man. When she refused,
they shot her instead." One night, Martha and two of
the girls escaped into the bush. "I am still struggling
with the memories", she said.

For groups such as ISIL and Boko Haram, slavery
has become one of their most versatile weapons of
war, used to instil fear, to inflict suffering, to recruit
followers, reward fighters, convert people of other
faiths, reward combatants and generate revenue, and
they are learning from one another's worst practices. It
is a grotesque race to the bottom.

So what can we, and by we I mean all States Members
of the United Nations, all civilized communities, what
can we do to root out this scourge? Of course, we must
condemn these file crimes and those who commit them,
and we must continue to document the horrors, so that
one day those responsible can be held accountable. We
must also commit ourselves to ending the conflicts that
provide an ideal climate for human traffickers, and of
course we must commit ourselves to eradicating the
groups that use human trafficking as a weapon of war.

To that end, under President Obama's leadership,
the United States has organized a coalition of 65
countries to degrade and destroy ISIL and spurred
efforts in the Security Council to curb the flows of
foreign terrorist fighters and the illicit funds that
extremist groups use to fuel their terror. The session
that United States Secretary of the Treasury Jack Lew
will chair tomorrow, when many other Council finance
ministers willjoin him, will aim to strengthen Member
States' efforts to cut off ISIL's financing.

Similarly, we continue to provide security and
counter-terrorism assistance to the Governments of
Chad, Nigeria, the Niger, Cameroon and Benin to aid
their fight against Boko Haram. We are also continuing
to partner with African countries to take on the Lord's
Resistance Army and Joseph Kony, who remains at
large. The Lord's resistance Army has been decimated
in recent years, but every day it exists and Joseph
Kony is at large is a day in which children, women
and civilian communities everywhere are at risk of
abduction, and the abductees, as all here know, are then
forced themselves into abducting others. In some cases
you have children being asked to abduct and kill other
children. It is monstrous. So that effort, too, is essential.

Beyond these efforts to end conflicts, in which
human trafficking thrives, and to go after the worst
perpetrators, we must also ask what each of our
Governments can do to ensure that we are not ourselves
helping to fuel the crime of human trafficking.

First, we must work to ensure that our own practices,
from procurement to distribution, do not themselves
contribute to human trafficking. This means taking steps
to require Government contractors and subcontractors
to prohibit activities known to contribute to trafficking,
such as making it illegal to charge workers recruitment
fees that can lead to debt bondage. By putting in place
such requirements and protections, Governments can
show that they are practicing What they preach when it
comes to cutting modern slavery out of supply chains,
and we can each model best practices for the private
sector.

Secondly, we have to teach people how to actually
see the victims of trafficking. This can be extremely
challenging. Some victims of trafficking go out of their
way to avoid being identified, out of fear for their safety
or that of their loved ones, out of fear of being deported
or otherwise criminalized. And when the victims of
trafficking are seen, they are seen too often as criminals.
People see only the crime that these individuals have
committed and not the force, fraud, coercion and terror
that led them to do so. Learning to see trafficking
victims demands sensitizing people at all levels of
Government and across the spectrum of agencies, and
it demands engaging partners outside of Governments
such as faith-based organizations, business owners,
teachers, health-care providers - those that are most
likely to come into contact with victims.

Consider one of the populations at highest risk of
trafficking: internationally displaced persons, namely,
refugees fleeing conflict areas. As we all know, nearly
60 million people are currently displaced by conflicts,
more than at any other time since the Second World
War. Yet aid workers, peacekeepers and other groups
that come into close contact with these vulnerable
individuals often lack the training to spot the signs
of trafficking, and even those with the training often
have extremely limited resources to assist the victims
who are identified. This is a massive gap, and we must
all work to fill it. I credit Jordan, which has taken in
more than 628,000 Syrian refugees, as we all know,
but Jordan also recently built its first shelter dedicated
exclusively to housing and assisting trafficking victims.

To give another example, in the United States, the
Department of Transportation and Homeland Security
have teamed up to train some 50,000 airline employees
in how to safely identify suspected instances of human
trafficking and alert law-enforcement authorities in
real time.
Thirdly, we need to spur more robust and innovative
solutions. Others have rightly highlighted the enormous
disparity between the $150 billion in profits estimated
to be generated annually by forced labour and the
amount spent by countries of the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development annually
on anti-trafficking development assistance, which is
less than one tenth of a 1 per cent of the amount the
traffickers are taking in.

But we do not just need more resources; we need
resources to be more victim- and survivor-centred. Time
and again, we have seen that incorporating victims and
survivors into the policymaking process yields better
solutions, and they can offer the kind of perspective
that Nadia offered us here today. To that end, the United
States Government will soon be launching the first-ever
United States advisory council on human trafficking,
made up exclusively of survivors, to help inform and
guide our federal policies and programmes to combat
trafficking and empower victims.

On 6 December 1865, the United States adopted
the Thirteenth Amendment to our Constitution, which
abolished slavery. Before it was adopted, generations of
men, women and children were enslaved in this country
in the most deplorable conditions. People were born,
lived and died in chains. It took fighting a brutal civil
war in which more than 600,000 lost their lives - one
out of every 50 Americans - for this practice to be
abolished. Even after the war ended and the Amendment
was adopted, the practice of forced labour endured in
other forms, as we know, and the legacy of slavery is
still acutely felt in our nation to this day.

Speaking on the one hundred and fiftieth
anniversary of the Amendment's adoption, President
Obama appropriately quoted President Abraham
Lincoln:

"In giving freedom to the slave we ensure freedom
to the free - honourable alike in what we give, and
what we preserve."

Lincoln was referring to efforts to emancipate slaves
in this country, but his words can just as easily be
applied to the Security Council today. Right now we
find victims of human trafficking in every one of our
countries. We eat food that they harvest. We speak on
telephones built from minerals that they mine. We wear
clothes that they make. The Security Council is built on
the premise that the peace and security of our nations is
bound up in one anothers'. But as Lincoln understood,
so are human rights.

Everyone of us here knows in our core that human
trafficking is wrong. We know that modern slavery
is inhuman. We know that no one should ever have
to endure what Nadia and so many women and girls
and others are enduring right here as we sit and as
we discuss. If we know that, then what Lincoln told
Americans so many years ago also holds true for us
here on this day: our freedom and our dignity are bound
up with the fates of millions of victims of trafficking,
such as Nadia, victims who possess tremendous dignity
and courage. We ensure our freedom by fighting to give
them their freedom.

The meeting rose at 5.35 pm.
