The Secretary-General: I am pleased to address
the Security Council again on the subject of resolution
1820 (2008).

At the outset, Madam President, I would like to
welcome you again to the United Nations. I would like
also to commend your leadership and commitment on
all the major goals and ideals of the United Nations,
including this very important issue of women and
peace and security.

Despite some progress in responding to sexual
violence in armed conflicts, the deliberate targeting of
civilians continues unabated, including on a
widespread or systematic basis. Parties to armed
09-53396
conflict continue to use sexual violence with efficient
brutality. The perpetrators generally operate with
impunity.

States and other parties to conflict must uphold
their international legal obligations. The international
community must do more to prevent violence, protect
individuals, punish perpetrators and provide redress to
victims.

With its resolution 1888 (2009) today, the
Security Council is sending an unequivocal message -
a call to action. It is an ambitious platform for
intensifying this struggle. It builds on resolution 1820
(2008), which itself set a important precedent by
recognizing the links between sexual violence and
sustainable peace and security. I am fully committed to
ensuring that the provisions of both resolutions are
implemented, in partnership with all relevant
stakeholders. I will continue to ensure effective follow-
up by the United Nations system.

The Security Council's continued engagement
will be crucial. My recent report to the Council
(S/2009/362) offered a series of mutually reinforcing
recommendations for action.

Sexual violence - in armed conflict or, indeed,
at any time - should have no place and find no haven
in the world. We must all do our part to fight and end
discrimination against women and girls. The new
gender entity recently agreed by the General Assembly
should strengthen our work for women's
empowerment; I have asked the Deputy Secretary-
General to lead efforts to put that entity in place.

I will also continue to do everything in my power
to advance gender equality among United Nations
staff, including in my senior appointments.

Women's empowerment must be at the heart of
our global work for peace and development.

