Mrs. Gatto (Italy): I would like to thank the
Russian presidency for organizing this important
debate on women and peace and security.

Italy aligns itself with the statement made on
behalf of the European Union and the statement made
by the representative of Canada on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Women and Peace and Security.
Furthermore, we fully support the statement made by
the representative of the Kingdom of the Netherlands
in the light of our cooperation related to the upcoming
split mandate in the Security Council. As a member of
the Security Council for the split term in 2017 and 2018,
Italy, together with the Netherlands, will continue its
sustained efforts to put gender at the heart of peace and
security issues and encourage other countries to join us.

There is clear evidence thatno sustainable and lasting
peace is possible without women's active involvement
in peace processes. That is why Italy is at the forefront
in supporting the full implementation ofresolution 1325
(2000) and enthusiastically co-sponsored resolution
2242 (2015), which encompasses concrete steps to
further promote the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), especially in the area of introducing new
working methods for more focused attention of the
Security Council on the issue.

Despite all the achievements of the women and
peace and security agenda over the past 16 years,
much remains to be done. It is inconceivable that half
of our societies continue to be excluded from efforts
to bring, restore and maintain peace and stability, and
that half of our communities should continue to bear
disproportionately the cost of conflict. If we are to
move further away from words and towards actions,
the promotion of women in peace and security must
be achieved in the areas of prevention, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding agendas, in general and throughout
the United Nations. The following are several
concrete examples.

Nearly half of all peace agreements say nothing
about women's rights or needs. In the majority of peace
processes, the presence of women is still treated as
an afterthought, although to date it has been proven
as a fact that involving women in conflict prevention
and resolution increases our chances of success. That
is why we are implementing the commitments made
at the peacekeeping defence ministerial in London in
September, which recognized the indispensable role of
women in peacekeeping and in conflict resolution as
a whole. Italy is particularly interested in increasing
the participation of women in uniformed roles,
including police roles, and in promoting the integration
of women's needs and gender perspectives into all
aspects of peacekeeping and in efforts towards conflict
prevention and resolution. In this period, Italy has
committed to supporting the initiative of UN-Women
on the role of women in mediation.

Secondly, women and girls are increasingly victims
of multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination
and violence. Such risks increase in emergencies,
conflicts and post-conflicts situations. The women
and peace and security agenda seeks to address such
risks, giving the issue of sexual violence in conflicts
the centrality it deserves, alongside the economic
and political empowerment of women and their vital
role in peacebuilding. Italy is strongly committed
to preventing and responding to sexual and gender-
based crimes in conflict. We are especially active in
training Blue Helmets on those issues, and we fully
support international initiatives for preventing sexual
violence in conflict at both the political and at the
operational level.

Thirdly, we believe that special attention to a
comprehensive strategy is needed to prevent the
radicalization of women and girls in order to ensure a
viable alternative to nihilists and extremists, which has
a dramatic impact on all our communities.

Let me conclude by saying that these are important
priorities for Italy and that we are cognizant that
efforts are needed in all countries, not just developing
or conflict-ridden ones. That is why we are currently
reviewing the third iteration of our of action plan
on women and peace and security with a view to
promoting the paradigm of the empowerment of women
as agents for change. At the same time, we are aware
that especially fragile States can greatly benefit from a
joint effort to shape national-level policy-\making and
to generate strategic cross-national partnerships for
gender equality. That approach is at the core of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, which recognizes
the need to build peaceful, just and inclusive societies
that are based on respect for human rights for all.

We look forward to working with all States,
members and non-members of the Security Council,
the United Nations and regional organizations to turn
that agenda into reality.

