Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to thank the delegation of the United States
of America for this initiative and for having convened
this very important meeting. I also thank the Deputy
Secretary-General, Mr. Jan Eliasson; Mr. Yuri Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC); and Mr. Nick Grono,
Chief Executive Officer of the Freedom Fund, for
their briefings. We would also like to thank Ms. Nadia
Murad Basee Taha for participating in this debate.
We thank her for her courage in speaking about her
personal tragedy and the tragedy being experienced by
the Yazidi community at the hands of the despicable
criminals of Daesh - which is neither an "Islamic
State" or any other kind of State: it is merely a band
of criminals, which the international community must
overcome.

Undeniably, combating trafficking in persons has
always been something that has enjoyed the attention
of the international community because trafficking
undermines the dignity of human beings and their
fundamental rights and freedoms. Recently, however,
terrorist groups have been carrying out the worst forms of
modern slavery - as we heard today, for example. Such
terrorist groups are commiting crimes systematically
and on a large scale against various ethnic groups and
religions. That means that the international community
must show leadership and deal effectively with this
issue. Moreover, we must take into consideration the
fact that such acts fuel inter-communal and inter-ethnic
conflict and serve to reinforce stereotypes and fuel the
cycle of violence.

Terrorist groups such as the criminals of Daesh,
Boko Haram and the Lord's Resistance Army are
deliberately abducting women and children, who are
then forced to serve as human shields and suicide
bombers or forced into sexual slavery or forced labour.
Such acts committed during armed conflict fall under
the international definition of trafficking in persons, as
established by the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime. Furthermore, when
carried out in war zones, they can constitute war crimes
and crimes against humanity, which are punishable
under the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court. Large-scale trafficking in persons by terrorist
groups is of maj or importance, and the Security Council
must therefore rise to the challenge, especially given
the fact that such acts are usually committed in areas
that are not under State control. Jordan supports today's
presidential statement S/PRST/2015/25, the first of its
kind, which should enable us to meet the challenge
posed by trafficking in persons by terrorist groups.

Jordan believes that there is a need to step up our
efforts to combat trafficking in persons, in particular
trafficking committed by terrorist groups. That requires
efforts at both the regional and international levels.

On the national level, States should expand
national awareness-raising campaigns concerning the
victims of trafficking and mass displacement during
armed conflict, including through education and social
media. All segments of society need to be informed
about the legal repercussions of such acts. It is also
very important for States to adopt pertinent legislation
and undertake the necessary legal and administrative
reforms in order to ensure that the perpetrators of such
crimes are brought to justice, including by transferring
them to countries with jurisdiction or to specialized
international criminal tribunals. Similarly, States
should provide medical and psychological assistance
and establish programmes to reintegrate people into
their societies, in particular in the case of persons who
become refugees as a result of armed conflict.

At the international level, there is a need for
cooperation to boost the capacity of States that require
technical, material and logistical support, in particular
fragile States that are unable to protect the victims of
trafficking. That must be done through cooperation
with the United Nations system and its specialized
agencies, including, among others, UNODC, UNICEF
and the International Labour Organization. All bodies
need to work in this area. We should also strengthen the
role played by peacekeepers, who must be provided with
the necessary resources to assist victims of trafficking
by terrorist groups. Specialized advisers should also be
appointed.

In the context of combating impunity, we believe
it is be very important that the Secretary-General
submit a report that includes proposals to implement
strategies and mechanisms to meet the challenges
posed by trafficking in persons committed by terrorist
groups, who do not respect the rules of international
law or human rights. That will enable us to implement
action plans to combat trafficking in persons, including
the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons. Along the same lines, we should
support the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for
Victims of Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children, which should be given the necessary
legal and other assistance, along with the appropriate
United Nations agencies and bodies.

Trafficking in persons is a crime under Jordanian
law. In addition, the Kingdom of Jordan has ratified
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime. Jordanian officials are seriously
addressing the fight against trafficking in persons,
with a view to providing assistance and health care
to victims in order that they can rebuild their lives. In
cooperation with non-governmental organizations and
United Nations specialized agencies, Jordan has set up
a health-care centre for Syrian refugees. In addition,
in collaboration with UNICEF, we have established an
educational centre for children, where they are also
provided psychological and social services.

In conclusion, Jordan will continue to make further
efforts to combat the crime of trafficking in persons
committed by terrorist groups. We are prepared
to cooperate with all national and international
organizations to combat this scourge and to address its
root causes in order to prevent it.

