Ms. White (Ireland): Ireland aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered later today by the
representative of the European Union.

Ireland welcomes the opportunity to address the
Security Council during this open debate, which marks
the tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) on women and peace and security. Ireland
is deeply committed to the principles enshrined in this
groundbreaking resolution and will continue to strive
for its full implementation, both in Ireland and
internationally.

Ireland has been very active on resolution 1325
(2000) and has long been reflecting the spirit of the
resolution in its external actions. In order to formalize
this commitment, my department is working closely
with other Government departments, as well as with
members of civil society and academia, towards the
development of an effective national action plan, which
we hope to launch early next year. This is our principal
pledge here today.

Ireland has also appointed a special envoy and
launched a cross-learning initiative on resolution 1325
(2000) in 2009. Yesterday afternoon, I had the honour
to present the findings of this initiative to the head of
UN Women, Under-Secretary-General Michelle
Bachelet. This innovative initiative involved
participants from Timor-Leste, Liberia, Ireland and
Northern Ireland, and was designed to draw upon the
experiences of those directly affected by conflict in
order to discuss the most critical issues facing women
and girls in conflict and post-conflict settings. The
participants, experts in their field, met three times, in
Belfast, Dili and Monrovia. Each meeting focused on
one of the "three p's" of resolution 1325 (2000) -
participation, protection and incorporating gender
perspectives in policymaking - and addressed issues
such as transitional justice, mediation, gender-based
violence and the application of international human
rights and international humanitarian law.

While the outcome of the cross-learning initiative
may not easily be quantified, it is our hope that the
recommendations included in the final report will have
a direct and immediate impact on women experiencing
conflict, and that this impact will continue to resonate
for years to come.

One important issue highlighted throughout the
cross-learning initiative was the urgent need to fight
the culture of impunity in relation to sexual violence.
Impunity and justice are mutually exclusive. To let
perpetrators of sexual violence roam free is to tell their
victims that the world is not listening.

But we must listen, and we must act. Effective
mechanisms must be put in place to bring perpetrators
to justice and to send a clear message that such acts
will no longer be tolerated. Crimes of a sexual nature
must not be included in amnesties. Impunity must no
longer be allowed to flourish. We have talked about a
policy of zero tolerance; it is now time to stand
together and demand that this policy be taken seriously.

Another central idea arising from the
cross-learning initiative was the need to engage with
men. Women, peace and security is not just a women's
issue. In order to achieve true gender equality, men and
women must work side by side. We had several male
gender champions involved in the initiative, and their
contribution to the process was invaluable.

Resolution 1325 (2000) permeates all facets of
conflict prevention and resolution and post-conflict
reconstruction. Men involved in those processes must
be convinced of the relevance of the resolution to their
work. Given the patriarchal nature of many societies,
men can and should become positive role models to
younger boys. In that way, resolution 1325 (2000) will
become a global normative issue, as opposed to a
women's issue. Peace is not sustainable, nor can it be
sustained, without the support of all members of
society.

I would also like to take this opportunity to note
Ireland's warm support for Michelle Bachelet and the
recently established UN Women. I am confident that
that body's core work will benefit the lives of women
and girls who experience, or who have experienced, the
atrocities of conflict, in particular the atrocities that
target them specifically. International support for it will
be integral to its success. I am delighted to confirm
Ireland's pledge to commit $1 million to UN Women
this year. We look forward to hearing of its progress.

I would also like to pay tribute to the excellent
work of Margot Wallstrom, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
She has focused the world's attention on the recent
unacceptable spate of sexual violence in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In doing so, she is
ensuring that action is being taken to bring the
perpetrators to justice. Her commitment and
determination in her role as Special Representative of
the Secretary-General will be vital in transforming the
current landscape of impunity into a legacy of zero
tolerance.

Ireland also welcomes the recent report of the
Secretary-General on women, peace and security
(S/2010/498). We note in particular the comprehensive
recommendations and the update on the set of
indicators that will be used to track the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) at the global level. We also
warmly welcome the Secretary-General's recent report
on women's participation in peacebuilding
(S/2010/466), in particular its resolute and forward-
looking seven-point action plan. The commitment to
allocate 15 per cent of United Nations-managed funds
in support of peacebuilding to projects whose principal
objective is to address women's specific needs,
advance gender equality and empower women is
especially laudable.

The tenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000)
is an important milestone in the evolution of the
women, peace and security agenda. Events marking
this anniversary, both here in New York and
worldwide, highlight the significant progress that has
been achieved, but also the long road yet to be
travelled. Women are more visible in many areas,
including peacekeeping, mediation and post-conflict
recovery. There is, however, no room for complacency.
Recent events in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo alone highlight that much more remains to be
done.

The objectives and principles of resolution 1325
(2000) underpin the core tenets of international human
rights law, international humanitarian law and the
Charter of the United Nations itself. The protection of
women and girls from sexual violence in armed
conflict and their participation in conflict resolution
and post-conflict peacebuilding are integral to the
maintenance of international peace and security. Let us
not forget that. In that context, Ireland commends the
Council's continued attention to resolution 1325
(2000).

