Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to start by thanking the President for
convening this open debate on women and peace and
security.

Costa Rica would like to reiterate its commitment
to the defence and promotion of human rights of
women and girls. It expresses its concern because, in
spite of some progress made in this area, the
Organization as a whole today is not sufficiently
prepared to face the grave challenges that are urgent in
this context. The violence against women, especially in
situations of armed conflict, has become an endemic
problem. For this reason, it should be approached
comprehensively with a time-horizon that goes beyond
the immediate and with mechanisms that go beyond
well-intentioned improvisation.

It is ironic that women are excluded almost
completely from the peace processes when it is they
who most suffer the consequences of armed conflict. It
is they who are the great majority of the refugees and
displaced persons; and it is they who are the most
likely to be victims of all consequences of wars. I say
it is ironic because it is generally recognized that
women are agents of change and engines for
development. For this reason, Costa Rica would like
women to have a major role and effective participation
in any decisions taken in areas of conflict prevention
and conflict resolution, as well as in the design and
implementation of reconstruction and peacebuilding.

There are few situations where the link between
peace, security, development and human rights is as
clear as in gender-based issues. To ensure progress
towards lasting peace and security and towards the
effective protection of human rights of all individuals
in situations of armed conflict, Costa Rica is convinced
that it is necessary to give women effective
empowerment. The United Nations should facilitate
and promote national activities aimed at that objective.

Furthermore, the multidimensionality of the
problems of women and girls in situations of armed
conflict requires a systemic approach. In that
connection, Costa Rica understands that all United
Nations organs and programmes should participate in
an active and coordinated manner in efforts to
overcome the great challenges in this area. We are
concerned at the compartmentalization of issues that,
by their very nature, are entirely cross-cutting, as the
Secretary-General indicates in his note contained in
document A/6l/583. For that reason, we consider it
imperative to move forward without delay in
discussing and taking swift decisions regarding the
Organization's gender architecture.

At the same time, Costa Rica believes it is
important to strengthen the political commitment of all
actors. In that connection, we wish to reaffirm the
importance of fulfilling the commitments set out in the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, as well as
those made at the twenty-third special session of the
General Assembly, particularly with regard to attaining
the six strategic objectives of the Platform for Action
pertaining to armed conflict.

We are convinced of the need to support States -
particularly those that find themselves in or emerging
from a situation of armed conflict - in capacity-
building in the areas of gender equality and the
empowerment of women. Mindful of that priority
consideration, we urge that the 2008-2009 Action Plan
be updated to make it a results-based instrument
through monitoring and reporting in its thematic areas.
We look forward to the assessment of the results of this
support tool.

Finally, despite all the challenges still facing us,
it is important to highlight and recognize the efforts of
the Security Council and of the agencies, funds and
programmes of the United Nations system aimed at the
effective implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
We also welcome supplementary efforts in that regard,
with special mention of the work of the International
Criminal Court to criminalize sexual and gender-based
violence and to protect civilians in armed conflict.

A coordinated, coherent and results-based
response that promotes and encourages fulfilment of
the commitments made by States over the years is the
best way to guarantee that peace, security, sustainable
development and respect for human rights will be the
pillars supporting the future of our nations.

