Mr. Kawamura (Japan): At the outset, I would
like to join other members of the Council in thanking
Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed and
Ambassador Tete Antonio for their valuable briefings
and contribution.

The joint mission of the United Nations and the
African Union is an important effort to close the gap
between the perceptions and the reality of the agenda
on women and peace and security that exists between
New York and Africa. It is also very significant as the
very first joint trip based on the enhanced partnership
between the African Union Commission and the United
Nations in the area of peace and security. I would
therefore like to commend Ms. Mohammed's strong
and insightful leadership, which made the visit a great
success, and we hope that other, similar, missions will
follow. This one made it clear that gender inequality
and discrimination against women are among the root
causes of conflict in both Nigeria and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In addition, during the visit
to the Lake Chad Basin region in March, members of
the Security Council witnessed the important role of
women in ensuring peace and security in the region.

The existing conflicts will become further
protracted and peace will become more distant and
fragile if countries in the region and the international
community fail to protect women, who are often the
first victims of conflict, and do not ensure their
participation in any peacebuilding efforts - as women
are bearers ofpeace.

When it comes to the protection of women, we have
to address sexual violence first. Holding perpetrators
legally accountable and providing victims with judicial
redress are both key elements that require both a legal
structure and its consistent implementation. Japan is
proud to be a leading supporter of the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, and specifically the Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence
in Conflict, in their effort to provide assistance to
Governments in Africa, including the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, to ensure the rule of law.

Regarding women's participation, we must enable
women to serve as leaders and to aspire to a better
future. Women's involvement makes their communities
and regions more resilient. It will prevent the infiltration
of violent extremist groups and end the negative spiral
of poverty and conflict. Japan continues to collaborate
with UN-Women to promote women's participation
through empowerment, community dialogue and
education, focusing on the Sahel region.

In Nigeria, it is encouraging that a group of Chibok
girls were released. However, as today's briefing
clarified, we must not forget that so many other girls
are still held captive and used as weapons of war by
terrorist groups. Even after their release, many are still
stigmatized and struggle to adapt to the return to their
communities. In such cases, we see the need to find
comprehensive and long-term approaches to support
women in conflict settings.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we
are gratified that perpetrators of rape are being held
accountable. The Democratic Republic of the Congo
is at an important crossroads in the maintenance and
enhancement of peace and stability throughout the
elections. The success ofthe elections hinges on women
being actively involved in the decision-making process
for their own future. The bitter experiences of both
countries should serve as prominent lessons for other
conflict-affected nations in Africa and beyond.

In conclusion, let me add that Japan underscores
peacebuilding in Africa, including through the Tokyo
International Conference on African Development
(TICAD). This month, Japan will organize the TICAD
Ministerial Meeting in Mozambique. This fall, Japan
will host the Fourth World Assembly for Women in
Tokyo. Japan has emphasized the fundamental nexus
between peace and women through these international
forums, which I believe embody the same values and
message as the joint AU-United Nations Mission.

