Mr. Gonzalez de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank Secretary-General
for his commitment to this issue, for his report
(S/2013/525) and for being present at this debate. I also
thank Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka for her statement
and congratulate her on her recent appointment as
head of UN Women. Spain fully supports her in the
performance of her duties.

Spain welcomes the fact that the Security Council
has devoted three debates this year, with different
approaches, to the women and peace and security
agenda. The adoption of resolution 2122 (2013) today
and of resolution 2106 (2013) in June consolidates
a doctrinal and legal corpus that reflects the will of
Member States to move from dialogue to action.

The approach chosen today for the current debate
links two fundamental principles to which Spain is
particularly committed: the first is the fight against
impunity for crimes against women in armed conflict,
and the second is women's participation in rebuilding
the rule oflaw in post-conflict situations in order to put
an end to the structures of inequality and discrimination
in the context of which those crimes were committed.

Regarding accountability and the fight against
impunity, the international community's efforts in that
field should be recalled. That was highlighted during
the Council debate of 24 June 2013 on impunity for
crimes of sexual violence in conflicts (S/PV.6984) and
the subsequent adoption of resolution 2106 (2013), which
reiterates the importance of vigorously continuing to
establish accountability for the most serious crimes
committed against women and girls in conflict. On
that issue, I would like to stress the need to address
impunity for crimes committed against those who tend
to be particularly discriminated against, such as women
and girls with disabilities or indigenous women and
girls.

Spain has actively contributed to such discussions
in many forums in which such questions have been
addressed and will continue to do so as long as the
effective prosecution of those responsible for such
crimes persists as a global challenge requiring urgent
and priority attention.

With regard to full participation in establishing the
rule of law, which means placing women at the centre
of the decision-making processes in the post-conflict
rebuilding phase, while giving particular attention to
justice and security sector reform. Spain believes that
that is the only way to end the discrimination that makes
women suffer disproportionate violations of their rights
during conflicts. It also enhances safeguards to ensure
that such discrimination is not repeated.

The report of the Secretary-General clearly notes
a positive trend in women's participation in mediation
processes and the negotiation of peace agreements.
However, the inclusion of matters that directly affect
women and their rights in such agreements is still
insufficient. That is what the United Nations Working
Group on the issue of discrimination against women in
law and in practice points out in its latest report. The
Working Group expresses concern for the fact that
the gender perspective is not sufficiently taken into
account in transitional processes, which will result in a
less inclusive peace.

On that count I would like to highlight the
initiatives mentioned by the Secretary-General in his
report that have promoted the involvement of women in
crisis and conflict situations. I would like to highlight
specific areas where Spain has participated. They are
the High-level Conference on Women's Leadership in
the Sahel Region, held in Brussels in April; the work
of UN Women through counselling many countries on
incorporating women's rights and gender equality in
measures being taken to restore peace and guarantee
justice in the context of a transition; and the general
recommendation that the Committee on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women has
adopted today on women and conflict-prevention,
conflicts and post-conflict.

As stated on many occasions, Spain devotes
particular efforts to promoting a gender perspective
in conflict situations and has had a plan of action on
women, peace and security since 2007. Within that
framework, our country carries out various actions
within the scope of its foreign policy, cooperation and
defence activities in order to guarantee the correct
implementation ofresolution 1325 (2000). In particular,
I would like to refer to the International Seminar on
Gender Perspective and Peace Operations, coordinated
by the Ministries of Foreign Affairs and Defence of
Spain and the Netherlands. The sixth edition of that
seminar will take place next November in The Hague.
The seminar includes a specific module on the role
of women in the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration processes, as well as on the processes
regarding security sector reform. Spanish cooperation
plays a leading role in that regard through the plan
on gender-sensitive peacebuilding, with a chapter
dedicated to gender- sensitive transitional justice and the
rule of law. Furthermore, the Office for Humanitarian
Action of the Spanish Agency for International Aid for
Development has elaborated a guide to address sexual
Violence in humanitarian interventions.

I will conclude by quoting the words of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, who,
on the occasion of an expert-level dialogue on the
approach of the United Nations on transitional justice,
pointed out that peace processes constitute historic
opportunities for broadening the goals of post-conflict
justice. Spain wants those opportunities effectively
recognize women's rights, both in terms of guarantees
ofjustice and conditions of peace.

