The Secretary-General (spoke in Spanish): I
thank the Spanish presidency of the Security Council
for organizing this important meeting.
(spoke in English)

Fifteen years ago, resolution 1325 (2000)
underscored the pivotal link between gender equality
and international peace and security. Since then, the
Council has adopted several resolutions on women and
peace and security, each of them a call to action for the
international community.

I am personally committed to implementing those
resolutions. I have highlighted women's leadership in
peacebuilding as a priority. I have appointed five women
Who are now serving as my Special Representatives in
peacekeeping missions from Haiti to Cote d'Ivoire, from
the Western Sahara and South Sudan to Cyprus. I have
also appointed the first-ever female Force Commander,
Major General Kristin Lund, in Cyprus.

But all of us must do much more. The 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) emphasizes the centrality of gender
equality and the need to step up our efforts for women's
empowerment to achieve Planet 50-50. Our strategies
for implementing resolution 1325 (2000) must be
aligned with the vision of the Sustainable Development
Goals.

On the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), I suggested that the Council
convene a ministerial-level review every five years
to assess progress, renew commitments and address
obstacles. I thank Member States for having come
forward today to share their achievements. I look
forward to hearing their plans for even stronger action.

This year we have conducted three major reviews
of United Nations peace operations, our peacebuilding
architecture, and women and peace and security. One
common theme has emerged: any reforms must include
gender equality and women's leadership as central
ingredients and must be strongly grounded in human
rights.

We must also pay particular attention to those
women who are most vulnerable. Facing a compound
disadvantage of gender and ethnicity, indigenous
women suffer from multiple forms of discrimination,
especially in times of conflict. We must also do
much more to combat the growing spread of violent
extremism. Groups such as Daesh and Boko Haram have
mercilessly targeted women and girls. For example,
the systematic acts carried out by Daesh against the
Yazidi community, which include killings, torture,
rape and sexual slavery, may amount to war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide. We must ensure
accountability.

As we look ahead, we have an ambitious agenda.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations is
restructuring the gender architecture at Headquarters
and in field missions, strengthening the partnership
with UN-Women and improving the accountability of
senior managers.

The Department of Political Affairs has highlighted
the need to deploy gender advisers to all special
political missions. It is working to bolster the capacity
of its gender team at Headquarters and to keep
expanding the engagement and participation of women
in peacemaking.

The Department of Field Support is implementing
strengthened measures to address sexual exploitation
and abuse, and to increase the representation of women
in peacekeeping, especially at the senior management
level. With my appointment of a Special Representative
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, we have seen strategic
leadership and unprecedented advances on this critical
aspect of the women and peace and security agenda. We
must ensure that these gains are reinforced, particularly
the concerted focus on prevention, accountability and
the critical needs of survivors of sexual violence.

The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs will ensure that the outcomes and commitments
of the upcoming World Humanitarian Summit, to be
held in Istanbul in May, have a strong focus on gender
equality. We will also boost efforts to ensure that
women and girls affected by crises are systematically
prioritized in the planning and implementation of
humanitarian responses.

I personally commit to do all I can to ensure
that we reach the target of devoting 15 per cent of
peacebuilding funds to projects that address gender
equality and the empowerment of women. We must also
expand this target to our efforts in emerging areas of
peace and security threats, in particular the countering
of violent extremism. The Under-Secretary-General,
Executive Director of the United Nations Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women) will present these and other commitments
as part of the highlights of my annual report on women
and peace and security.

In preparation for this high-level review, I
commissioned an independent expert's assessment.
The global study on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) is an important part of the United
Nations agenda for change. I thank the lead author,
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, the high-level advisory
group, UN-Women and other United Nations entities,
Member States and civil society for their important
contributions.

At a time when armed extremist groups place the
subordination of women at the top of their agenda, we
must place women's leadership and the protection of
women's rights at the top of ours. In the face ofdaunting
challenges, I am encouraged and inspired by the recent
commitments of everyone from world leaders to grass-
roots activists. I expect a similar level of determination
and ambition from the long list of Member States that
have requested to participate in this open debate today.

Let us heed the call for action and work together to
empower women and girls, protect their human rights
and advance world peace for everyone - all cornerstones
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and a
life of security and dignity for all.

