Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I would like to thank
you, Madam President, for convening this debate today.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General, the
Executive Director of UN-Women and Ms. Siniora
Atallah for their very important messages to us today.

I am speaking before the Security Council today
because this issue matters deeply to my country,
Ireland. In fact, I am speaking because we owe a great
deal to women in Ireland, particularly northern Ireland,
where women helped make peace possible on our island
after decades of violent conflict. This year marks the
twentieth anniversary of the Good Friday Agreement,
the result of a peace process in which women played a
critical role on the streets, in community groups and
at the negotiation table in bringing about sustainable
peace. I am very proud that one of those negotiators
is here with me today and that she has been so willing
to share her experience and expertise with women
peacebuilders across the globe.

Ireland welcomes the focus of the Secretary-
General's report this year (S/2018/900) on women's
meaningful participation in negotiating peace.
Meaningful is the operative word. We have long moved
beyond gestures and symbols. We know that we need
hands-on, influential roles for women in which they
can make the critical life-and-death differences in
ending conflict and building peace.

It is now almost a cliche to say that women's
participation significantly increases the probability
of sustainable peace. What is shocking, however, is
that this reality is so little respected globally. Ireland
believes that we have a duty to change that - we have
an obligation to work to support women's leadership
and empowerment across the development and
peacebuilding nexus. We take that duty seriously.

Ireland's international development policy
seeks to strengthen the voices of women and girls in
decision-making at all levels. We are proud to actively
support and, indeed, advocate for greater roles for civil-
society organizations. We know that women's voices are
louder at the civil-society and local grass-roots levels.
We want to see the volume turned up. Women are gifted
in mediation and peacebuilding. We want to see that
capacity leveraged. With that in mind, my country is a
founding member and core donor to the Women's Peace
and Humanitarian Fund.

Ireland welcomes the increase in the number
of female and civil-society briefers at the Security
Council. We believe other voices should be heard here.
In that regard, today is a good day. We also support
calls for stronger gender analysis across the Council's
entire agenda of work, including in its reporting from
mission visits.

To echo the Secretary-General's welcome report,
peacekeeping operations and uniformed personnel
remain the most visible representatives of the United
Nations worldwide, working directly with communities.
Ireland's Defence Forces have an unbroken record of 60
years of participation in United Nations peacekeeping
missions. Peacekeeping is a part of the DNA of the Irish
nation; we often say that we are as proud of the blue
beret as we are of the shamrock. In the Irish Defence
Forces, we have a dedicated and ambitious action plan
on women and peace and security. It has started to
show results.

Preparations for Ireland's third national action plan
on resolution 1325 (2000) are now in full swing. We
are engaging Government, civil society and academia
across the country. At the top of our agenda are issues
such as preventing violent extremism, listening to the
experiences of migrants and refugees and considering
the important question of masculinity. Ireland was
very pleased to host the second regional acceleration
of resolution 1325 (2000) in Dublin earlier this year,
collaborating with our European partners on the women
and peace and security agenda.

I am currently the proud Chair of the Commission
on the Status of Women. In addition to the work I have
mentioned, Ireland fully supports today's focus on
women's political and economic empowerment. We
believe that our calls for women's equal participation
in politics must be matched by our calls for women's
equal participation in society and the economy. We also
want to see an end to the structural barriers that limit
women's political and economic empowerment. In the
Commission on the Status of Women, we are acutely
aware of how many insidious barriers there are to that
empowerment and how deep-rooted they are. Ireland is
working with the Commission on the Status of Women
to overcome them.

As Ireland looks to celebrate 100 years of women's
suffrage in December, we also look ahead to the
brilliant young women waiting in the wings. Ireland
is a strong advocate of the youth, peace and security
agenda. We must not perpetuate the cycle of violence
by leaving young women out of the debate. We also
need to engage young men, as they are just as important
as young women in implementing the women and peace
and security agenda, one that we care deeply about in
Ireland. If Ireland is elected to the Security Council
for the period 2021-2022, I think the Council will find
a courageous and, ifI may say so, feisty advocate for
women and peace and security in the Irish delegation.

In conclusion, as Chair of the Commission on the
Status of Women, I am professionally and personally
deeply committed to realizing the true transformative
potential of women and girls. As Mary Robinson, the
first-elected female President of Ireland recognized,
the hand that rocks the cradle can also rock the system.

