Mr. Sinirlioglu (Turkey): As Chair of the MIKTA
Group for 2017, Turkey has the honour to deliver the
following statement on behalf of the MIKTA countries,
namely, Mexico, Indonesia, the Republic of Korea,
Turkey and Australia.

At the outset, we would like to express our
appreciation to the French presidency of the Security
Council for organizing today's open debate. We also
thank the Secretary-General for his recent report
(S/2017/861).

The MIKTA countries welcome the continued
attention paid to the women and peace and security
agenda at the Security Council. We recognize the
key role of women in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts and in peacebuilding. We underscore
the importance of their equal participation and full
involvement in all efforts in the maintenance and
promotion of peace and security. We also believe in the
need to increase the role of women in decision-making
on conflict prevention and resolution.

In that regard, let me note that all MIKTA countries
are members of the Group of Friends for Gender Parity.
The MIKTA countries believe that achieving gender
equality and the empowerment of women and girls are
critical to conflict prevention, as well as the broader
efforts to maintain international peace and security.
That is also key for the fulfilment of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development.

We consider resolution 1325 (2000) to be an
important milestone for addressing the impact of armed
conflict on women and girls. Successive Security
Council resolutions have also contributed to the
establishment of a sound, normative framework in that
regard. We attach importance to ensuring collaboration
and coordination through the United Nations system in
the implementation of those resolutions and continue
to encourage more women to participate in the
United Nations peacekeeping process and missions.
Despite the progress achieved so far, we still face
daunting challenges. Women and girls continue to be
disproportionately affected by the impact of conflicts
around the world. In that context, we are alarmed by the
targeting of women and girls by gender-based violence,
in particular rape and other forms of sexual abuse,
in situations of conflict. Such appalling acts deserve
to be condemned. The MIKTA countries also attach
importance to the efforts to improve the United Nations
system-wide approach to preventing and responding to
sexual exploitation and abuse.

Massive forced displacements caused by the
devastating effects of conflicts continue to be a
source of grave concern. Women and girls face severe
consequences in humanitarian crisis situations. The
MIKTA countries are committed to promoting gender
equality and the empowerment of women and girls. It is
imperative to develop gender-responsive humanitarian
polices that ensure that women and girls have access
to basic services, including health and education.
It was encouraging to see that gender equality and
the empowerment of women and girls emerged as an
overarching theme of the commitments made at the first
World Humanitarian Summit, held in Istanbul last year.
It is important to transform such commitments into
action. It is also crucial to redouble our efforts to prevent
women and girls from becoming victims of human
trafficking in conflict and post-conflict situations. We
can achieve meaningful progress on that front only
through coordinated and consolidated measures.

At a time when the causes and effects of conflicts
easily spread across borders, regional and international
coordination and cooperation remain important
tools in addressing the challenges we face. With that
understanding, MIKTA, as a cross-regional group
of countries on different continents, underscores its
readiness to contribute to international efforts for taking
forward the women and peace and security agenda.

