Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Allow me to begin by
expressing our appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
convening today's open debate on this item. We
welcome this discussion on an issue that we consider of
great importance. We also look forward to the
independent expert assessment on the impact of armed
conflict on women and the role of women in peace-
building. We View the present initiative as an important
opportunity to reflect on the plight of women in
conflict situations as well as on their role in conflict
resolution, conflict prevention and peace-building.

The plight of women in armed conflict has a
history which is as long as the history of warfare. The
American writer Kate Richards O'Hare wrote almost a
century ago: "It is the women who pay the price
while war rages, and it will be the women who will pay
again when war has run its bloody course". There are
specific injunctions - in the Geneva Conventions and
in human rights instruments - proscribing torture,
violence, rape and other ill-treatment of women during
conflicts. Unfortunately, those injunctions have been
honoured more in the breach than in the observance.

The march of civilization has not reduced the
suffering and special vulnerabilities of women in
situations of armed conflict. Crimes against women
have been frequent in several recent and ongoing
conflicts. Systematic rape has been used to terrorize
populations, force displacement and demoralize
adversaries - as in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In
Afghanistan's two decades of conflict, the destitution
of hundreds of thousands of women was a pervasive
consequence.

In the ongoing freedom struggle in Jammu and
Kashmir also, rape and the humiliation of women and
girls have been used by the occupation army as an
instrument of war. Human rights organizations have
testified since 1992 that in Jammu and Kashmir "rape
and ill-treatment of women are usually reported to have
taken place during counter-insurgency operations" by
Indian forces. Asia Watch and Physicians for Human
Rights documented the extensive use of rape by the
occupation forces designed "to punish and humiliate
the entire community." Amnesty International has
reported that "harassment, abduction, rape and
deliberate and arbitrary killings perpetrated by [pro-
Indian] 'renegades' in Kashmir" are also carried out
"with the support of the [Indian] security forces".

Destitution of women is another manifestation of
the conflict in Kashmir. There are thousands of women
who have been widowed, or whose husbands have been
maimed, have disappeared or are in detention. We urge
the United Nations and non-governmental
organizations to prepare a survey of the number of such
destitute Kashmiri women. The international
community should take appropriate measures to
provide help and compensation to those Kashmiri
women. We urge humanitarian agencies, specially the
International Committee of the Red Cross, to act as the
instrument and avenue for such relief distribution.
Political considerations should not stand in the way of
international humanitarian agencies responding to the
plight of Kashmiri women and children suffering from
the long and bloody conflict in their homeland.

In April 2000, the Security Council adopted its
landmark resolution 1325 (2000) on women and armed
conflict. The Beijing Declaration and the Platform of
Action also contain comprehensive recommendations
on women and armed conflict. The Security Council
must strengthen the processes for the observance and
implementation of the principles of international
humanitarian law and human rights in international

conflicts, including those relating to the protection of
women.

We believe that the Council must not only ensure
prompt and effective responses to crisis situations,
irrespective of their geographical location, but also
avoid selectivity in the implementation of its
resolutions. The Charter contains provisions, including
those in Chapter VI, which can be utilized to promote
implementation of Council resolutions.

In the international experts assessment and the
Secretary-General's report several relevant proposals
have been submitted to the Council. The Pakistan
delegation further suggests the following measures for
the Council's consideration.

First, the Council should adopt a declaration that
the targeting of women, especially the use of rape as an
instrument of war, will be considered a war crime,
susceptible to national and international punishment.
Secondly, a study of recent and ongoing conflict
situations should be initiated to identify crimes
committed against women, with a view to seeking
redress and compensation for the victims.

Thirdly, current and future United Nations
peacekeeping operations be required to monitor, and
regularly report to the Security Council on, the
situation of women and girls in their mission areas.
Fourthly, the fullest possible participation of women in
peace processes and in post-conflict peace-building
should be encouraged, including the reintegration,
reconstruction and rehabilitation of societies in the
post-conflict phase.

Fifthly, the United Nations specialized organs and
agencies should be asked to develop ways to address
the special needs of women and girls affected by
conflict, including health and psychological care.
Sixthly, the Security Council may involve other United
Nations bodies, as well as representatives of the civil
society, perhaps using the Arria formula, for a
comprehensive discussion to promote such
recommendations and actions.

