Ms. Allamin: Today I wish to draw global attention
to the plight ofwomen and girls in Nigeria's north-east, a
region that has been the centre of a two-year insurgency.
Yesterday we marked the one-year anniversary of the
abduction of 276 girls from Chibok. Two hundred and
nineteen of them remain missing, even as the whole
world has been asking our authorities to bring back our
girls. The most recent estimate is that approximately
2,000 women and girls have been kidnapped by armed
men since the start of 2014, a much higher number
than is currently receiving attention. They are stripped
naked so that they cannot escape, forced into marriage
and repeatedly raped.

On behalf of the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security, and as the regional manager of the
Nigeria Stability and Reconciliation Program and as a
national executive member of the Federation of Muslim
Women's Associations in Nigeria, I am here to implore
the Security Council and the international community
to develop integrated solutions in partnership with
women's groups and service providers. Such solutions
should prevent conflict-related sexual violence, protect
those at risk, provide comprehensive support to
survivors, promote gender perspectives and women's
voices, prosecute those responsible and take action to
strengthen the rights of women and girls. In addition,
women's meaningful participation in peace and security
processes must be a core component of any effort to
effectively reduce and address incidents of conflict-
related sexual violence.

Fighting extremism and ending violent conflicts
must prioritize the promotion of State and global
responsibilities to uphold international standards.
That means ensuring accountability for human rights
Violations, including all forms of sexual and gender-
based violence, and enshrining gender equality at all
levels.

State and non-State armed groups in my
country - as in Somalia, the Sudan, South Sudan, Iraq,
Syria, Yemen, Burma and many other places - are
perpetrating acts of sexual and gender-based violence
on women, girls, men and boys. That has a devastating
impact on sustainable peace and development. In Iraq,
sexual and gender-based violence committed by the
extremist group Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
may amount to crimes against humanity. Likewise in
my country, Nigeria, witnesses last month reported that
dozens of women who had previously been forced to
marry insurgents were killed by their "husbands" to
prevent them from either escaping or being rescued
and eventually marrying soldiers or other so-called
non-believers.

Efforts to prevent all forms of conflict-related
violence will not succeed without women's leadership
and participation. Women human rights defenders and
local civil society representatives in north-eastern
Nigeria are negotiating and mediating with armed
groups, rescuing women and girls in the occupied
territories and providing rescued survivors with
assistance and support. I cannot stress enough the
importance of coupling international efforts with those
that are already happening at the grass-roots level.

Community organizations must be involved in
the provision of immediate and long-term support
services, and be supported to create safe spaces where
women and girls can openly discuss their experiences
and share their coping strategies. Often, survivors and
their families do not want to be identified. They fear
retribution and stigmatization, and they feel alone.
Coordination is also required to ensure that specialized
and confidential survivor-centred medical, psychosocial
and economic support is available. Member States must
also commit to removing barriers that prevent many
survivors, particularly those who are displaced, from
accessing the medical care required by their condition
on a non-discrimminatory basis.

In addition, I urge the Security Council and Member
States to ensure the establishment of comprehensive
justice strategies that ensure investigations, reporting
and reparation provisions. Those must be in line with
international humanitarian and human rights law and
comply with ethical and safety guidelines. Immunity
must not be granted for sexual and gender-based
violence or any other serious human rights violations,
whether in legislation or peace agreements. In Nigeria,
therefore, we need a formal process to determine
the total number of women and girls who have been
abducted to date. Those still missing must be found and
supported, and the perpetrators and sponsors of those
crimes must be brought to justice.
Out of the horrible ordeals that we have suffered
and witnessed has come the transformation of Nigerian
women as peacebuilders. Women who were the most
marginalized, poor and illiterate are now mobilizing.
They are active citizens who speak on community radio
and are establishing safe spaces and peace clubs that
train other women and survivors, equipping them with
life skills and linking them to microfinancing bodies.
The international community should support those
growing efforts.

Organizations such as my own are advocating and
building awareness in Nigeria for the full integration of
resolution 1325 (2000) and the women and peace and
security agenda into domestic policies and legislation.
In addition, we need international attention and support
for the implementation and resourcing of Nigeria's
national action plan. Member States should ensure
that development assistance to Nigeria helps increase
educational opportunities for girls, combats gender-
based and other forms of discrimination, keeps schools
safe, builds the capacity of women leaders in girls'
education, improves health care for women and girls
and supports and empowers local women civil society.
Women's meaningful and active participation must
be prioritized in all efforts aimed at addressing the
underlying causes of conflict-related sexual Violence
and broader conflict management, prevention and
resolution, as well as post-conflict strategies. Such
strategies must also address the proliferation of drugs
and corruption and the absence of the rule of law, and
curb the flow of small arms and light weapons, which
have been linked to conflict-related sexual violence.
States should ratify and implement the Arms Trade
Treaty, which requires exporting parties to take into
account the risk of conventional arms being used
to commit or facilitate serious acts of gender-based
violence.

It is important to acknowledge the recent peaceful
elections in Nigeria, which have brought hope for
stability. The incoming President must address the
general system and the institutional failures in the
country. Permit me to use this opportunity to also
call on the Security Council and all Member States to
encourage the Nigerian and neighbouring Governments
to explore alternative options for dialogue with the
non-violent members of the insurgency, including
those who were forcibly conscripted and those who are
yearning for peace and an end to violence. I am sure
there are many who are willing to lay down their arms,
but lack an alternative.

We have all seen the violence in my country spill
over into neighbouring States. Women in our part of
the country are not included, and our voices have been
marginalized from discussions relating to peace and
security in the region. My country, and particularly
the region I live in - the north-eastern part of
Nigeria - will experience peace, security and stability
only when we, the women, are empowered to be active
citizens in society.

