Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Madam President, we would like to thank you for the
initiative of convening this debate and for the concept
note (S/2015/243, annex) that you circulated to inspire

our commitment and our thinking on this issue. I
should like also to thank Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, for her statement. Every
day we are grateful for her consistency, commitment,
courage and honesty. We would also like to thank the
representative of the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security, who shared with us this morning
her experiences and her desire to fight injustice and
impunity.

The issue of conflict-related sexual violence is
part and parcel of Argentina's State policy. That policy
aims to protect and promote human rights; ensure that
there are full reparations for Victims; protect, promote
and ensure equal conditions and opportunities for,
and treatment of, women in all areas; and fulfil the
commitment to eliminate all forms of discrimination,
xenophobia and racism, as well as the commitment to
not countenance impunity but, rather, to work with
truth, memory and justice to ensure that development,
human rights and peace can go hand in hand.

International law is of fundamental importance
in this respect, because therein lie the appropriate
mechanisms to ensure that when a State cannot or does
not want to protect human rights, we have the tools at
our disposal to do so. International law is in our hands
with these mechanisms, so we can listen to the victims
and ensure that violations of human rights do not go
unpunished.

In that context, Argentina strongly supports
the efforts of the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict
aimed at eliminating all forms of sexual violence, in
particular against women and children in the context
of armed conflicts, post-conflict situations and the
actions of violent extremist groups. We welcome
the report (S/2015/203) prepared by the Office of the
Special Representative and fully agree and adopt its
recommendations. We recognize that sexual violence
is used as a tactic of war and terror. It is therefore
necessary to coordinate efforts to address such crimes
in armed conflicts and prevent violent extremism.

We support the report's recommendations with
regard to including sexual Violence in the work of the
sanctions committees. The referral to the International
Criminal Court of cases in which crimes of sexual
violence in conflict have been committed is a substantive
part of the Rome Statute. We support the provision
of multidimensional support to survivors, including

sexual and reproductive health services. We support the
provision of mulidimensional assistance to Victims for
their effective reintegration. We support engaging in
dialogue with all stakeholders - State actors, non- State
actors and civil society, including religious leaders. We
support eliminating the stigmatization of survivors and
providing protection, prevention and support to families
and communities. We encourage the deployment of
women in peacekeeping operations and including in the
specific training of all that participate in peacekeeping
operations content and practices respectful of human
rights and women and children's rights and making it
clear that sexual violence in conflicts is a war crime
and a Violation of human rights.

Similarly, we want to recognize that yesterday was
the first anniversary in Argentina of the coming into
force ofthe third Optional Protocol to the Convention on
the Rights ofthe Child on a communications procedure.
We deposited that instrument at the United Nations,
and a few days ago the brotherly nation of Chile did
as as well. I also recognize with great respect the work
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflicts, Ms. Zerrougui.
My country calls upon other States to ratify the third
Optional Protocol. Today there are only 34 States that
have signed it, and only two current members of the
Council have ratified it. Doing so would set an example,
since the Council is making progress on substantive
resolutions on the protection of the human rights of
women and children and the protection of civilians and
the condemnation and erradication of sexual violence
in conflicts. Since we know that the majority of victims
are women and children, it would be good if all United
Nations States Members, not just Council members,
could sign the third Optional Protocol.

Argentina strongly supports, both when we
are members of the Council and when we are not,
the Council's tasks and we recognize the various
resolutions that have been adopted. However, the
recent and increasing sexual crimes that have been
perpetrated by extremist violent groups, as well as by
States that enjoy impunity, as a strategy to terrorize,
intimidate and stigmatize specific groups - women,
children, the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender
population, refugees and displaced persons, people of
different faiths and religions - constitute some of the
most serious international crimes.

From the perspective of human rights, protection
from crimes of sexual violence perpetrated in conflicts
as a tactic or strategy of war, terror, intimidation or
stigmatization and the prevention of those crimes
must remain our priority. We must therefore continue
to insist on this matter. Very often, because of having
become accustomed or desensitized to these abhorrent
crimes, victims themselves do not see what they have
suffered as violations of their human rights and dignity.
But they are war crimes and human rights Violations.

In conclusion, as an elderly Spanish lady said - she
was 88 years old at the time - from the collective of
the women of 1936,

"to think that the clock is ticking fast and every
day we tear off another page from the calendar, we
cannot wait for next year."

Why do I mention this? Not because I always like to
quote poets, but sometimes they speak more plainly
than politicians or diplomats. When Enriqueta wrote
that, we all knew what she was saying. Do not rip
another page off the calendar until the Victims have
been provided with reparations. We call for an end
be put to the slowness in providing reparations to the
victims and to prevent conflict-related sexual violence.
It seems that we may not have been alert when reading
that in a given country 48 women per day are subject
to sexual Violence. We should awaken to our great
commitment and desire for a better world.

In my country, which suffered from State
terrorism during a bloody civil-military dictatorship,
the women who were victims of that dictatorship also
had to learn what it meant for their human rights to
be violated, including when it came to their bodies.
In Susana Chiarotti's Grietas en el Silencio, a recent
book compiling testimonies of women who were
subjected to sexual violence during the civil-military
dictatorship i and this is something that people at first
either did not know or did not want to talk about - a
Victim of sexual violence recounts,

"If you tell me that this is a violation of my
human rights because it is sexual violence, and is
so defined as a crime in the Rome Statute, then,
yes, I was abused. When I was arrested they put
the barrel of a gun in my vagina. They took away
my six-month-old baby while I was nursing. They
licked milk off me, saying it was the milk my baby
would be having if they themselves were not taking
it."

At the end of the day, we are what we do in order
to change what we are. Those are not my words, but I
mention them in homage to the poet Eduardo Galeano,

who died yesterday and who was the writer of The Open
Veins ofLatin America.

