Archbishop Auza: The Holy See would like to
thank the Peruvian presidency for putting a needed
spotlight on conflict-related sexual violence and on
how it can be prevented and effectively addressed.

Since the Council adopted resolution 1325 (2000),
the international community has developed a strong
framework to facilitate women's increased role in peace
and security and has achieved important results and
made substantial progress, in spite of the increasing
challenges and complexities of the international
security landscape. On the side of the victims of
conflict, however, women still suffer far too frequently,
in particular from sexual violence perpetrated during
conflict. Collective national and international efforts
are greatly needed if the fight to minimize and end
violence against women - in particular sexual
violence - is to be won.

First, ever-greater resources and focus must be
dedicated to conflict prevention. The Holy See supports
the efforts of the Security Council, within the limits of
its mandate under the Charter of the United Nations,
to actively encourage Member States to settle their
disputes through dialogue and negotiation. There is no
better means to protect women from violence during
conflict than by preventing the eruption of conflict
itself. Attention must be given to ensuring that women's
voices are heard and their effective participation is
availed of throughout the whole process.

Secondly, the prevention of every form of violence
against women in conflict and the protection of their
legitimate rights and interests should be an integral
part of peacekeeping operations. The importance of
integrating women in peacekeeping missions can also
be seen from that perspective. Host countries should be
helped to prioritize the prevention of violence against
women during conflict, while ensuring the inclusion
and active participation of women in all stages of
peace processes.

Thirdly, heightened attention and efforts to prevent
violence against women should be sustained in post-
coanict situations, which, more often than not, remain
chaotic, lawless and dangerous, and are therefore
environments that enable and facilitate violence against
women and failure of prosecution. With the goal of
eliminating the root causes of conflict, the international
community should actively help post-conflict countries
rebuild and ensure that the dividends of peace and
development benefit the entire population.

With regard to access to education, the Catholic
Church has a long and proud history of placing great
emphasis on providing young women and girls with
access to quality education. Young women and girls
today constitute the majority of students in Catholic
educational institutions at every level throughout the
world. That is particularly true in regions where women
and girls still suffer discrimination and in areas where
there are ongoing conflicts. For instance, almost 80 per
cent of the students of Bethlehem University, a Catholic
institution, are young Palestinian women. They become
educators and professionals who contribute greatly to
peace and harmony in families and societies.
Survivors of violence in conflict should receive
comprehensive assistance to ensure that they are able to
recover fully from such Violations and reintegrate into
their societies. States should maximize their efforts,
at both the national and international levels, to ensure
the prosecution of the perpetrators of these crimes. The
International Criminal Court plays a key role in that
regard by judging crimes that have been recognized
by the Rome Statute as war crimes and crimes against
humanity, including those that may constitute crimes
of genocide.

Women and girls suffer many forms of violence not
only in situations of conflict but also in what we call
normal daily situations. However, as Pope Francis said
during his visit to Puerto Maldonado in Peru:

"Violence against women cannot be treated
as normal, maintaining a culture of machismo
blind to the leading role that women play in our
communities. It is not right for us to look the
other way and let the dignity of so many women,
especially young women, be trampled upon."

The Holy See is working with the rest of the
international community to continue pursuing the goals
of women and peace and security. Their role must be
recognized and valued and their participation assured.
Without the input and specific skills ofwomen, the most
comprehensive understanding possible of the causes of
conflicts and the most effective solutions to end them
and build peace cannot be attained, and the effective
prevention of conflict-related sexual violence against
women could hardly be achieved.

