Mr. Liden (Sweden): Sweden welcomes the
progress made in the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) since its adoption eight years ago, but
much more remains to be done. All of us - the United
Nations and Member States - must intensify our
efforts to address the situation, rights and roles of
women in armed conflicts.

We also welcome the Secretary-General's Unite
to End Violence Against Women campaign which seeks
to increase global advocacy on all forms of violence
against women and girls.

Women must be involved in resolving the armed
conflicts that are affecting them, their families and
their communities. They should take part in both the
negotiation and the implementation of peace
agreements. They should also be able to participate
equally in the political decision-making process. We
must actively work to increase opportunities for

women to be involved in peace negotiations and
processes, in recovery operations and reconciliation
efforts, and in security sector reform. When women are
part of informal and formal negotiation processes, the
chances for a sustainable solution with full respect for
human rights increase.

We should also work to raise awareness at the
local and national levels of the role of women in
conflict management and peacebuilding. That can be
done through a systematic inclusion of gender advisers
in contingents and through the training of legal and
military advisers and other security personnel in how
to mainstream gender equality perspectives in their
activities.

We must not forget that women are often active
participants in armed groups. That means that a gender-
sensitive approach to designing, planning and
implementing United Nations-supervised disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes is
required. The situation and role of women and girls in
armed groups, their training needs, including
non-traditional vocational training, and their special
reintegration needs should all be addressed. The needs
of women associated with armed groups in various
capacities, including as forced wives and child bearers,
must also be considered.

The need to protect women and girls during
conflict and crisis is an essential element of peace and
security. That aspect has been particularly highlighted
and elaborated in resolution 1820 (2008).

We have seen ample evidence of the horrendous
sexual violence committed against women by armed
groups, sometimes even Government forces.
Combating that phenomenon is part of the mandate to
protect civilians. Since the violence rarely stops once
the conflict is over, those efforts should continue even
after a peace agreement is reached, including ensuring
women's access to justice as part of the rule of law
efforts. While the United Nations has made many
efforts in that area, it is most deplorable that even
today peacekeepers are implicated in sexual
exploitation and abuse in conflict areas. That is just not
acceptable.
There is still a lack of gender balance at all
levels, both in missions and in the Secretariat. More
women should be appointed as special representatives
of the Secretary-General and special envoys and more
women should be appointed to senior positions in the

Secretariat and in missions. Special representatives of
the Secretary-General and other United Nations envoys
should have a clearer gender equality perspective. That
is especially important in environments where women
have suffered from gender-based violence. A lack of
understanding of gender issues or an unwillingness to
consider their importance can no longer be tolerated in
such positions of responsibility. Therefore, we strongly
believe that all pre-deployment training should include
gender content. Resolution 1325 (2000) and issues
concerning women, peace and security should be
properly addressed as part of the efforts to reform the
United Nations gender architecture.

One impediment to the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) is the lack of budget lines for
gender activities. We therefore suggest that proposals
for specific mechanisms, including financing, be
included in the next report of the Secretary-General on
women and peace and security in order to ensure full
implementation of the recommendations of resolutions
1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008).

In last year's open debate on resolution 1325
(2000), Sweden underlined that we all have a
responsibility to provide ideas, initiatives and good
practices. Let me share some of our experiences. In
2006, Sweden launched a national action plan for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). It stipulates
that Swedish personnel contributions to peacekeeping
missions should have the same proportion of female
officers as the national base.

In that spirit, the Swedish police recently
approached all female police officers who have more
than eight years of experience with the force and
informed them of the procedure to apply for a position
in a peacekeeping mission. At the moment, Sweden has
an all-female police contingent in Timor-Leste.
Furthermore, Sweden has nominated the first female
deputy police adviser ever in the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations. Next year, Sweden will have
just as many female as male students at the national
police academy. As a result of those active efforts,
Sweden has achieved the same proportion of female
police officers working overseas in peacekeeping
missions as we have nationally.
In the military forces, special observer teams that
form part of our contribution to the International
Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan, there will be
equal participation of female and male officers. For the

past couple of years, Sweden has argued for a new
capacity in peacekeeping missions. We believe that
civilian observers would be an important complement
to the capabilities we already have. In particular,
civilian observers could be an even more relevant tool
in dealing with violence against women and girls.

Sweden is now in the process of reviewing our
national action plan on resolution 1325 (2000). It was
developed through a consultative process, including
public authorities and civil society organizations. It has
helped put the issues of women in armed conflict high
on the agenda and made everybody aware of the
importance of including more women in Swedish
contributions to peace missions. We wholeheartedly
recommend that fellow Member States which have not
yet done so elaborate national action plans of their own
for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

