Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): Hungary aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the observer of the
European Union.

I thank France for convening today's open debate.
Let me join others in thanking our briefers this morning
for their very informative and moving reports.

In conflict-affected areas, women are agents
for peace. They play a key role in ensuring family
livelihoods in the midst of chaos and are particularly
active in community-building and peace movements
at the grassroots level. Women's talent should be fully
utilized not only in political decision-making, but also
in countering violent extremism. At the local, national
and international levels, we support the peace initiatives
of local women and hope to see the important role civil
society and women-led organizations play in peace
processes recognized.

We believe that the issues on the women and peace
and security agenda are interrelated and interconnected,
and must be addressed as such. In order to ensure the
effective implementation of the women and peace and
security framework at the national and international
level, close and comprehensive cooperation is needed
among institutions and Governments. We must ensure a
holistic approach from the local to the global level, using
all tools available within the United Nations system.

Hungary is an active member of the Women,
Peace and Security National Focal Points Network and
continues to engage in interministerial consultations
processes, with the goal of establishing a national
mechanism on the implementation of the task deriving
from the women and peace and security agenda. The
Hungarian Ministry ofForeign Affairs and Trade is now
planning to organize an awareness-raising workshop
on the women and peace and security agenda for the
experts of the relevant ministries, the army, police,
peacekeeping personnel, as well as for interested civil
society organizations and academics. One of the topics
of the workshop will be dedicated to women's effective
participation in peacebuilding.

Hungary is deeply concerned about the growing
threat and use of violence against women human rights
defenders. We should step up our efforts in combating
that dangerous phenomenon more effectively, and
develop a horizontal and specialized response. Hungary
believes that youth engagement is important to forging
sustainable peace and development and we need to
empower girls so that later they become strong women
and active members of their societies. We also believe
that women's increased participation in peacekeeping
missions is ofthe utmost importance. Their contribution
could be particularly useful in designing, implementing
and assessing strategies for the protection of civilians
and humanitarian assistance. We are pleased to see the
continued effort of the Department of Political Affairs,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
European Foundation Centre in building staff capacity
and senior-level accountability on gender.

At the national level, Hungary is seeking to
continuously increase the number of deployed female
military experts and police officers in United Nations
peacekeeping missions. Ending the culture of impunity
is a major contributor to conflict-prevention and
sustaining peace at the national and international
level, since ensuring accountability for serious crimes
helps us bring about reconciliation. Stable and resilient
societies address injustice, promote human rights and
build peaceful societies. We highly appreciate the
work of the United Nations team of experts on the
rule of law and sexual violence in conflict. Moreover,
Hungary is a proud contributor to the invaluable work
of the gender advisers deployed in the framework of
the collaboration between UN-Women and Justice
Rapid Response, as well as to UN-Women's work on
preventing violent extremism.

