Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Mexico affirms that sexual violence
in conflict, whether it is a tactic of war, an act of
terrorism or criminal violence, is an abhorrent act and
a flagrant and unacceptable violation of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.

We appreciate Peru's convening of today's open
debate, given how urgent it is that we analyse the
most effective and sustainable ways to prevent and
address sexual violence in conflict, such as through
the empowerment of women, the promotion of gender
equality and efforts to ensure access to justice and
accountability for the commission of such crimes.

Sexual violence in conflict does not occur
spontaneously, and can therefore be prevented if
States make full use of all the tools at their disposal
to empower women and girls and strengthen their
protection and access to justice. In investing in women
as essential promoters of peace and security, we must
bear in mind that from a prevention perspective, every
national and international effort to address sexual
violence in conflict should be made in recognition
of the virtuous circle that exists between sustainable
peace, development, the rule of law and human rights.

Sustainable peace is not possible without the
comprehensive participation and consideration of
the needs and perspectives of women and girls.
The systematic exclusion of girls from schooling
leads to discrimination and is at the root of women's
marginalization in political, economic and social
life. Such marginalization is one of the most obvious
structural causes of conflict and creates fertile ground
for sexual violence. Girls must be empowered in the
family and in school in relation to boys; women must
be empowered with equality in relation to men and to
society in general. Empowered women, respected in
their society, are crucial to building a healthy, equitable
and inclusive social fabric in which the same human
rights for all are promoted and respected. Communities
based on gender equity will always be more resilient
in the face of every kind of conflict or expression
of violence.

Mexico has integrated a gender perspective
into its national development plans as one of its
main directions for action, enabling the necessary
resources to be allocated to it in the national budget.
Our long-term national initiatives include a national
programme for equality and non-discrimination
aimed at mainstreaming a gender perspective into all
Government programmes, actions and policies with a
view to guaranteeing women's rights. At the federal
level, our Government is coordinating efforts with local
authorities, the private sector, civil society and academia
aimed at advancing the Goals of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development in a comprehensive and
timely manner, including all the targets of Sustainable
Development Goal 5.

Crises do not discriminate with regard to gender,
and armed conflict has a particular impact on women
and girls. Mexico recognizes the importance ofincluding
them in mediation processes and process for building,
strengthening and sustaining peace, and believes that
it is vital to ensure they participate in prevention,
reconstruction and national reconciliation efforts. Their
access to justice is crucial, and establishing protection
mechanisms for women and girls should therefore be a
norm in every legal system.

The resolutions adopted by the Security Council
on women and peace and security have helped to
strengthen the normative architecture of that agenda.
The challenge now lies in achieving its effective,
consistent and cross-cutting implementation across the
entire United Nations system and by Member States in
order to eliminate the marginalization of women that
still exists when it comes to making decisions on peace
and security.

Mexico has joined the Secretary-General's
voluntary compact on preventing and addressing
sexual abuse committed by United Nations staff on
the ground. In that regard, we should point out that the
privileges and immunities of the Organization cannot
and must not be seen as a factor in impunity. That is
why we call on the Council to implement a stronger
and more effective mechanism for monitoring national
proceedings related to sexual violence committed by
staff deployed under the United Nations flag, as well
as other officials and experts on mission, in order to
combat impunity.

As an international community, we must
acknowledge that sanctions are one of the most
effective ways of punishing perpetrators of sexual
violence and ensuring that they never commit such
acts again. However, sanctions imposed by the Council
will continue to have a limited impact when it comes
to combating sexual violence in conflict if they are
not strengthened through cooperation, both within and
outside the United Nations system, on investigating and
documenting these types of war crimes in an impartial
and effective manner.

Prevention, as the Secretary-General has pointed
out on several occasions, involves the empowerment of
women and girls in society. A society cannot be healthy
when the needs of half of its members are ignored.
There can be no sustainable peace without women's full
participation in our societies.

