The Secretary-General: First I would like to
thank the President for taking the initiative to organize
a debate on this very important subject, which has a lot
to do with our reputation and future work. The open
discussion on this shameful issue will create a sense
of urgency with regard to and raise awareness of the
need to take immediate action based on the principles
of accountability and transparency.

This issue has not only humbled me; it has left me
feeling very regretful and ashamed as the Secretary-
General of the United Nations. I am sure that the
message that the Council has conveyed strongly and
unambiguously will help to strengthen my commitment
as well as that of the senior advisors of the United
Nations engaged in this area. Again, I feel deeply
sorry for the victims, in particular those minors whose
human rights and dignity have been abused. I apologize
for not having taken more thorough care on this matter.
I thank the Council for presenting clear guidelines and
directions to the Secretariat, myself and the world. The
United Nations is very committed.
As Ambassador Samantha Power has so eloquently,
passionately and emotionally stated, this matter greatly
affects our reputation. Why were we unable to address
this issue much, much earlier? Only a few people are
responsible for the problem. There is a saying that a
small mudfish can make an otherwise clean stream
dirty. We must eliminate thse practices. We must get
rid of those mudfish, and I am very much committed to
working with the Council on this matter. At the same
time, despite the shamefulness of the issue, we must
honour the integrity, sacrifice and hard work of the tens
of thousands of peacekeepers and police officers who
are working under very difficult and often dangerous
circumstances. We have lost a lot of peacekeepers. We
really have to honour them. Their reputation, integrity
and honour should not be tarnished by this small number
of people. I am really commiting myself on this matter.

During my term as Secretary-General, which began
in 2007, the issue of ending violence against women has
been one of my top priorities. Council members may
remember that I launched the Unite to End Violence
against Women campaign in 2008. Then, in 2009,
knowing that the mentality of men must be changed, I
established the Network of Men Leaders. I reached out
to a great number of men leaders in Governments and
the business community, and religious leaders. We have
been working to eliminate these practices.

However, we see now that we have been neglecting
our own in-house concerns. This has happened
in-house, and we have to take greater responsibility for
this matter. I appointed the first Special Representative
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and I have a Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict. And I
have appointed most recently Jane Holl Lute. Appointing
special representatives or responsible persons may
be helpful, but I need the support of everybody - all
Member States, the Secretariat, and people working in
the field. We all must work together.

As I have presented in my report (A/70/729), I
think this matter should be addressed comprehensively.
First and foremost, we have to do much more to end
this violence and help the victims. I appreciate the
willingness of Member States to provide financial and
other material support to a trust fund. At the same
time, I am also grateful that Member States agree to
my proposal to withhold the salaries of those that have
committed violence and to transfer those salaries to a
trust fund. That is a a small effort, but I do need the
strong support of Member States.

Measures to ensure accountability should be
formulated, strengthened and implemented. Without an
accountability process firmly established in mindsets
as well as in our system, I regret to say that we will see
this kind of crime continue. In that regard, I am making
sure that our investigations of currently pending cases
are expedited. From 2010 through 2015, we received
407 cases of alleged abuse. Eighty per cent of them
have been concluded. As ofthe end of 2015, we still had
54 cases pending. I believe that a large number ofthose
54 cases were reported in 2015. We have concluded
all investigations up through 2012. We still have three
cases from 2013 and three cases pending from 2014.
We will make sure to expedite the investigations as
much as possible. Out of 407 cases, we have concluded
353. However, 48 cases remain . I will make sure that
investigations are expedited. Although I suggested
a six-month investigation period, we will shorten the
process further.

Once allegations have been reported or a report
has been received, we will take interim measures. For
example, the persons involved may be suspended from
the mission or confined to the barracks, or assigned to
another mission, which will then have to confine that
person within the mission. And of course, salaries will
be withheld as much as possible.

Now, during the course of discussions some
Member States have stated - and of course I agree
with them - that the honour and reputation of troop-
contributing countries should be respected. We have
tried to do that by not disclosing the names of countries
until most recently. However, we have realized that this
is not very helpful. That is why last year we returned
the personnel of certain Member States, whose names
have already been publicized, and established a conduct
and discipline website where we are making all the
names of the countries and cases available at all times
to Member States and the international community.

There may always be a question about whether
naming and shaming is a good policy or not at this time.
Sometimes we need to make it known to the public so
that they will also be motivated to improve their way
of conducting their business. In that regard, as most
speakers today have explained and expressed, it is
extremely important for troop-contributing countries

to offer firm and strong predeployment education and
training on the importance of respecting human rights,
particularly gender empowerment and balance. Without
the strong engagement and commitment of the Member
States, it will be extremely difficult for the Secretariat
to manage these cases alone.

As Secretary-General for the past many years,
I have directly confronted many Heads of State, face
to face, and told them: "You cannot go on like this".
Some Heads of State have made excuses, saying that
the alleged crime was not committed by their people.
I am talking about national crimes of sexual violance,
not United Nations-related. They say that the crimes
are committed by rebels. "But Mr. President," I reply,
"Are you not the leader of a sovereign State? Whoever
commits these crimes within your territorial boundaries
is your responsibility. You have to be accountable." I
have gone face to face in my fights with Heads of State.

I again commit myself to confronting any country
that continues to permit such crimes. Particularly at the
United Nations, we have to clean house; only then can I
go out to Member States worldwide to eradicate sexual
violence against women. That is my strong commitment,
and I really count on the strong engagement and support
of Member States. I truly appreciate the fact that the
Security Council has raised this issue.

