Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Mr. President, your
presence in New York with us today is a clear
indication of how seriously Ghana takes this matter.
We commend the Ghanaian delegation for organizing
the annual open debate on women and peace and
security. We are also grateful for the contributions
made to the debate by Mr. Jean-Marie Gue'henno on
behalf of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
Ms. Rachel Mayanja, Special Adviser to the Secretary-
General on Gender Issues and Advancement of
Women, Ms. Joanne Sandler, Ad Interim Executive
Director of the United Nations Development Fund for
Women, and Ms. Gina Torry, Coordinator of the NGO
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
that will be read out by the delegation of Zambia on
behalf of the Southern African Development Community.

It has been seven years since the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000). While there has been progress
in implementing that resolution, there is still a lot to be
done to improve the lives of women, particularly
women in conflict-affected areas. For this reason we
agree with the concept paper, presented to us by the
Ghanaian delegation (S/2007/598, annex), that one of
the central objectives remains to meet the demand for
gender mainstreaming in all its aspects.

Throughout the history of South Africa, women
have played a pivotal role in the liberation of our
country. In the negotiations for a new South Africa,
women were in the forefront in developing a
constitutional framework centred on a non-sexist and
non-racist policy. From the beginning, South Africans
recognized the need for mainstreaming a gender
perspective in all aspects of our lives. As a result, we
pride ourselves on having senior women in key
government, business and civil society positions. As
South Africa has increased its participation in the
international arena, our representatives in regional and
international peacebuilding and peacekeeping efforts
have always included women.

Also from our experience, we have learned that it
is important to build solidarity among all actors,
particularly women. For example, South African
Women in Dialogue (SAWID) has links with women
throughout the world. SAWID has collaborated with
women from the Great Lakes region, including women
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Recently,
SAWID travelled to Darfur in solidarity with the
displaced women of the Sudan.

Despite those efforts, South Africa believes that
there is still more work to be done in support of women
and girls in conflict and post-conflict societies. Women
and girls make up a disproportionate and
overwhelming number of the victims of violence,
particularly gender-based violence. Mothers and girls
are the first to be affected in war situations and suffer
among the highest casualties. Those who survive
conflict are victimized and traumatized yet again just
because they are women.

While the situation of women, particularly in
conflict areas, remains desperate and unacceptable, we
should resist seeing women only as victims. While
women may be the first casualties of conflict, it is also
true that women have played and continue to play a
meaningful role in the recovery of families and their
reintegration into society. Women have also been
among leading policymakers and have been
instrumental in bringing about democracy in some
post-conflict societies. As we approach the seventh
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), my country,
South Africa, would like to pay tribute to those women.
One of Africa's leaders is President Ellen Johnson-
Sirleaf of Liberia, who was one of the major
contributors to resolution 1325 (2000), which we are
discussing today.

We also agree that Member States must
continually look at measures to strengthen the full and
effective implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
We believe that full implementation requires the
resolve of Member States in forming partnerships with
civil society, the private sector and community-based
organizations to promote women's rights.

During the negotiations for the drafting of the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), South Africa was among the advocates of
ensuring that gender-based violence was included in
the list of war crimes. When the International Criminal
Court was created, South Africa presented a woman
candidate, who has since contributed meaningfully to
the ICC's jurisprudence on violence against women in
armed conflict. Judge Navi Pillay, a member of the
ICC, is a well-known advocate for the protection of
women's rights.

Also, South Africa has joined with Sweden and
others in promoting the Partners for Gender Justice
initiative. The aim of that initiative is to forge a more
coordinated and integrated system of collaboration to
assist national stakeholders in achieving gender justice
in conflict affected countries.

We recently hosted in Cape Town the Africa
Regional Meeting on Gender Justice, with the
participation of ministers of justice and ministers of
gender, at which there was a sharing of experiences on
how best to identify gaps, challenges and opportunities
with regard to implementing resolution 1325 (2000) at
the national level. The Regional Meeting also focused
on ways to promote gender justice and ensure the
participation of women in the legal system. We wish to
thank the President of the Council, the Permanent
Representative of Ghana, for circulating the report of
the Africa Regional Meeting on Gender Justice as a
document of the Security Council (S/2007/607).

In conclusion, South Africa believes that there is
still more work that needs to be done to address the
situation of women and peace and security. There is a
need for increased participation by women at all levels,
particularly in peacekeeping and peacebuilding, as well
as in United Nations field operations. More women
should be appointed as special representatives and
envoys of the Secretary-General. For that reason, we
commend the Secretary-General for appointing our
colleague Ambassador Ellen Loj of Denmark as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Liberia.

South Africa remains committed to working
within a consultative and collaborative framework to
find peaceful resolutions to conflicts. To that end, we
believe it would be important for women in local
communities to be allowed to participate in finding
solutions for the reconstruction and rebuilding of their
own countries. Besides being the ones who are the first
to suffer when there is conflict, women are often the
ones who know when and how to rebuild the lives of
their families and communities.

