Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): Women and
children continue to be disproportionately affected
by armed conflicts and their aftermath. We have
witnessed, in particular, an alarming increase in sexual
violence, which is often used as a method of warfare.
It has disastrous long-term consequences, not only
for the victim, but also for the affected communities.
Liechtenstein is proud to give its support to the sexual
and gender-based violence work of the Justice Rapid
Response initiative and is among the 124 States that
have endorsed the United Kingdom initiative to end
sexual violence in conflict.

A pervasive culture of impunity continues to be
a major challenge in the area of women, peace and
security. Accountability, human rights and the rule
of law are recognized preconditions for successful
political transition and development, but women are
too often denied full and equal access to justice. States
must offer effective and universally accessible national
judicial systems and provide all victims with support,
protection and redress. The needs of vulnerable groups,
such as women with disabilities and indigenous women,
among others, require special attention.
The Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) has significantly contributed to ending
impunity for gender-based crimes, and its Prosecutor
has declared the issue of sexual violence to be one of
the priorities of her work. Indeed, 18 of the persons
currently accused in the Court's cases are charged
with sexual crimes. Where national justice systems are
unable to deliver justice, the ICC can play an important
role pursuant to the principle of complementarity. It
can also assist in domestic proceedings by providing
information and evidence. The Court also provides
direct assistance to victims on the ground through its
Trust Fund for Victims, which Liechtenstein continues
to support. Like other speakers before us in the debate,
we remain of the view that the grave situation in Syria
merits referral to the International Criminal Court by
the Council.

The need to protect women and girls must not
overshadow the participation pillar of the women, peace
and security agenda. My delegation is therefore pleased
to see that resolution 2122 (2013), adopted earlier today,
builds on the core elements of resolution 1325 (2000)
and contains key commitments for several stakeholders
to the full participation of women.

Women's full participation - including in
peacekeeping operations, national reconciliation
processes and mediation - enhances the effectiveness
and sustainability of development efforts and contributes
to the prevention of conflict. But women continue to be
underrepresented at all levels of decision-making. Their
interests are often not, or insufficiently, reflected in
peace agreements. Out of 10 peace agreements signed
in 2012, only three included provisions on women
and peace and security. Against that background,
we welcome the Peacebuilding Commission's recent
declaration on women's economic empowerment for
peacebuilding. We have noted with great interest the
Mediation Support Unit's commitment to increasing its
efforts to include more women in mediation processes
and the increased female capacity in that respect.

We believe that it is important that the United
Nations lead by example to advance this agenda. The
appointment of Mary Robinson as the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region of
Africa is therefore a very important step in that respect.
We welcome the Special Envoy's active engagement
to involve women and ensure their participation in
mediation efforts.

As in other areas, we have noted a lack of
consistency when it comes to the inclusion of concerns
raised by the issue of women and peace and security
in the Security Council's work. It is important that
the Council consistently implement the provisions of
resolution 1325 (2000) and the follow-up resolutions in
all its resolutions on country situations.

