Mr. Errazuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to begin by saying that Chile associates
itself with the statement made by the representative of
Costa Rica on behalf of the Human Security Network.

Chile attaches great importance to the issue of
conflict-related sexual violence, which usually affects
highly vulnerable groups and which represents a threat
to security and a persistent obstacle to peacebuilding,
including in situations addressed by the Council. The
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court,
which my country has ratified, defines six types of
sexual violence as crimes against humanity.
Accordingly - and in the belief that such violence
should be a priority for those dealing with establishing,
maintaining and building peace, as well as for
humanitarian workers - Chile co-sponsored
resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010).
Those resolutions enable the international community
to focus on prevention and real-time responses, not
merely on the necessary corrective measures.

Believing as we do in the merit of the principles
underpinning those resolutions, we welcome the
Secretary-General's comprehensive report
(S/2010/604) on this subject. We also wish to highlight
the role played by Ms. Margot Wallstrom's in fulfilling
her mandate as the Secretary-General's Special
Representative. We urge her to continue to work
actively and collaboratively while avoiding duplication
of efforts addressed in other mandates. We also thank
her for the field missions she has undertaken, which
have borne eloquent witness to the horrors of this
scourge. In that regard, we were outraged at the large-
scale violations committed in July and August. We
acknowledge the crucial need to address this scourge in
exemplary, timely and sustainable ways. We also take

note of the important work of the network of 13
entities involved in the United Nations Action against
Sexual Violence in Conflict. We hope that it will
receive the support it needs to continue to improve
prevention and early warning mechanisms.

Chile takes a positive view of the following
recommendations in the report. The first is to invite the
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict
to exchange pertinent information with the Council and
its relevant sanctions committees.

The second is to assess the advisability of
adopting sanctions and other measures by the relevant
Security Council sanctions committees, as provided in
resolution 1888 (2009), taking into consideration their
short-, medium- and long-term impacts.

Third is to closely assess the usefulness of
including in the annexes to the annual reports lists of
parties responsible for sexual violence in situations of
armed conflict on the Security Council agenda as a
basis for more focused engagement on the parties. In
that connection, we believe that the Council's work on
children and armed conflict could serve as a guide.

Fourth is to call on parties in situations of armed
conflict on the Council's agenda to make specific and
time-bound commitments to put an end to all acts of
sexual violence, including clear orders through the
chain of command.

Fifth is to support the efforts of the United
Nations system to establish monitoring and reporting
arrangements with regard to conflict-related sexual
violence; to promote the participation of all concerned
in the analysis of information, including on trends,
patterns and early warning indicators; and to evaluate
and identify targeted actions against perpetrators and
programmatic responses for survivors.

I conclude by thanking the presidency of the
Council for this month, the United States, for having
convened this debate, and by calling on the Council to
engage decisively in the implementation of the
resolutions, which Chile supported together with the
mother resolution 1325 (2000), for which we already
have a national plan. In our opinion, such
implementation will be concrete only if we commit
ourselves to concerted action and accountability as
regards prevention, participation and protection, taking
into account all the stakeholders involved.
