Mrs. Hassan (Djibouti): At the outset, Djibouti
wishes to express its gratitude to the delegation of
Bolivia for taking the leadership during its presidency
to organize this important annual Security Council
debate on the issue of women and peace and security.
We furthermore wish to express our gratitude for
the concept note (see S/2018/904, annex) drafted in
preparation for this meeting, as well as for the useful
briefings provided to us this morning in the Chamber.

Djibouti aligns itself with the statement made by
the representative of Ghana on behalf of the Group of
friends of the African Women Leaders Network.

(spoke in French)

With today's growing number of complex conflicts,
it is more important than ever to find the path to
peacebuilding, which is an economic imperative for all.
With resolution 1325 (2000) and the seven resolutions
that build upon it, we have the necessary commitments
and instruments. Now we must give life to those
instruments and commitments while encouraging
greater harmonization between them and the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, Agenda 2063
of the African Union and, more important, national
programmes. Prevention is essential, especially in
substantial investments in education, the management
of natural resources such as water, job creation, the
protection of women and girls and the promotion of their
role and leadership in the search for peace. The full and
effective implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda remains a priority for Djibouti. I will
focus on three points in that regard.

First, as affirmed in the Beijing Platform for Action,
adopted at the Fourth World Conference on Women,
equal participation in decision-making is not only a
demand for simple justice or democracy but can also be
seen as a necessary condition for women's interests to
be taken into account. Without the active participation
of women and the incorporation of women's perspective
at all levels of decision-making, the goals of equality,
development and peace cannot be achieved. Much effort
has been expended on this agenda, but much remains to
be done.

Turning to my second point, we can note only with
regret that the impact of climate change on security
affects women disproportionately. Climate change
limits women's access to essential resources such as
water, thereby reinforcing the negative consequences
of conflict for women. According to the report of the
Secretary-General presented this morning:

(spoke in English)

"For the fifth year in a row, wars, violence and
persecution drove forced displacement worldwide
to a new high: 68.5 million people displaced at the
end of 2017." (S/2018/900, para. 4)

(spoke in French)

As a result, our responses to peace and security
issues need to address both climate issues and
gender inequality. In that context, we underscore the
importance of adopting appropriate risk-assessment
and management strategies. Those tools pursue both
the immediate objective of mitigating the triggers
and effects of violent conflict, while seeking to build
peace and move towards the long-term objectives of
prevention and sustainable peace.

With regard to my third and final point, my
country has worked to promote women's participation
in processes of women's economic empowerment,
in governance and in justice. Many sectoral public
policies in that regard have been put in place and have
been the subject of a national gender programme.
Article 1 of Djibouti's Constitution established gender
equality in civil and political rights. On 11 January, the
Government of Djibouti was able to get a law passed
by Parliament that established a quota of 25 per cent
for eligible positions reserved for women on different
lists. Currently, in the public administration, thanks
to a legal framework and political will for equal
participation, women represent approximately 25 per
cent of the workforce.

My delegation fully shares the goal of fully
implementing resolution 1325 (2000) by 2020. The
Council can count on Djibouti to work with it to achieve
that goal. As other speakers have alluded to, the issue
of women's economic empowerment, the enjoyment
of their fundamental rights and their role within their
families and communities is something that must be
cultivated and encouraged. It is not only a moral issue,
but one of economics and prosperity.

I would like to conclude by reiterating that this
theme concerns not only all those sitting around this
table, but also all the Members of the Organization.
Therefore, what can, and should, we do? In two years'
time, resolution 1325 (2000) will be 20 years old.
Djibouti believes that by 2020 we must to everything
we can to ensure that women's voices are heard at
the peace-negotiating table, but also in this Chamber.
Today women can be the drivers of a new approach, a
new concept and a new paradigm.

Finally, Djibouti associates itselfwith all those who
have warmly congratulated the Ethiopian Government
following the appointment of its first woman President,
Ms. Zewde.

