Ms. Wilson (Australia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for the invitation and for bringing the Council's dedicated
attention to the critical issue of the protection needs and
challenges faced by some of the most vulnerable and,
potentially, most powerfully transformative members
of conflict-affected societies - women and girls. We
would also like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Kang, Ms. Durham of the International Committee of
the Red Cross and Ms. Elman for their valuable and
powerful briefings today and for the work that they and
their organizations do in some of the most challenging
environments around the world.

As the United Nations community prepares to mark
the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) later this year, it is a timely opportunity
for us to reflect on how effective the Council has
been, particularly in its efforts to protect and promote
the human rights of women and girls in conflict-
affected situations and their roles in peace and security
settings, and to see how those proactive efforts can be
strengthened.

Of course, as many have acknowledged, the
challenges facing the Council are immense, covering
more simultaneous conflicts, having a greater impact
on civilians and encompassing a wider breadth of
the world. It is clear to us that in facing those many
challenges, it is imperative that the Council move
early to secure the protection needs of women and
girls as conflicts emerge, and that it consistently and
comprehensively apply a gender lens across the breadth
of its work.

Today, Australia would like to highlight three key
areas where we think the Council and Member States
could usefully focus their efforts to substantively
improve protection outcomes for women and girls in
conflict and address the underlying causes of gender
inequality. Acknowledging the many who have spoken
before us on a range of very important issues, we are
just picking up three particular issues that many have
already addressed.

First, on improving women's participation in
prevention and protection efforts, we think it essential
to recognize and make full use of women's capabilities,
particularly by ensuring that they play central roles in
inclusive peace and security mechanisms, including
the design and implementation of conflict prevention
initiatives, conflict resolution strategies and post-
conflict rebuilding and reconciliation. We must also
work to counter cultures of impunity for violations
of women's human rights and ensure accountability
for crimes perpetrated against them, as others have
mentioned. Furthermore, in designing peacekeeping
and special political missions, we encourage Council
members and United Nations leaders to remain
focused on the protection of civilians and on ensuring
that mandates are implemented in a gender-sensitive
manner.

Key to that is following up with practical action.
We have heard some examples, such as deploying
women protection advisers to address the protection
needs of women in conflict, particularly from sexual
violence, and deploying gender advisers who can be
very instrumental in helping local women to participate
in peace processes and empowering women in the area
of legal and judicial processes. Of course, we strongly
believe that the responsibility for the protection of
women's and girls' rights is not a matter for women
and girls alone. Men and boys have a vital role to play,
and so it is critical that peacekeepers receive adequate
predeployment training on protection of civilians,
gender and human rights.

Secondly, as to empowering women economically
and politically, a key element to strengthening the
protection of women and girls and securing their
livelihoods in post-conflict situations is prioritizing
women's economic empowerment. The economic
empowerment of women is a major priority of Australia's
foreign affairs, trade and aid, and it is championed by our
Government. Ensuring the full and equal participation
of women in the political, economic and social spheres
is fundamental to that; it must be embedded early
and be a priority in all conflict resolution and post-
conflict rebuilding efforts. It also links importantly to
the eventual outcomes of the post-2015 development
agenda discussion this year. It will be important for us
to ensure that any discussion take account of conflict-
affected women and girls and global efforts to promote
economic growth and poverty reduction and to ensure
peaceful and resilient communities.

Thirdly, we must ensure that United Nations
missions and agencies collect, analyse and provide
to the Council information and data on the gender-
sensitive aspects of their work. We have seen how a
lack of data, including sex and age-disaggregated data,
fundamentally affects and undermines our prevention
and response efforts. It is therefore important that
United Nations missions and agencies monitor and
report on both the gender aspects of their mandates
and the gender impacts of their work. It is equally
essential to that this information be provided to the
Council through regular reporting, as well as through
briefings. Such information can be very powerful in
conflict-prevention efforts, so we see it as an area of
fundamental importance to the Council's protection
efforts.

In conclusion, the year 2015 will provide us with
a rare opportunity to strengthen the United Nations
architecture on women's and girls' rights, including
through the parallel reviews of resolution 1325 (2000),
United Nations peace operations and the peacebuilding
architecture. We must seize this chance together.
Australia calls on those involved in the reviews to ensure
that we make concrete and practical recommendations
on how all arms of the United Nations peace and security
architecture can work more effectively and consistently
to protect civilians in conflict and to promote the rights
of women and girls across the Council's agenda.

