Mr. Khalek (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at
the outset to express our appreciation for the convening
of this annual open debate to review the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security. Our appreciation is also extended to all
previous speakers.

Egypt has read with interest the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2012/732) on women and peace
and security. Egypt would like to express its appreciation
for the efforts made in the preparation of the report
and for the progress that has been achieved over the
past year, in particular with regard to the involvement
of women in mediation efforts; in peace accords that
include special provisions to improve security for and
the situation of women and girls; and in the continuing
efforts for the follow-up, monitoring and evaluation of
the activities ofUnited Nations missions. My delegation
hopes that future reports will reflect an increase in
the number of women who are in leadership positions
and involved in the decision-making processes of the
United Nations, in particular those related to peace and
security.

Women are key and active partners in
decision-making, conflict resolution, the development
of peace strategies and the promotion of the culture
of peace. The empowerment of women is therefore
an instrumental factor and a cornerstone in the
implementation of Security Council resolutions,
particularly resolution 1325 (2000), which remains
pivotal, as it affirms the responsibility of the
international community to ensure women's rights in
post-conflict situations and in peace processes.

Egypt reiterates its full commitment to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), in line with
its international obligations as well as its conviction
as to the central and indispensable role that could be
played by women at all stages of conflict, with the aim
of providing support and raising public awareness of
the need to achieve peace.

In that context, Egypt also stresses the need for
further efforts to include women in decision-making
processes at all stages of peace negotiations and
mediation, and the need to include the implementation
of all relevant resolutions of the Security Council.

Egypt believes that providing women with equal
opportunities in the context of decision-making
processes reflects not only our commitment to achieve
gender equality and the empowerment of women but
also a clear recognition by the international community
of the essential role that women play in their societies.

Egypt deeply appreciates the role of the United
Nations system in the area ofpeace and security and the
increased political participation of women in a number
of Arab States, as stated in the report, through its
joint strategy with the Department of Political Affairs
aimed at cultivating women's expertise in mediation
and enhancing their role at all stages of mediation and
negotiation, and their contribution to United Nations
field operations.

Egypt welcomes the appointment of Ms. Zainab
Bangura, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and reaffirms
its commitment to fully cooperate with her. Egypt hopes
that her reports to the Security Council will mark the
distinction between violence in conflict situations and
violence in non-conflict situations, with full neutrality,
professionalism and objectivity.

Wars and armed conflicts have severe effects on all
communities, including on men, women and children,
but the Israeli occupation of Arab occupied territories
has had severely negative impacts, especially on
the status of Arab women psychologically, socially,
economically, legally and politically. Arab women
under foreign occupation bear a heavy burden because
of the practices of the Israeli occupation, such as severe
violations of human rights, the blockade that had led
to a deteriorating economic situation, restrictions on
freedom of movement, and displacement and poverty.

Egypt stresses the responsibility of the United
Nations system and of all international organizations
concerned with women's issues towards women under
foreign occupation, and the need to pay greater attention
to their suffering and tragedy, in order to ensure them
enjoyment of their rights, in compliance with the
relevant provisions of international law, international
humanitarian law and human rights law.

