Mr. Viinanen (Finland): I have the honour to
address the Council on behalf of the Nordic countries:
Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden.

At the outset, let me thank the United States for
leading the Council's work in its efforts to address the
scourge of sexual violence in conflict. Sexual violence
is a grave violation of human rights and a threat to the
health and lives of the victims and of their
communities. And let me be clear: sexual violence is a
serious impediment to peace, security and
development. Resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009)
and 1960 (2010) - the latter adopted today -
complement in important and concrete ways the
landmark resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace
and security by recognizing sexual violence as a
security issue and a possible war crime and in adding
provisions on protection, monitoring and enforcement
tools. The Nordic countries fully support the
resolutions and the Council's work.

Let me also thank and give further
encouragement to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Margot Wallstrom and to United
Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict.
Special Representative Wallstrom's briefing to the
Council and the insightful report of the Secretary-
General (8/2010/604) show that all possible synergies
and joint efforts are needed for the United Nations to
support national Governments in their efforts to fulfil
their responsibilities to prevent and effectively respond
to sexual violence.

Preventing sexual violence should be our highest
priority. Unfortunately, in many conflict situations,
national Governments and the United Nations alike
have failed to protect civilians from violence.
Widespread impunity in conflict situations has led to a
culture of impunity and the "normalization" of sexual
violence after the conflict has ended.

Better monitoring and reporting, effective
measures against impunity and comprehensive
reparations for victims all contribute to prevention, and
that is why I am focusing on these aspects today.

We fully support the Secretary-General's
recommendations to establish monitoring, analysis and
reporting arrangements on conflict-related sexual
violence, including the listing of those parties who

commit sexual violence in situations of armed conflict.
We further support the Secretary-General's call for a
coherent and coordinated approach at the field level.
We are therefore very pleased that the resolution
adopted by the Council today endorses those
recommendations in full.

It is also of crucial importance that the
information gathered reaches the Council and its
sanctions committees in a timely manner. In that
regard, we welcome the intention of the Council to
ensure the flow of information from the field to the
Security Council and to take action based on that
information.

Monitoring, reporting and sanctions are not ends
in themselves. Their aim is to change behaviour and
promote adherence to national and international law.
We were therefore particularly happy to note that
resolution 1960 (2010) also endorses the Secretary-
General's proposal for a dialogue with parties to armed
conflict, where verified behavioural change will lead to
delisting, while sanctions will be applied against
persistent violators.

All of those provisions together build a long-
awaited mechanism for accountability for sexual
violence, and we congratulate the Council for its
decision.

Investigating and prosecuting all acts of conflict-
related sexual violence are both legal obligations and
powerful deterrents. This includes holding
commanders accountable for ordering, condoning or
failing to prevent acts of sexual violence committed by
troops under their control. We must find ways to
strengthen national judicial systems and processes,
including through the deployment of the teams of
experts on the rule of law. In some instances it may be
necessary to refer cases to the International Criminal
Court (ICC). We also encourage the Council to use
other mechanisms at its disposal, such as fact-finding
commissions and commissions of inquiry.

Justice should always be sought with the
perspective of survivors in mind. The Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights has recently
convened a panel in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, where survivors of sexual violence gave their
views on justice and reparations. The findings support
a holistic approach encompassing not only access to
justice, judicial remedies and financial reparations, but
also attention to the security, health, education and
economic needs of the affected communities.

Nordic countries contribute to the ICC's Trust
Fund for Victims and support the work of United
Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict. We
also support a large number of local and international
organizations engaged in rehabilitation for survivors of
sexual violence.

The Nordic countries promote women's
participation at all stages of conflict prevention, peace
negotiations and peacebuilding processes. Sexual
violence should always be addressed in peace and
ceasefire agreements, and no amnesty should be
granted for such abuses.

The Nordic countries support the efforts of UN
Women and the Department of Political Affairs in
developing guidance for mediators on addressing
sexual violence in peace negotiations. We also
welcome and support their Joint Strategy on Gender
and Mediation. We believe that it will be an effective
tool for strengthening women's participation in peace
processes and for providing expertise and guidance to
the parties and the mediators. Leaving sexual violence
unaddressed undermines the very purpose of a peace
agreement: peace and security for all.

