Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
fully associate myself with the statement made on
behalf of the European Union. I thank you sincerely,
Mr. President, for providing the opportunity to review
the progress achieved and the challenges ahead in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
subsequent resolutions, in particular the provisions on
conflict-related sexual violence.

We welcome the start of implementation in the
field, of the monitoring, analysis and reporting
arrangements and hope that the difficulties remaining
in collecting and verifying information and in
establishing shared databases will soon be resolved.

We fully support the new United Nations
initiatives in the fight against conflict-related sexual
violence, in particular the development of early
warning indicators to assist United Nations personnel
on the ground in identifying early warning signs
specific to acts of sexual violence and to better prevent
such violence, as well as the importance attached to the
inclusion in ceasefire and peace agreements of
provisions on conflict-related sexual violence aimed at
achieving durable peace.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2012/33)
illustrates in a most alarming way how impunity linked
to human rights abuses of the past, in particular acts of
sexual violence perpetrated in armed conflict, is a
major factor undermining early recovery and peace
consolidation, and frequently allows sexual violence to
persist. In that context, it is particularly disturbing, as
the report indicates and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
also noted today, that in many countries the alleged
perpetrators of sexual violence are not prosecuted for
their acts, but are often promoted or appointed to
senior Government positions in national institutions.
The impunity of such high-ranking officers is
unacceptable and prevents communities emerging from
conflict to recover sustainably.

I echo the Secretary-General's call on the
Security Council to employ all means at its disposal to
fight conflict-related sexual violence, including the use
of referrals to the International Criminal Court, and to
increase pressure on the perpetrators of sexual violence
through the adoption of targeted and graduated
measures by relevant sanctions committees. The fight
against impunity is also of major importance to the
prevention of sexual violence.

In that context, allow me to highlight a positive
development that has taken place since the publication
of the Secretary-General's report. It was referred to
today by the Special Representative, and I particularly
value it in my capacity as Chair of the Guinea country-
specific configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission. I am referring to the indictment under
Guinean justice of Lieutenant Colonel Moussa
Tiegboro Camara, who is suspected of being one of the
main persons responsible for the violence that
occurred, including mass rape, in the Conakry stadium
on 28 September 2009. This is an important step in the
right direction.

Since the most recent public debate of the
Council on the issue at hand (S/PV.6642) on
28 October 2011, Luxembourg has further intensified
its commitment to supporting women in armed
conflict, including through its support of the work of
the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
This is our response to the Secretary-General's call on
Member States, reiterated in this year's report, to
provide the resources necessary to enable the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
subsequent resolutions.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, a
subregional workshop was organized in November
2011 in Goma, with the support of Luxembourg, by the

Office of Gender Affairs of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to promote exchanges of
experiences among women's organizations in the Great
Lakes region in the areas of peace, security and
prevention of election-related violence. The workshop
sought to help reduce the risk of the outbreak of
conflict before, during and after elections. Training
was also offered to improve conditions in order to
promote women's participation in provincial and local
elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

With the support of Luxembourg, the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations has been able to
implement similar initiatives in Timor-Leste and in
Haiti. This year, again with our support, a national
workshop in the Republic of South Sudan and a
workshop for West Africa in Liberia will be held with
the shared objective of strengthening the contributions
of United Nations peacekeeping operations to
increasing women's representation at all levels within
national, regional and international institutions and to
reinforcing mechanisms for the prevention,
management and resolution of conflict.

The fight against conflict-related sexual violence
is a moral obligation that we must fulfil together.
Luxembourg can be counted on to continue its
contribution to that collective effort.

