Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French):
Allow me at the outset to express my gratitude to you,
Mr. President, for having organized this open debate on
a subject to which Morocco attaches particular
significance and which directly concerns our continent
of Africa. My delegation would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his statement and his report
(S/2010/498). My thanks also go to Ms. Bachelet for her
contribution to this debate. I would take this opportunity
to congratulate Ms. Bachelet, on behalf of my country,
on her appointment as the head of UN Women, and we
wish her every success in the fulfilment of her mandate.
I also thank the President of the Economic and Social
Council and Mr. Alain Le Roy, as well as Ms. Thelma
Awori speaking on behalf of civil society, for their
important contributions to this debate.

Our debate today provides us with the
opportunity to take stock of the commitments that have
been honoured and the goals that have been met, as
well as the further efforts that remain to be carried out
to implement resolution 1325 (2000). In this respect,
we can be proud of the fact that the momentum created
by the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) has paved
the way for a strengthening of the judicial and
institutional arsenal at the national and international
levels for promoting and protecting women's rights and
their empowerment in conflict and post-conflict
situations, in particular through the adoption in several
countries, including in Africa, of specific national
action plans.

Furthermore, significant progress has been
recorded in terms of women's participation in
peacekeeping operations and decision-making
processes, and we welcome that progress. However, we
must note that, despite those efforts, the situation of
women and girls in several regions around the world
remains difficult and sometimes even intolerable. This
is particularly true in situations involving fresh
outbreaks in armed violence, violations of international
humanitarian law by military or paramilitary groups,
the use of child soldiers, in particular young girls,
extreme poverty, pandemics and sexual violence.

My delegation would like to commend the efforts
undertaken by the Security Council to ensure regular
reviews of the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), in particular through the inclusion of the
gender perspective in the resolution of conflicts and
peacekeeping within the various organs and institutions
of the United Nations, and the importance of the role of
women in general in matters concerning peace and
security.

In terms of establishing quantifiable indicators in
the follow-up to the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), as requested by the Security Council, we
should note, as was indeed highlighted by the
Secretary-General, that these indicators must be further
enhanced. The debate organized a few weeks ago by
the Security Council on post-conflict peacebuilding
(see S/PV.6396) allowed us, among other things, to
highlight the substantial contribution of women to
peacebuilding processes. The success and durability of
peacebuilding processes after conflict often depend on
the full participation of women in such processes. In
that regard, lasting solutions must be proposed for
women, in particular women refugees, who are often
the first victims in conflict and post-conflict situations.

It is clear that the Secretariat has undertaken
substantial efforts to promote the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). We therefore believe that the
creation of UN Women will contribute to improving
coordination between the various United Nations
entities involved. This will have a positive impact on
United Nations system support to the various national
and regional stakeholders involved in implementing
resolution 1325 (2000).

Furthermore, we must commend the central role
played by civil society organizations in the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) and in its implementation these
past ten years. Since that adoption, they have carried
out substantial work in terms of collective awareness-
raising and have enhanced the mobilization of efforts
to achieve the objectives of resolution 1325 (2000).

In conclusion, the Kingdom of Morocco believes
that the effective implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) will require better representation for women in
national, regional and international institutions, in
particular in conflict prevention and management
processes, as well as full respect by the parties

involved for the resolution's provisions, better
coordination between the various national and
international stakeholders, and more sustained support
by the United Nations in terms of cooperation and
technical assistance.

