Mr. Grant (Canada) (spoke in French): Canada
commends Spain for having convened this high-level
review of the implementation of Security Council
resolutions on women and peace and security. In
particular, we applaud the adoption of a fittingly
ambitious resolution on women and peace and security
(resolution 2242 (2015)), which Canada was proud to
co-sponsor.

Enhancing the empowerment of women and
girls, respect for their human rights and dignity and
the promotion of their well-being have long been
priority issues in Canadian foreign policy. We see
these as elements critical to realizing safe and secure
communities, development and prosperity.

Resolution 1325 (2000) and the subsequent seven
resolutions that compose the women and peace and
security agenda highlight how emergency and conflict
situations seriously exacerbate threats to the human
rights, dignity and welfare of women and girls, and the
vital role of the meaningful participation of women and
girls in furthering international peace and security.

(spoke in English)

Women around the world continue to face an
onslaught of violence in situations of conflict, as
we have witnessed in the deliberate and systematic
campaign of sexual violence undertaken by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant and Boko Haram. While
these groups publicize their crimes, such atrocities also
take place in other conflicts behind a curtain of silence
and shame. Accountability, let alone true justice,
remains elusive. Women's rights defenders, serving as
a voice for the voiceless, are themselves often targeted.
The United Nations itself has witnessed shortcomings,
with instances of sexual exploitation and abuse by
peacekeepers and staff.

In response to these situations, Canada supports
projects to address the specific needs of women and
girls in conflicts and emergencies. We are mounting
a strong response to sexual violence in conflict in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Iraq
and Syria. Our programming includes providing access
to justice for survivors and holding perpetrators to
account, including through the deployment of Justice
Rapid Response experts. This work is undertaken
within the context of Canada's national action plan on
women and peace and security.

Canada remains a staunch supporter of the work
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Bangura,
whose courage and tenacity have been an inspiration
to us all. We are proud to be providing $3 million
in support of her Office over the next three years,
recognizing that financing is key to the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda.

As we reflect on the past 15 years, the ravages of
war, displacement and violent extremism should only
push us to redouble our resolve. Canada pledges to be
relentless in our pursuit of peace, justice and prosperity
for women worldwide.

