Mr. Mminele (South Africa): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, and the French delegation for the
convening of this timely open debate on sexual violence
in conflict.

Sexual violence in conflict remains one of the
most harrowing and serious problems facing civilian
populations, who have to endure the wanton targeting
of vulnerable groups in times when State authority is
undermined. Women are often considered the bedrock
of any society. When they are targeted, the very heart
of the population is threatened. It is therefore vital
that we do all we can to refine our policies, but also to
support States, which have the primary responsibility
for ensuring the safety of their people.

In order to generate greater sensitivity with
regard to women who are affected by the breakdown
of State authority that many contemporary conflicts
entail, it is necessary that they be included in the
political decision-making mechanisms of any country.
Furthermore, women have an important role to play
in both peacekeeping and the mediation of conflicts.
With regard to the former, greater participation by
women at all levels in United Nations multidimensional
peacekeeping missions would help provide a stronger
approach to the implementation of the protection-of-
civilians mandates of United Nations mission, in
particular as it relates to sexual violence against women.
South Africa welcomes the recommendation made by
the Secretary-General in his report (S/2016/36l) on
conflict-related sexual violence to ensure that troop-
contributing countries abide by the measures required
in resolution 2106 (2013).

We are also encouraged by the leading role played
by the African Union (AU) through its commitment to
gender mainstreaming and its development and adoption
of the Gender Training Manualfor AU Peace Support
Operations. That is in line with the recommendation
of the Secretary-General to train all peacekeeping
personnel on gender sensitivity and address conflict-
related sexual violence.

South Africa has been actively involved in the
training of women mediators in conflict. However,
we strongly support the Secretary-General's
recommendation that mediators be called upon to
include gender and conflict-related sexual Violence
expertise as part of their mediation support teams.
Furthermore, the appointment of senior-level women to
mediation roles is also sorely needed.

We recognize that the scourge of conflict-related
sexual violence can be used as a tactic of war and of
terrorism. While we agree with the Secretary-General
that measures to address that should be aligned, allowing
for broader strategies to prevent violent extremism,
we believe that, like terrorism, sexual violence as a
tactic is based on society's broader approach to how it
treats women - in particular misogynistic tendencies
inherent in patriarchal societies that allow for women
to be treated with disdain and inhumanely. Therefore,
the interests of women and notions of gender equality
should be mainstreamed into our governance and
leadership mechanisms. Women should be involved in
decision-making and participate in the economies of
their societies so as to end the trend of sexual violence
again women. Women's voices need to be heard, and
they also need to be at the forefront of the war against
impunity and the fight against poverty and finding
the right solutions to ending such abuses during and
outside of conflicts.

While sexual abuses and exploitation in conflict
situations need to be urgently addressed, due attention
to the post-conflict situation, and in particular to the
survivors of such abuses, needs greater attention. We
concur with the Secretary-General's recommendation
that relief and recovery programmes should be put in
place to begin to heal the psychosocial wounds that
result from such heinous violations. A zero-tolerance
approach should be adopted, and stricter and effective
punitive mechanisms need to be put in place, such as
improving conviction rates and integrating legal support
options, as well as removing obstacles to reporting of
such cases.

We also support the recommendation of the
Secretary-General to support capacity-building for
civilians and military justice systems in order to
safeguard against impunity. Furthermore, women's
legal status and rights must be ensured in post-
conflict situations. Strengthening the legal framework
to address issues of discrimination against women
with respect to land ownership, access to economic
opportunity and employment, education and health
care is an essential component of gender-responsive
peacebuilding. Ultimately, Member States have the
primary responsibility to put an end to impunity and
to prosecute perpetrators responsible for crimes against
humanity and war crimes, including those related to
sexual violence against women and girls.

In conclusion, South Africa remains committed
to addressing the scourge of conflict-related sexual
violence against women in all its manifestations, and
will work tirelessly in supporting the broader global
response to ending this blight within the wider context
of addressing the root causes of both conflicts and
sexual violence in general.

