The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Afghanistan,
Albania, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belgium, Botswana, Brazil,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, the Czech
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Ecuador, El Salvador, Georgia, Germany,
Guatemala, Hungary, India, Indonesia, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Maldives,
Mexico, Morocco, Namibia, Nepal, the Netherlands,
Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Peru, the
Philippines, Portugal, Qatar, the Republic of Korea,
Romania, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Switzerland, Thailand,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, the United Arab
Emirates, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and
Viet Nam to participate in this meeting.

I extend a special welcome to all the ministers
attending, including those representing Colombia, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Germany, Sweden
and Ukraine.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Maria Luiza
Ribeiro Viotti, Chefde Cabinet ofthe Secretary-General;
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director
of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and
the Empowerment of Women; Ms. Charo Mina-Rojas,
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security;
and Ms. Michaelle Jean, Secretary-General of the
International Organization of la Francophonie.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following to participate in this meeting: Her Excellency
Ms. Mara Marinaki, Principal Adviser on Gender
and the Implementation of United Nations Security
Council Resolution 1325 (2000) on Women, Peace
and Security of the European External Action Service
of the European Union; Ms. Amarsanaa Darisuren,
Senior Adviser on Gender Issues of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe; Ms. Louise
Sharene Bailey, Charge' d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Observer Mission of the African Union to the United
Nations; and Mr. Krisztian Meszaros, Civilian Liaison
Officer of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization to the
United Nations.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in the meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/861, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on women and peace and security.
I wish to also draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/889, which contains a letter dated
20 October 2017 from the Charge d'affaires a.i. of the
Permanent Mission of France to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept paper on the item under consideration.

I now give the floor to Ms. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti.

