Mr. Khan (Indonesia): At the outset, I would like
to extend my appreciation to you, Sir, for convening
this open debate on women and peace and security. The
focus of this debate on the implementation of
resolution 1960 (2010) is both necessary and
important. It is also a clear demonstration of the
general commitment to protecting women from sexual
violence in armed conflict. I also would like to join
others in thanking all the speakers today for their
respective briefings. We appreciate the information
provided by the Secretary-General's report
(S/20l2/33), which has been helpful in indicating to us
the extent of the problem. That information will help to
guide and enhance the fruitfulness of our debate.
Indonesia strongly deplores all forms of violence,
including sexual violence in armed conflict, committed

against women. Women must be free to live their lives
without having to face the threat of violence, sexual or
otherwise. We note with deep concern the fact that
while the Security Council resolutions related to
women and peace and security have served to highlight
the problem and force action aimed at its elimination,
the violations persist. We have every reason to speedily
implement resolution 1960 (2010). But this must be
done in keeping within the spirit of resolution 1325
(2000), which addresses all aspects of women in
conflict and post-conflict situations in a more
comprehensive manner.

We are informed by the Secretary-General's
report that over the past year, there have been several
new and ongoing armed conflicts in which sexual
violence has been widespread, with civilian
populations being systematically targeted. What is even
more disturbing is the fact that most perpetrators
remain at large. Indonesia finds this unfortunate
situation unacceptable. All action must therefore be
directed at eliminating the conditions that give rise to
and sustain such behaviour.

The need for determined action is clear. It would
be to our benefit if we were to deal not only with the
consequences of this violence, but - as recommended,
inter alia, by the Beijing Platform for Action - also
with its causes. Certainly, that would take us off the
field of battle and into the wider society. Those
attitudes, values and traditions that sanction such
behaviour must be consistently confronted and
discouraged.

Activities specific to combating sexual violence
in armed conflict are taking place on two fronts -
international and national. At the international level,
the emergence of a universal working definition to
facilitate data collection should advocate timely,
reliable and verified information and proper analysis of
data on the occurrence of sexual violence in situations
of armed conflict. Such a definition will help
stakeholders in delivering survivor and victim-focused
responses. Overcoming the trauma they have had to
endure is an important factor in helping women to
become active peacebuilding actors in the future. In
addition, such a definition will also considerably refine
the monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements
recommended by resolution 1960 (2010).
Apart from greater clarity about the problem, we
also take note that technical infrastructure to combat
sexual violence in armed conflict has been under
careful construction, inter alia, through the
establishment of a technical-level working group as
part of the United Nations response and placing a
women's protection adviser in the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict.

The responsibility to implement relevant Security
Council resolutions with a view to enhancing women's
participation in peace processes, including the
protection of women from all forms of sexual violence,
rests primarily with their respective Governments. At
the national level, stress has been placed on national
ownership of the peacebuilding process. Indonesia
fully agrees with this. In effect, this means that any
external support provided for the process must be
demand-driven.

It is also important that the role of women not be
minimized in any way at this level. Their inputs are
integral to enhancing civilian capacity, especially in the
most affected developing countries. Indonesia believes
that dialogue, partnership and cooperation within the
framework of the global South are of critical
importance to the peacebuilding capacities of
developing countries.

We also appreciate the work done by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support on the guidelines for
integrating a gender perspective into the work of the
United Nations military in peacekeeping operations.
Predeployment gender-related training for
peacekeepers is also significant in contributing to a
more enhanced understanding of the protection of
women and children by United Nations peacekeepers.
The gender training workshop for peacekeepers that
will be held in Indonesia next April is part of such
efforts.

Equally important is the enhancement of the
capacity of national institutions dealing with security
and judicial matters so that they can be safeguarded
against impunity. Every effort must be made to stamp
out sexual violence as a method or tactic of warfare.

