Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): The
representative of Denmark will speak later on behalf of
the European Union, and my delegation endorses what

she will say. I would just like to make a few additional
observations in my national capacity.

I would like to begin by thanking the Secretary-
General for his excellent report on the follow-up to
resolution 1325 (2000), which we passed almost
exactly two years ago, and also for his pointed
introduction to this debate. The report sets out the
problems very well and is very clear in its
recommendations. We can support them all.

I also express warm appreciation for the excellent
work of the Secretariat in this area, and I share the
praise bestowed by previous speakers on the efforts of
Angela King and Carolyn Hannan in particular.

The Secretary-General's report is concise and
well focused and correctly emphasizes what needs to
be done to implement the provisions of resolution 1325
(2000) and to ultimately ensure that all stages of
conflict management are more effective. Before I turn
to it in detail, I should like to make a couple of general
points.

First, it is important to remember that women are
not solely victims of war. They also make tremendous
contributions to conflict resolution, conflict
management and peace-building. They can of course be
combatants themselves. While the Secretary-General's
report is right to place emphasis on women in need of
protection during conflict, we should also see them as
potential participants, particularly in peace processes.
For example, in our own national experience, women's
groups in Northern Ireland play an ongoing important
role in the peace process.

Secondly, following on from that, non-
governmental organizations in civil society are
important players in promoting peace and
reconstruction and in protecting women's rights. We
are pleased to see that the Secretary-General's report
emphasizes regular grass-roots contacts. Such contacts
need to be flexible; in some circumstances women in
areas of armed conflict are not organized in any formal
or identifiable way.

The report draws out many important points, and
I would like to provide five examples. We strongly
support the recognition that promoting gender equality
is not just women's responsibility. We agree that
reconstruction efforts have to be based on human rights
principles and non-discrimination. We support an
increase in the number of programmes to meet the
needs of child soldiers, specifically girl soldiers. And
we support the objective of a 50-50 gender balance in
all areas of peace operations by 2015. We believe that
the creation of a database of gender specialists would
be a helpful development.

Our focus in the Council, however, as most of us
have said, needs now to be on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), to which the Secretary-
General's report is a very useful contribution. The
Council's work is of course part of a wider strategy.
Gender mainstreaming has an essential part to play in
the achievement of the Millennium Development
Goals. Conflict management - and that is the context
of our debate today - is crucial to the implementation
of those Goals.

Let us look at the facts. In conflict areas, women
make an important but often unrecognized contribution
as peace educators, both in their households and in the
wider community. Refugee and displaced women often
display remarkable endurance and resourcefulness and
can contribute positively to post-conflict reconstruction
and peacekeeping operations. They need to be involved
more fully in decisions that effect them and their
community. They perform generally better than men in
the control and management of economic resources -
for example, credit schemes - and of natural
resources, such as land and water. This is fundamental
to the success of a society in the post-conflict phase.
The United Nations system needs to move quickly to
enable women to contribute effectively to the
reconstruction or rehabilitation process.

The monitoring of human rights should be
included in the mandates of peacekeeping operations,
few of which make any specific reference to women
and girls. Personnel in peacekeeping operations should
be trained on the gender perspective before
deployment - an aspect on which the United Kingdom
is working with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations. Respect for women, and an absence of
impunity for those who do not show such respect, must
be ubiquitous, both inside and outside the United
Nations system.

One element that is not brought out in the report
is the need to place United Nations work on women,
peace and security within the broader humanitarian
framework. The Security Council has in the past
delivered key messages on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict and on children affected by armed
conflict. It is essential to construct working links
between all of those areas. We would like to see the
United Nations system operating in cross-cutting ways
that integrate this work into programmes on the
ground. We will return to these same themes next
month when the Council discusses the Secretary-
General's report on the protection of civilians.

I would like to make one last point. It is essential
for gender mainstreaming within the United Nations
system to be taken up by the operators and agencies
concerned, drawing on the support of the expert gender
bodies. Progress on gender will not be made unless all
parts of the United Nations system assume
responsibility for leading in their own areas on matters
relating to gender.

Work has already begun on a presidential
statement to follow up the Secretary-General's report.
This must take gender mainstreaming forward, and not
content itself with recycling analysis, however good
such analysis may be. The Council has to implement
resolution 1325 (2000) and the Secretary-General's
recommendations in its regular work, until we know
that a gender perspective is properly integrated into all
of our relevant work. For that purpose, and to introduce
a touch of accountability into our procedures, I wonder
whether, each year as we apportion jobs among
members of the Council, we should not ask one
delegation to oversee the implementation of our agreed
decisions on gender mainstreaming, working with the
appropriate parts of the Secretariat to achieve it,
because whenever women are disadvantaged in
conflict, we owe them some results.

