Ms. Mohammed: I am here today as the co-founder
and President of the Organization of Women's Freedom
in Iraq. On behalf of the NGO Working Group on
Women, Peace and Security, as we reflect on the
fifteenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), I
implore the Security Council and the entire international
community to take action on implementing its women
and peace and security commitments.

Much of what Ms. Julienne Lusenge has said is
applicable to my country, Iraq, and to neighbouring
Syria. These situations illustrate why peace will never
be established as long as Governments fail to implement
resolution 1325 (2000) and consider the rights and
COHCGI'HS Of WOIIICI'I.

As the world's attention is on the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham (ISIS), let us remember that ISIS
arose from ongoing conflicts in Syria and Iraq in which
the rights of women, girls, lesbian, gay, bisexual and
transgender persons and other marginalized groups
had already been devalued, leaving them far more
vulnerable to abuse by ISIS and other combatants.
This Violence has helped to produce the largest wave of
refugees in modern history.

To understand the crisis for Iraqi women today,
one cannot ignore what has happened, beginning in
2003. A Government was formed as a result of politics
of division based on sect, ethnicity and gender. This
Government failed to uphold the basic rule of law,
allowing extremists to take up positions of power. Ten
years ago, Iraqi women spoke to the Security Council
about their situation. What would Iraq look like if the
Council had heeded those calls then and promoted an
inclusive process in which women and minority groups
were fully engaged?

The situation that we now have in Iraq bears the
twin hallmarks of what eventually occurred - the
subjugation of women and the disenfranchisement of
minority groups. Indeed, instead of building a unified
democracy, those empowered by the occupation
designed the State and the new Constitution to guarantee
their own rule. Speaking in the name of religion, these
politicians denied Iraqi women their rights as citizens
and as political leaders who could truly represent
women.

Women's rights were hijacked by articles of the
Constitution that guaranteed the interests of religious
groups at the expense of human rights, making Iraqi
women vulnerable to sharia law. Since then, Iraqi women
have experienced unprecedented disempowerment and
Violence. In fact, within a decade, a century ofwomen's
struggles for better social and legal status was halted
by the creation of a State that claims to be democratic
but that marginalizes entire portions of its population
in policy and practice.

It was only a matter of time before such a
Government began marginalizing minority groups,
most notably the Sunnis of western Iraq. Building a
State on a corrupt foundation subjected millions to
poverty and hunger in a climate of sectarian hatred.
These are the politics that paved the way for the creation
of ISIS and the enslavement of Iraqi women for the first
time in our modern history.

When I speak about the enslavement of women, I
am speaking of the countless women being trafficked,
in both ISIS- and Government-controlled areas. For
example, over 3,000 Yazidi women and other minorities
were enslaved by ISIS fighters. We, at the Organization
of Women's Freedom in Iraq, have documented the
execution of over 150 women in one area controlled by
ISIS, because they refused to obey the so-called Islamic
State.

In the absence of Government-sponsored services,
local women's groups meet the needs of those most
vulnerable to the conflict. We are at the forefront of
providing aid and services in places unreachable by
international aid organizations. Yet, we remain vastly
underrepresented in our efforts to prevent and address
conflict and violent extremism. Our rights are not
protected, let alone promoted.

The use by ISIS of sexual and gender-based
violence has been discussed at length in this Chamber,
yet civil society efforts that seek to combat this violence
are stifled. Iraqi authorities do not allow women's
organizations to provide shelter to the thousands of
women fleeing conflict-related violence. Furthermore,
independent radio stations that promote peace across
sectarian divides, dispel misogyny and combat
homophobia have been shut down.

Discriminatory laws and policies prevent women who
are fleeing armed conflict, honour crimes, trafficking,
abductions, sexual and gender-based violence and forced
marriage from obtaining legal identification without
the approval of a male family member. Perpetrators of
honour killings receive mitigated sentences, if they are
punished at all. Reforming these laws now will build
more equitable and inclusive foundations for the long
term. Such reforms must also be pursued in times of
peace, for without them, discriminatory practices and
social norms, including the denial of services and
stigmatization of rape survivors, become exacerbated
in times of conflict.

Research demonstrates that women's meaningful
participation improves peacebuilding and sustains
efforts to counter extremism. The inclusion of Syrian
women in the Geneva peace process is therefore critical,
not only to safeguard women's human rights but also
to produce an accord that will prevent a resurgence of
violent extremism in the region.

With support for ISIS and other violent extremist
groups being voiced by individuals from the Philippines
to Yemen and from Europe to West Africa, extremism
is not just an Iraqi or Syrian problem; lessons from
our region must be applied globally. Together we
have the tools, evidence and resources to implement
strategies for inclusive and lasting peace. The full
and holistic implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
and international human rights standards provides a
comprehensive road map for the prevention of armed
conflict and the integration of gender equality across
all peace and security actions.

What is primarily lacking is the political will. I
urge the Security Council to act now to condemn all
forms of violence against civilians on all sides of the
conflict; remove legal and practical barriers preventing
non-governmental organizations from providing vital
services, including shelters; increase support and
protection for women's organizations and women's
human rights defenders; call on Iraq and all other
Member States to fully implement and fund national
action plans on resolution 1325 (2000), in consultation
with civil society; and prosecute those responsible for
violations that amount to genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes, including sexual and gender-
based violence. We are documenting these abuses and
their perpetrators and will be ready for the day when
they will be held accountable.

Iurge the Security Council and the entire international
community to take action on its commitments. We
cannot wait another 15 years for the women and peace
and security agenda to be implemented.

