The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Peru.
I welcome the important briefings of the Deputy
Secretary-General, Ms. Amina Mohammed, and
Ms. Pramila Patten, as well as the valuable testimony of
Ms. Razia Sultana. We also welcome the participation
of a significant number of countries that have requested
to take part in this open debate.

My delegation is especially grateful for the support
and contribution of women's organizations in preparing
for this annual debate and for the Informal Expert group
on Women and Peace and Security, which Peru has the
honour to chair alongside Sweden.

We wish to express Peru's commitment to the
women and peace and security agenda, which is a
crucial component of the fight against sexual violence
in conflicts. We are convinced that the United Nations,
particularly the Security Council, has a fundamental
role to play in preventing this atrocious crime.

We note with deep concern the magnitude of
the problem and the changing patterns of sexual
violence noted in the Secretary-General's latest report
(S/2018/250). Its widespread and systematic use as a
military tactic and attack against collective identities
must be acknowledged and confronted as a threat to
peace and international security. Consequently, we
must condemn in the strongest terms all forms of sexual
violence in armed conflicts, which overwhelmingly
affects women, girls and boys. We must protect the
victims and ensure that those responsible are held
accountable. But that is not enough. A comprehensive
strategy against this scourge requires addressing its
root causes. To that end, the empowerment of women,
gender equality and access to justice are key.

Evidence illustrates that greater participation by
women in decision-making processes results in a lower
likelihood of conflict, and that defending and promoting
their rights reduces their vulnerability. Equality and
empowerment have a direct impact on the maintenance
of peace and security. The same applies to access to
justice. We reaffirm the critical need to ensure that
those responsible for such acts of violence are held
accountable before the justice system and to eliminate
all structural obstacles that hamper investigation and
prosecution of rape and other forms of sexual violence.
Moreover, due attention to and the rehabilitation of the
victims are critical to any process of building sustainable
peace. It is necessary to understand that their traumas
are also psychological in nature and carry the potential
to destroy the social fabric of a community.

We cannot ignore the stigma and fear of the victims,
or their intimidation by their attackers. The majority of
cases of sexual violence are not reported. This reflects
the low level of confidence in and credibility of national
institutions, which is exacerbated when the aggressors
are members of the security forces. It is necessary
to create a closer relationship between the State and
its institutions and the victims. In this regard, Peru
has a national plan on violence against women and a
comprehensive reparations programme for the victims
of violence in Peru between 1980 and 2000.

The Peruvian commitment to the women and
peace and security agenda is also manifested in the
progressive increase in Peruvian women's participation
as Blue Helmets, pursuant to resolution 1820 (2008).
In this regard, we wish to highlight the importance of
incorporating the gender perspective into the mandates
of peacekeeping operations deployed by the Council.
There is also the need to adequately train Blue Helmets
to protect women and children's human rights. The
Security Council must also continue to encourage,
support and monitor specific commitments and plans to
prevent sexual violence in the conflicts on its agenda.
We consider it important to recall, in line with resolution
1820 (2008), that sexual crimes should not be subject to
amnesty in the context of conflict resolution processes.

We wish to conclude by expressing our appreciation
of and support for the work of the Special Representative
on Sexual Violence in Conflict and her team, and to
highlight the high priority given to this issue by the
Secretary-General, in keeping with the need to build
sustainable peace. In the words of the Secretary-
General, the time has come "to give that agenda the
investment and action it deserves, so as to replace
horror with hope" (S/2018/250, para. 22).

I resume my functions as President of the Council.

I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.

I now give the floor to the representative of Canada.

