Mr. Schulz (Germany): Germany aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the observer of the
European Union.

I would like to thank the United Kingdom for
maintaining the momentum created in the previous
debate on the topic (see S/PV.7847), held last December
at the initiative of Spain.

Armed conflicts, terrorism and humanitarian crises
have exposed individuals to increased risks of being
trafficked in conflict zones and beyond. Women and
children are particularly vulnerable to this risk; they
make up, in fact, 79 per cent of all detected trafficking
victims. In response to the scourge of trafficking,
we must find answers, which will be as multifaceted
as the terrible crime itself. At the international level,
we need to aim for universal ratification of the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and its Protocols, in particular the Protocol
against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and
Air, and ensure that we collect the data needed to fully
understand the challenges, for instance by developing a
comprehensive data-collection system.

We must follow a comprehensive, multidisciplinary
and cross-border approach. We must increase synergies
among United Nations agencies and develop a
comprehensive joint United Nations response that
includes the Special Representatives of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and on Children
and Armed Conflict. The United Nations Inter-Agency
Coordination Group against Trafficking in Persons is
one important instrument for such coordination.

We should apprise the Security Council of the
link between human trafficking and human rights
violations, and support the Council's ability to look into
the connections of such trafficking with transnational
organized crime and terrorism. Furthermore, we
should use the upcoming review process of the Global
Plan of Action on Trafficking and its high-level
meeting in October to define appropriate responses to
current challenges and discuss measures to implement
trafficking-related Sustainable Development Goals. In
addition, we must go after the proceeds from human
trafficking and ensure accountability.

At the national level, Germany has taken additional
steps to address the growing challenges resulting from
the recent large movements of refugees and migrants.
We know that resettlement and relocation programmes
can reduce the risk of vulnerable persons falling victim
to greedy traffickers. With that in mind, we have
adopted new legal measures to provide trafficking
victims with residence permits. As one example, I
would like to mention our programme through which
over 1,000 Yazidi refugees have reached Germany,
including Ms. Nadia Murad Basee Taha, the United
Nations Goodwill Ambassador for the Dignity of
Survivors of Human Trafficking.

We also started an initiative with the United Nations
Children's Fund and multiple national partners to protect
those staying in refugee accommodationsf in particular
women and children - from violence, including

trafficking. As part ofthat initiative, minimum standards
for protection were published in 2016. Specially trained
coordinators will help implement those standards in up
to 100 refugee accommodations until the end of 2017.

On a more general note, in 2016, we passed
legislation to strengthen the protection of women and
children. Among other measures, we adopted new
criminal-law provisions.

To conclude my statement, I would like to reiterate
how important it is for us all to work together and step up
our efforts to address conflict and instability, because
they represent the key push factors for migration and
human trafficking.

