Mr. Thoms (Germany): Germany aligns itselfwith
the statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union and that delivered by the representative of
Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women
and Peace and Security.

About a year ago, we met in this Chamber for
the high-level review on women and peace and
security (see S/PV.7533). On that occasion, a record
number of speakers in the history of the Council
voiced their support for the agenda built on resolution
1325 (2000). However, despite some progress, huge
implementation gaps remain, as today's briefings
have clearly demonstrated. I would like to particularly
thank Rita Lopidia from EVE, who spoke about the
difficult situation of women in South Sudan in a very
impressive manner.

I will keep my remarks short and operational. After
all, the shortcomings in the implementation of the
women and peace and security framework are due not
to a lack of words, but to a lack of action.

How can we do better here in New York? A year
ago, the adoption of resolution 2242 (2015) gave the
Council a clear mandate to be more inclusive and to
involve civil society in the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda. The Council
needs to live up to that commitment and should open
its country-specific considerations for briefings
by civil society whenever possible. Germany sees
the establishment of the Council's Informal Expert
Group on Women and Peace and Security as a major
institutional milestone. Within less than a year of its
existence, the Expert Group has already assessed four
country situations, in close collaboration with United
Nations field missions on the ground. We now need to
ensure that the excellent outcomes of the Group reach
the Council more frequently and directly.

How can we improve the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) at the regional level? The
Council has rightly called upon regional organizations
to partake in the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda. As part of our Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
chairmanship, Germany has heeded that call and
has appointed a Special Representative of the OSCE
Chairpersonship-in-Office on Gender Issues. Next
month we will host a meeting in Berlin on women and
peace and security that will discuss ways to accelerate
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) both
within the OSCE framework and beyond.

Where do we stand on the implementation on
the national level? Germany is currently revising its
national action plan on resolution 1325 (2000). We
look forward to exchanging our lessons learned with
partners, not just here in New York, but also at the
capital level. Germany has also taken an active role in
the setup of the focal points network founded by Spain.
We are proud to host the 2018 meeting of the network
in Berlin. We are currently working with UN-Women,
the African Union (AU) and the AU Envoy on Women,
Peace and Security, Bineta Diop, to explore ways to
facilitate the exchange of experiences between African
women leaders.

We encourage the next Secretary-General to
continue to treat the women and peace and security
agenda as a high priority. The implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) remains a cross-cutting task
for the entire United Nations system, not just the
Security Council. We see the women and peace and
security agenda and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development as interlinked. That means that we need
to approach their implementation in tandem.

Those present can count on Germany's support
in taking practical and specific steps to transform the
women and peace and security framework into action.

