Ms. Migiro: Mr. President, Excellencies, I am
delighted to join you at this open debate of the Security
Council on resolution 1325 (2000) on women and
peace and security. I will now read a statement of the
Secretary-General.

"I welcome this open debate on a subject
that is a top priority for the United Nations.

"Resolution 1325 (2000) provides a global
framework for mainstreaming gender in all peace
processes, including peacekeeping, peacebuilding
and post-conflict reconstruction, as well as in the
general maintenance of peace and security. The
text was a milestone in the Security Council's
approach to the question, and I am pleased to say
that the Council has consistently reviewed the
progress being made to implement it.

"This year's open debate on the needs of
women and girls in post-conflict situations
highlights the importance of seizing the
opportunity created by the cessation of hostilities.
Addressing those needs is critical for long-term
peace. So too is empowering women and girls in
order that they can play their rightful role in
conflict prevention and peacebuilding.

"As we approach next year's tenth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) and the
review of its implementation, it is appropriate
that today we take stock. In nine years, only 16
countries have adopted national action plans for
the implementation of the resolution. I encourage
all Member States to take action before the tenth
anniversary.

"Much has been said about the importance
of a monitoring mechanism. I have repeatedly
called upon this Council to demonstrate
leadership in this regard. Attention must also be
given to safeguarding the newly acquired roles
that women are playing during conflict, including
in decision-making.

"A cessation of conflict should not result in
the marginalization of women and girls nor their
relegation to stereotypical roles. Nor should we
allow any exclusion of women in peace negotiations
and mediation to become the template for what
happens in implementing a peace settlement.
Indeed, a growing body of evidence suggests that
bringing women to the peace table improves the
quality of agreements reached and increases the
chances of successful implementation.

"Women are likely to put gender issues on
the agenda, set different priorities and possibly
bridge the political divide more effectively.
Experience also suggests that women's
contributions in post-conflict situations can make
a critical difference to community survival and
reconstruction.

"As we heard from many speakers last
Wednesday in this Chamber (see S/PV.6195),
women face appalling violence, especially sexual
violence, in the anarchy generated by conflict and
its aftermath. Yet post-conflict gender-based
violence often remains below the radar screen
since a cessation of conflict is often mistaken for
the full return of peace.

"Resolutions 1820 (2008) and 1888 (2009)
focus directly on these challenges. However, the
implementation of those resolutions must be done
in tandem with resolution 1325 (2000).

"The strengthening of women's participation
in decision-making is critical to overcoming the
scourge of sexual violence. I am committed to the
full implementation of these landmark texts on
women and peace and security and I will continue
to do my part, including by appointing more
women to positions of leadership.

"I thank the Council for its attention to this
issue and look forward to working with it to
achieve our shared objectives."

The foregoing is what the Secretary-General
would have said had he been here.

