Mr. Matjila (South Africa): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate the United Kingdom on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
November. Please be assured of South Africa's support
for your efforts this month, Madam President. On a
slightly different note, I would also like to congratulate
the England rugby team on their performance in this
year's Rugby World Cup and final. In all sports our
teams have historically had a healthy competitive spirit,
and that was again illustrated during the Rugby World
Cup matches this year and the past weekend.

We would like to thank Deputy Secretary-
General Amina Mohammed and Ambassador Fatima
Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African Union
(AU) to the United Nations, for their briefings. We
commend the joint Visit to Sudan, Djibouti, Ethiopia,
Eritrea and Somalia led by the Deputy Secretary-
General together with Ms. Bineta Diop, the AU Special
Envoy on Women, Peace and Security, and Mr. Parfait
Onanga-Anyanga, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for the Horn of Africa. The focus of the
joint United Nations-African Union trip on women
and peace and security, and on the international
commitment to peace, stability and credible elections
in those countries, was important. South Africa would
also like to commend the role that the African Union,
the Intergovernmental Authority for Development
(IGAD) and other international partners have played in
facilitating State-building and peacebuilding processes
in the Horn of Africa.

As we have seen in the recent past, the winds of
positive change are blowing in the Horn of Africa. The
frontiers of peace and peaceful neighbourliness are
expanding, and in the process are touching many nations
and ordinary people. Though still fragile, they augur
well for the goal of silencing the guns in Africa by 2020.
It is in that context of peaceful overtures ahead that
South Africa thanks the Deputy Secretary-General and
Ambassador Mohammed, and their colleagues both at
the United Nations and the AU, for their extensive visits
and numerous engagements held with policymakers,
activists and ordinary people in their successful trip to
the Horn of Africa. We also want to acknowledge the
role played by Abiy Ahmed, Prime Minister of Ethiopia
and the current Chair of IGAD, in facilitating the peace
agreement and transition processes in the Sudan, as
well his own country's rapprochement with Eritrea.

In terms of the peace process in South Sudan, we
would like to note the progress made so far towards
implementing the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. We want to highlight how important it is that the
parties strictly adhere to the deadline of 12 November
to form a revitalized transitional Government of
national unity and emphasize that there can be no delay
or postponement of that deadline, which arrives in eight
days' time.

My delegation further wishes to underline the
importance of ensuring that the political process
in the Horn of Africa is sustained. In that regard,
South Africa reiterates that the gains achieved can be
strengthened and sustained only through continued
dialogue and cooperation among the countries of the
region. We emphasize that the steps taken so far are a
major milestone in Africa's efforts to quiet the guns by
2020 and deepen regional and continental integration,
in line with the African Union's Agenda 2063.

We agree with the Deputy Secretary-General in
her statement to the African Union Peace and Security
Council in Addis Ababa on 21 October, when she
emphasized that women's inclusion contributes to the
development of responsive decision-making processes
that ensure sustainable development. We also share her
view that in situations of conflict, and in preventing
violence, women's mediation and peacemaking efforts
have been proven to be more effective.
The involvement of women in United Nations
peacekeeping roles within the military, police and
civilian components in conflict remains negligible,
despite the adoption of resolution 2242 (2015), which
calls for doubling the number of women in the military
and police contingents of United Nations peacekeeping
operations over the next five years, a period that has
now almost run its course. We were encouraged,
however, by the Council's unanimous adoption, on
29 October 2019, under our presidency, of resolution
2493 (2019) urging States to recommit to the women
and peace and security agenda, including by creating
safe environments for women leaders, peacebuilders,
human rights activists and political actors around
the globe.

We must continue to support the narrative that
women, including young women, are agents of change.
As we have heard today, and as we have seen in many
examples all over the world, they have the greatest
potential for transformative effects on societies,
including in peacebuilding and nation-building. We
must work to provide the necessary resources for
holding elections and implementing peace agreements,
as we are seeing in the processes taking place in the
Horn of Africa and elsewhere in the world.

