Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
thank you, Mr. President, for scheduling today's
debate. I offer a warm welcome to Ms. Wallstrom and
Ms. Mayanja and thank them for their helpful and
forceful briefings this morning.

The United Kingdom believes that the Council
must continue to give issues on women, peace and
security sustained attention. As Ms. Wallstrom said,
this is not a women's issue. It is a peace and security
issue.

We have spoken many times in the Council
Chamber about the devastating and disproportionate
effect that conflict has on women and girls. The impact
is all the more debilitating because it most affects the
very people we rely on to rebuild a society and to
deliver lasting peace and long-term stability.

Last year, the Council adopted two important
resolutions on this agenda item to address the
continued threat from sexual violence in conflict and to
ensure that women's participation, including in peace
processes, achieves the status it deserves. At that time,
many Council members emphasized that more needed
to be done to implement resolution 1325 (2000), the
landmark resolution that 10 years ago raised women's
empowerment as a crucial issue for international peace
and security.
In the second of those two debates in October of
last year, Ms. Ine's Alberdi, Executive Director of the
United Nations Development Fund for Women,
committed to answering the Council's challenge for
indicators to measure progress, saying:

"It is time for us all to count the numbers of
women at the peace table, the numbers of women
raped in war, the numbers of internally displaced
women who never recover their property, the
numbers of women defenders of human rights
killed for speaking out." (S/PV.6]96, p. 7)

Thanks to her efforts, and in particular the efforts of
Ms. Mayanja and her team over the past six months,
we now have some impressive analysis - a list of
26 indicators to build on, to strengthen and to examine
before the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) in October. I congratulate her
on this thorough report (S/2010/173).

In October, the United Kingdom hopes that the
Council will be in a position, drawing upon Views from
across the United Nations membership, to endorse
indicators against which we can set goals, measure
progress and adjust our efforts to ensure that we make
good on the ambitions of those who drafted and those
who supported resolution 1325 (2000).

We need to know where we start from in order to
assess the progress we want to make. Where we
succeed, we should examine Why. Where our efforts
are found wanting, we should direct more time and
resources deliberately to empower women to support
post-conflict recovery. Of course, some things are
difficult to measure and difficult to quantify, but that is
no excuse. It is a challenge that we need to overcome.
We should build up our indicators and refine them
based on experience.

I want to make two other points on this important
agenda item. First, I want to express the United
Kingdom's support for the Secretary-General's Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict. In only
a few short weeks, Ms. Wallstrom has already raised
the level of attention that we pay to women, peace and
security issues, and we hope that this trend will
continue. Related to that, we fully support the creation
of the composite gender entity as the best option for
strengthening the capacity, accountability and
effectiveness of the United Nations system in gender
equality and the empowerment of women, including
the issue of women, peace and security.
The United Kingdom sincerely hopes that the
10-year anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) is one
that will be remembered as a milestone in the
implementation of this item, setting the tone for the
next decade, with women, peace and security as an
ongoing priority for all Member States.

We support today's draft presidential statement.

