Ms. Kocyigit Grba (Turkey): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the MIKTA countries,
namely, Mexico, Indonesia, the Republic of Korea,
Turkey and Australia. At the outset, we would like to
express our appreciation to the Bolivian presidency for
convening today's open debate on the women and peace
and security agenda. We also thank the Secretary-
General for his recent report (S/2018/900).

As we approach the twentieth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000), which set the foundation for
the women and peace and security agenda, the MIKTA
countries believe that it is critical to take stock of our
achievements and discuss our further collective and
individual efforts.

The MIKTA countries recognize the key role of
women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts,
as well as in peacebuilding and sustaining peace. We
remain committed to increasing women's participation
in all aspects of peace and security, including women's
political participation and leadership. We believe that
women's political and economic empowerment is crucial
to both the prevention of conflicts and the stabilization
of societies emerging from armed conflict. We also
attach importance to our commitment to achieving
gender equality, which is key to the fulfilment of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. In that
regard, we would like to note that all MIKTA countries
are members of the Group of Friends of Gender Parity.

The MIKTA countries acknowledge the importance
of seven subsequent resolutions of the Security
Council in establishing a sound normative framework
for the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda by the United Nations system and
Member States. As a result, there has been increased
development of programmes to increase women's
participation as leaders in military and law enforcement
and as peacebuilders in treaty and peace agreement
negotiations. There has been deeper awareness and more
serious attention to the vulnerability and asymmetrical
impact of conflict on women.

Despite the progress made, women and girls still
face daunting challenges. We note with deep concern
that sexual violence has become a routine tactical
element of war and armed conflict. Rape, sexual
exploitation, forced marriage, sexual abuse and torture
constitute abhorrent violations of human rights and
human dignity. We underscore that sexual abuse and
gender-based violence are linked to gender inequality,
poverty, exclusion and discrimination.

The MIKTA countries therefore believe that it
is imperative to directly address those root causes of
conflict, including through the promotion of gender
equality and the greater and meaningful participation
of women in all forms of mediation, the prevention of
conflicts, United Nations peacekeeping operations,
post-conflict recovery and peacebuilding processes.
We also support the importance of increasing gender
advisers in United Nations peacekeeping operations.

Further efforts are required to see more women
gain leadership seats at the negotiating table,
enhance their engagement in political and economic
decision-making at all stages of the peace process, and
implement peace agreements. According to UN-Women
statistics, civilians - the majority of whom are women
and children - constitute almost 90 per cent of the
casualties in contemporary conflicts, whereas fewer
than 4 per cent of signatories to peace agreements are
women and fewer than 10 per cent of negotiators at
peace tables are women.

At a time when the causes and effects of conflicts
easily spread across borders, regional and international
coordination and cooperation remain important
tools in addressing the challenges we face. With that
understanding, MIKTA, as a cross-regional group
of countries on different continents, underscores its
readiness to contribute to international efforts to
advance the women and peace and security agenda.

