Mrs. Meslem Si Amer (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me at the outset to extend to you, Mr. President,
our warmest congratulations on the Kingdom of Spain's
accession to the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We thank you for organizing this very
important discussion.

I also thank the Secretary-General, the Executive
Director of UN-Women, and the representatives of civil
society for their briefings. I should also like to extend
the greetings of the President Abdelaziz Bouteflika of
Algeria, who asked me to deliver this statement on his
behalf.

Fifteen years ago, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1325 (2000) to highlight the harmful effects
of armed conflict on women and girls. The resolution
was the outcome of effective campaigning by women's
groups at the international level following the Fourth
World Conference on Women in Beijing in 1995, as
well as of the resolve demonstrated by political leaders
at that time.

Yet, despite the efforts of the international
community to establish a normative and legal
framework, including Security Council resolutions,
sexual violence in conflict is on the rise and becoming
more complex. Sexual violence is still used as a weapon
in war in order to subjugate and humiliate opponents
in conflict. With the appearance of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham and Boko Haram, collective
public rape, sexual enslavement, the selling of women
and girls under 14 years of age, along with the ensuing
pregnancies and abortions have become signs of the
present age of terror and injustice.

This high-level review of resolution 1325 (2000)
gives us an important opportunity to implement the
women and peace and security agenda and to abide by
certain ambitious agreements. Within this framework,
I should like to emphasize the following three points.

First, we must reinforce the participation of women
and mainstream the gender perspective in conflict-
resolution and peacekeeping operations. We must
provide the necessary training for the mediators and
envoys who participate in mediation and ceasefires and
in achieving peace and preventive diplomacy. We must
ensure that peace agreements include provisions to
strengthen the role of women in conflict-resolution, such
as the Algiers Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali.

Secondly, we must break the silence and raise
awareness so as to prevent sexual violence, protect
victims and provide them with the opportunity to be
reintegrated into their societies. We must also work to
reinforce the legal arsenal to protect the victims and
punish the perpetrators of such violence. In addition,
we must encourage civil society to work to change
the mentality and improve the economic and social
conditions that lead to an increase in sexual violence.

Thirdly, we have to reinforce anti-terrorism
activities at all levels. Extremist terrorist groups
continue to commit terrible sexual violence that violates
human rights, especially those of weaker groups.
We also have to support dialogue and combat violent
extremism, as confirmed at the conference held in July.

In many countries, the victims of sexual violence
have limited recourse. Until we remedy that situation,
the perpetrators will continue to commit these crimes
andjustice will be out ofreach. We therefore emphasize
the importance of reporting, protection and prevention
by women's groups, leaders of society, religious leaders,
and mass media working in human rights. We must
support the efforts of the Organization to reinforce the
capacities of these groups.

The fight against sexual violence is not limited to the
United Nations. At the regional level, the African Union
has adopted a its own solidarity initiative to promote
international consultations on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and the Protocol to the African
Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights on the Rights of
Women in Africa. At the national level, Algeria, under
the able leadership of President Abdelaziz Bouteflika
and in implementation of his programmes, has been
working hard to reinforce its legal system and to review
its laws on the protection and promotion of women at
all levels, based on our belief in the effective role of
women in achieving peace, promoting social equality
and combating all forms of violence and inequality.
Thanks to the Government's belief in the effective
role of women, Algerian women have made great
strides within Algerian society. They participate in
decision-making and in the political process. Algerian
women currently represent 30 per cent of members of
the Algerian Parliament and over 40 per cent of our
judges. The chief justice of one of our most important
courts is a woman. Algerian women also fought
against colonialism and played a major role during the
1990s - the dark years - when they also contributed
to reconciliation. They have also participated in the
implementation of numerous development projects in
my country.

Algeria supports the need to take into account
incidents of sexual violence in conflict situations and
has incorporated such considerations in all ofits special
political and peacekeeping missions, as well as in the
investigational framework and other mechanisms.
The issue of sexual violence must be taken into
account at every level, especially within those groups
and committees that are responsible for the follow-up
the implementation of Security Council resolutions.
We must work for peace and security in order to create
a better world. That will not be possible if we do not
eradicate all forms of violence and discrimination
directed against women. I am especially thinking of
sexual violence in conflict situations. As members of
the international community, let us recall that we cannot
ignore the fact that poverty and ignorance are often two
factors that spur on terrorism and extremism. We must
eliminate those scourges by using all available means,
in particular by empowering women and bettering their
condition.

