Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I join
others in thanking Margot Wallstrom and Herve
Ladsous for their briefings, and Amina Megheirbi for
her moving words on behalf of the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security. The United
Kingdom welcomes the report of the Secretary-General
on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2012/33). We
wholeheartedly support the work and the mandate of
Margot Wallstrom.

I would like to make three points. First, I would
like to commend Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Wallstrom for the good work that
she has done to raise the profile of this issue, including
fighting against impunity. We welcome her concerted
efforts in tackling this issue, leading to a more
coordinated response from the United Nations system,
as she set out this morning. United Nations Action
against Sexual Violence in Conflict has played an
important part in implementing the monitoring,
analysis and reporting arrangements. Ms. Wallstrom
has also worked tirelessly to ensure that the voices of
non-governmental and civil society organizations are
heard.

Secondly, we welcome the efforts towards greater
accountability and an end to impunity. The United
Nations monitoring and reporting mechanisms provide
reliable, objective and evidence-based information on
conflict-related sexual violence against women, men,
girls and boys. Under resolution 1960 (2010), the

Security Council can now hold to account parties
credibly suspected of committing acts of rape or other
forms of sexual violence. We note that these parties are
listed for the first time, and support appropriate action
being taken against those responsible for these terrible
acts.

It is important that the Council take into account
information on conflict-related sexual Violence when
considering post-conflict situations and other situations
of concern. However, conflict-related sexual violence
is not confined to countries on the Security Council's
agenda, as we see incidents or patterns occur in other
settings. The Special Representative of the Secretary-
General must be able to address conflict-related sexual
Violence wherever a pattern or trend exists as an early
warning sign of conflict. These crimes must be
reported, addressed and punished, and the survivors
must be treated with dignity throughout the reporting
process.

We recognize the good work of the Team of
Experts on the Rule of Law. It supports Member States
in strengthening the rule of law and institutional
safeguards against impunity by working with them to
improve rule of law processes and ensuring that those
who commit sexual violence are brought to justice. It is
not until impunity has been combated and the
perpetrators of conflict-related sexual violence are
brought to account that justice will have been done. All
parties to conflict must learn that it is the perpetrator,
and not the survivor, who will pay the price.

Finally, we welcome the development of a
framework of early warning signs specific to conflict-
related sexual violence, as well as the ambition to
integrate this analysis into existing and emerging early
warning and prevention systems. Early warning and
prevention systems are vital tools in both preventing
and in tackling conflict-related sexual violence.

Rape is increasingly used as a tactic of war, and
the Security Council should be united in condemnation
of it and steadfast in support of the crucial work of the
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
The adoption of resolution 1960 (2010), the
appointment of Ms. Wallstrom, the establishment of
her good offices alongside the Team of Experts on the
Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, and the
work of women protection advisors all contribute to
preventing and responding to conflict-related sexual

12-2393]
violence, and thereby to international peace and
stability.

We firmly believe that the Council needs to
sustain and build on this work. For that reason, the
United Kingdom is disappointed that the Council has
not yet been able to agree a presidential statement
condemning conflict-related sexual violence. It sends a
depressing message to the world at large, and in
particular to victims and survivors, that on the occasion
of this debate the Council has not yet been able to
agree a public statement on impunity, on prevention
and early warning, on follow-up to resolution 1960
(2010) over the past year, and, crucially, on the
excellent work of Ms. Wallstrom.

We trust that intensive and urgent efforts will
continue among Council members to agree a public
position on these important issues, and that all
delegations will demonstrate the necessary
commitment, sensitivity and vision to make such a
statement possible. The United Kingdom will certainly
be active in such efforts.

Finally, we have noticed a disturbing trend
recently of certain members of the Security Council
arguing that they do not feel bound by resolutions
adopted when they were not on the Council. Security
Council resolutions are, of course, legally binding on
all States Members of the United Nations, and no
Member State can distance itself from resolutions or
undermine their implementation, whether or not they
were present on the Council when those resolutions
were adopted.

