Mr. Penaranda (Philippines): The world will
remain stuck in a cycle ofviolence and conflicts as long
as nations put almost every other issue ahead of equality
for women. That is a takeaway from the 2019 United
Nations Peacekeeping Ministerial held here two weeks
ago. Today's open debate is crucial as we approach
the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000),
on women and peace and security. That resolution
deals with women's strategic roles as peacekeepers,
negotiators and mediators and their contributions to the
narratives of war and peace. It is an operational and
moral imperative to recruit more women peacekeepers.

From the Vancouver Peacekeeping Ministerial
in November 2017 to the 2019 United Nations
Peacekeeping Ministerial, the Philippines has
strongly committed itself to deploying more women
peacekeepers. More emphatically than ever before,
the Philippines joins the United Nations in calling
for more female peacekeepers to enhance the holistic
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations. More
than 50 per cent of our total deployed peacekeeping
personnel in six United Nations missions - South
Sudan, Darfur, the Central African Republic, Haiti,
Mali and the India/Pakistan border - are women. That
is well beyond the 15 per cent requirement for troop-
and police-contributing countries.

Since the launching of the second cycle of its
national action plan on women and peace and security, in
March 2017, the Philippines has achieved the following
milestones under the three pillars of empowerment and
participation, protection and prevention, and promotion
and mainstreaming. The Philippines is one of the first
countries to formulate and implement a regional action
plan to localize resolution 1325 (2000). The following
are the Philippines' inputs.

On the first pillar, among the provisions of the
Bangsamoro Organic Law, which was signed by
President Rodrigo Roa Duterte on 26 July 2018, is
the allocation of reserved seats for women in the
Bangsamoro Parliament and Cabinet. The continuing
efforts of the all-female Hijab troopers - as members
ofthe armed forces and the Philippine national police, in
partnership with different Government agencies, such
as the Office of the Presidential Adviser on the Peace
Process and civil society organizations - are being
undertaken through programmes and projects focused
on social healing and reconciliation and preventing
violent extremism.

On the second pillar, the Bangsamoro Organic
Law upholds and protects the fundamental rights
of women, including the right to engage in lawful
employment and to be protected from exploitation,
abuse or discrimination.

On the third pillar, the agency strategic action plans
operationalize the commitments of national Government
agencies under the national action plan. Capacity-
building programmes for local Government units,
Government agencies and civil society organizations
are also being conducted to ensure that the women and
peace and security agenda is mainstreamed in the plans
and budgets for gender and development programmes.

The Philippines will hold a forum exploring various
sub-themes of women and peace and security in order to
familiarize participants, mainly from the Philippines'
security sector, on the impact and significance of
women's participation in peacekeeping around the
world, with particular emphasis on the Philippine
experience. The Philippines further supports the calls of
Member States to appoint gender advisers as members
of crisis management teams in peacekeeping missions
and for the United Nations to commit resources for
mission leaders.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that the
conviction of the Philippine Government is grounded
in the experience that the gender that binds the wounds
of war, comforts its widows and shelters children in
conflict has the strongest motivation and the best
approaches to stop the outbreak of war and restore a
broken peace.

