Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): As previous
speakers have stated, in December 2016 the Council
considered the issue of human trafficking in conflict
situations (see S/PV.7847) and adopted resolution 2331
(2016), which strongly condemns all forms of human
trafficking in areas of armed conflict.

In October, the General Assembly will hold a
high-level meeting to assist action taken and ongoing
challenges in the framework of the combat against
human trafficking in general. This is a reflection
of the importance that we the States Members of the
United Nations attach to eradicating this appaling
scourge, which, lest we forget, undermines the rule of
law and development, and, above all, is a call on the
universal conscience.

I should like to thank the British presidency for
the timely choice of returning to this issue, this time
placing emphasis on and forced labour, slavery and
other similar practices in conflict situations. I thank also
Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for his important
statement, as well as our briefers today, Mr. Fedotov,
Mr. Hyland and Ms. Elman. Their briefings were
extremely instructive and illuminating with respect to
the gravity and scale of this scourge.

The armed conflicts currently under way throughout
the world unfortunately represent an opportunity
for traffickers, as the impunity resulting from the
breakdown of law and order allows them to operate
more easily and on a broader scale. Moreover, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in its 2016 report,
clearly highlights the complex links between human
trafficking and armed conflict. In addition, migrants
are the victims of trafficking and smuggling in conflict
zones, specifically because of those very conflicts.
During armed conflict, the loss and lack of economic
opportunity, discrimination and gender violence are
compounded. Family support networks are weakened
or destroyed, all of which contributes to exacerbating
individual and collective vulnerability to trafficking.

The resurgence of the phenomenon of human
trafficking in armed conflict situations is all the more
troubling since it leads to the forced marriage and
sexual or domestic enslavement of women and girls, and
to men and boys being trafficked into forced labour, if
not enslaved outright or turned into combatants.

Therefore, it is clear that human trafficking can
be described as - to use the term of the Special
Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially women
and children - an "umbrella concept" for practices
that are all equally inhuman and barbaric in nature.

While certain forms of trafficking result from
exacerbated vulnerability due to conflict, others are
the direct result of the actions of armed groups that
operate in conflict zones. My delegation would like
in particular to reiterate its growing concern at the
involvement of non-State and terrorist armed groups in
human trafficking in situations of conflict, often with
the goal of modifying the composition of a community
or persecuting or humiliating a given ethnic or religious
group. These practices, which, sadly, we have had
difficulty eradicating, are used by extremist groups not
only as terrorist tactics but also as a strategy of war,
with a view to furthering their goals and ideology,
consolidate their power or to increase their sources
of financing.

It is therefore crucial that we conduct an intensive
and determined struggle against all forms of human
trafficking in situations of armed conflict, including
against forced labour, slavery and other, similar
practices. These practices, in addition to constituting
grave violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law and exacerbating instability,
contribute to the fuelling of terrorist groups. We
therefore cannot but reiterate the overriding need to
implement resolution 2195 (2014), on the links between
terrorism and transnational organized crime, as well as
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime.

In terms of the struggle under way in my country,
allow me to highlight the fact that in addition to
having ratified virtually all international and regional
instruments relative to human trafficking, Senegal also
has adopted legislative and regulatory instruments that
address the issues of migration and human trafficking,
particularly through a specific law on the trafficking of
persons and similar practices and on the protection of
victims, which was adopted in 2005 and complements
the Senegalese penal code. That law criminalizes
the trafficking of persons and similar practices by
placing emphasis on the diverse forms of exploitation
of vulnerable persons and their transnational
organized character.

Furthermore, in order effectively to clamp down
on violations in the field of human trafficking and
in the trafficking of migrants, chapter 3 of that same
law confers to the Senegalese authorities two kinds
of competence, one universal, through article 10, and
the other based on the passive personality principle,
through article 11.

In addition to this legal framework, a set of
structures exists for addressing problems linked
to human trafficking, including a counselling and
guidance centre for children in difficult situations, an
inter-sectoral department for combating child labour
and a national unit to combat trafficking in persons. The
latter has two missions: one to provide early warning,
monitoring, information and communication, and a
scientific mission, which is to formulate proposals for
the modification of legislation on human trafficking
and harmonize them.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to stress
the need for the international community to focus on
prevention, protection, reintegration and accountability
in the framework of combating all scourges that
threaten humankind, including conflicts and human
trafficking in situations of conflict. In this regard, we
will have to ensure that we can effectively focus on
deterring, detecting and ending human trafficking, in
particular as carried out by violent extremist groups,
as the Council highlighted in its presidential statement
on human trafficking issued on 20 December 2015
(S/PRST/2015/25).

Human trafficking in situations of armed conflict
constitutes a threat to stability, the maintenance of
peace and reconstruction in affected countries. We are
in duty bound to collectively and in a concerted manner
put an end to these repugnant practices.

