Mr. Kickert (Austria): Let me first thank the
United Kingdom presidency for convening this timely
and pertinent open debate.

Austria aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union.

Conflict and post-conflict settings often create
the kind of conditions in which civilians are more
exposed to the risk of becoming victims of trafficking.
People fleeing from violence might become victims of
trafficking along their migration route or after their
arrival in their destination countries. Armed groups are
also actively engaged in the trafficking of persons in
the territories in which they operate.

There is much evidence that the smuggling of
migrants, including from conflict and post-conflict
settings, is increasingly intertwined with trafficking
in persons. Well-managed regular migration and
addressing the root causes of irregular migration
are imperative to efforts to prevent the smuggling of
migrants and trafficking in persons along migration
routes. In that regard, we are also looking forward
to the informal thematic session on the smuggling of
migrants, trafficking in persons and contemporary
forms of slavery, including appropriate identification,
protection and assistance to migrants and trafficking
victims, in Vienna later this year. The event will take
place in the framework of the preparatory process
leading to the adoption of the global compact for safe,
orderly and regular migration.

As a transit and destination country for the
increased migration movements we see in Europe,
Austria has scaled up training for immigration and
asylum officers and the staff of reception centres,
putting a special focus on identifying victims of human
trafficking. At the same time, international cooperation
in investigations into trafficking in persons and the
smuggling of migrants has been intensified, inter alia,
by establishing a Joint Operational Office against
Human Smuggling Networks in Vienna as a regional
platform and contact point for investigators from the
countries of origin, transit and destination.

Trafficking, as many have pointed out, remains in
large parts gender-specific. That has been confirmed by
the findings ofthe 2016 United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime Global Report on Trafficking in Persons.
Trafficking for the purpose of sexual exploitation still
constitutes more than half of all trafficking cases,
and women and girls are overwhelmingly affected
by it. Violence against women, sexual exploitation
and forced marriage - as often displayed in conflict
settings - illustrate that gender inequality forms part
of the overall problem.

Children are particularly vulnerable to becoming
the victims of trafficking. The overall proportion
of child victims of trafficking stands at 28 per cent.
Thousands of children have been recruited by armed
groups and are used as child soldiers. Girls are also
forced into marriages and used for domestic work
and sexual slavery. Boys - apart from being used in
combat - are also exploited through forced labour, for
example in the exploitation of natural resources.

In armed conflict situations, trafficking in
persons is also used as a strategy to target ethnic and
religious minorities. Austria continues to advocate for
a victim-centred approach, with a focus on preventing
trafficking in persons and protecting victims of
trafficking or other serious forms of exploitation. It is
also clear that States have the primary responsibility
for bringing perpetrators to justice and for ending
the climate of impunity. In post-conflict settings,
accountability and transitional-justice mechanisms,
including at the international level, are key elements
for sustainable peace.

It is important to recognize the links that exist
between conflict, trafficking in persons and other forms
of transnational organized crime. Understanding the
correlations better will help us to improve our response
aimed at preventing and combating trafficking.

With its portfolio of technical assistance
programmes, the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime has been and continues to be a central partner
for assisting Member States in implementing practical
measures to combat trafficking in persons. At this
point, we would also like to acknowledge the valuable
expertise and contribution of non-governmental
organizations in the framework of the coordinated
efforts on the national, regional and international
levels. I am also very glad that we had the chance
to hear from the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe's Special Representative and
Co-ordinator for Combating Trafficking in Human
Beings, which provided a good example of what the
regional organizations can contribute.

We reiterate the importance of the Palermo
Protocol, which provides the internationally agreed
definition of the crime of trafficking in persons, and
focuses on the prevention of trafficking, the protection
of victims and the prosecution of perpetrators. We
invite all States to ratify it without delay and to ensure
its effective implementation.

Finally, the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund
for Victims of Human Trafficking has facilitated direct
assistance to approximately 2,500 trafficking victims
each year. That covers only a fraction of all the victims,
and many projects are waiting for the necessary funds.
Yet it is still an immensely important contribution.
We therefore encourage all States to contribute to
the Trust Fund in order to ensure financing for many
worthwhile programmes.

