Monsignor Charters (Holy See): My delegation
would like to thank the presidency of the United
Kingdom for reconvening this important open debate
on women and peace and security.

Next year will mark the twentieth anniversary of
the landmark resolution 1325 (2000). Progress has been
made during the years since its adoption. Women's
voices are increasingly heard and, in many places, more
space is being given to their unique contributions in
the pursuit of peace and reconciliation. However, much
remains to be done to increase women's representation
in this important area. Pope Francis recently
commented on the great differences that still mark the
condition of women in the world, which flow mainly
from sociocultural factors.

In situations of conflict, women, who are seldom the
cause or the perpetrators of violence, are often the first
to be victimized. They bear the brunt of the negative
effects of conflict. This has a detrimental effect on
their health and well-being and that of those in their
care. They also find themselves frequently excluded
from the conversations and programmes that seek to
work out solutions that serve the cause oflasting peace.

We know of the impact of armed conflict on
women and girls. Sadly, our attention is all too often
drawn to the problem of sexual violence used as a
weapon of war. This must be, at all times and in all
places, firmly condemned. More effective efforts must
be made to ensure that such heinous crimes are not
committed. Perpetrators must be brought to justice.
Widespread impunity for such actions, as is still the
case in situations of conflict, must be addressed if such
crimes are to decrease.

In situations of conflict and tension around the
world, however, we must never forget that women are
not only victims; women also have an essential and
irreplaceable role as protagonists in the promotion
of peace and reconciliation at the grass-roots level,
especially within the family and local community.
Their uniquely feminine sense for the pulse of difficult
situations makes them capable of expressing the
concerns and aspirations ofthose communities. It also is
important that their irreplaceable genius and expertise
be harnessed in national, regional and international
decision-making. To exclude the full participation of
women at every stage and in every aspect of the peace
processes would be to fail on the commitments made
since resolution 1325 (2000) was adopted. In that regard,
the Holy See takes note of the decision to make United
Nations peacekeeping operations more sensitive to the
needs of women and girls, both to ensure the protection
ofthose who find themselves in situations of conflict as
well as to facilitate the presence of uniformed women
within peacekeeping missions.

It has been 40 years since Mother Teresa of Calcutta
won the Nobel Prize for Peace. She was known for her
selfless work and for her tireless commitment to the
poorest of the poor, the abandoned, the unborn, the
dying and others whom society leaves behind today.
Each day, often in very hidden and humble ways,
all around the world, thousands of Catholic women
religious work to promote the dignity and advancement
of women and girls - an important, albeit unsung,
element ofbuilding and maintaining peaceful societies.
The work of the women in those religious institutes
also answers the needs and challenges of the horror of
human trafficking and the other abuses that women,
men, boys and girls endure. Amid very complex and
tragic situations, these women of peace and solidarity,
inside and outside of situations of conflict, race to
assist those who suffer the consequences of wars and
underdevelopment and serve as an example to the entire
international community of grappling with the root
causes of conflict and inequality.

In fulfilling its critical responsibility to promote
and maintain international peace and security, the
Security Council must ensure that the women and
peace and security agenda receives more than verbal
commitments, and that policies and programmes are
founded and implemented at all levels so as to foster the
incorporation of women into peace processes, and thus
bring about deeper, more profound and lasting results
for the good of all.

