Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate the United Kingdom
on its presidency of the Security Council for this
month. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General, the Special Envoy of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura,
for their briefings, as well as others who spoken today.

Colombia endorses the repeated rejections by the
Security Council of all acts of sexual violence and other
forms violence against civilians in armed conflict, in
particular against women and children. My country
deplores the fact that these situations continue to arise
in armed conflict in various parts of the world, and
believes that the international community should adopt
an attitude of strict condemnation and seek, through all
means, to abolish violence, ensure the protection of and
reparations for victims, and see to it that perpetrators
are brought to justice.

Colombia is aware of the impact of sexual violence
in conflicts on international peace and security, and
believes that we must not lose sight of the fact that the
primary responsibility to put an end to that scourge and
to protect the victims lies with States. We believe it
necessary for international cooperation in this field to
be developed and implemented, not just in a constructive
way, but also on the basis of an open dialogue with the
Governments concerned, so as to ensure that effective
solutions are found and that national institutions and
processes are strengthened, while respecting States'
policies and priorities.

Colombia also joins in the repeated condemnations
by the Security Council of violations of international
humanitarian law committed against women and girls,
and the need to bring tojustice those who are responsible
for such crimes, in particular the perpetrators of
sexual violence against women. We also underscore
the importance of enhancing the role of women in
peacebuilding and in providing assistance to victims,
in particular the victims of sexual violence. It is clear
that in order to ensure that those cases are managed
properly, information has to be gathered by United
Nations agencies on the ground in a timely, precise,
reliable and objective way. In that way, the United
Nations entities can address each case individually,
conduct related criminal investigations, and ensure due
process and follow-up, as required.

The resolutions that have been referred to in the
framework of this debate call up the Secretary-General
to conduct dialogues, "as appropriate", with the parties to
armed conflict. Currently, the Government of Colombia
is holding a peace dialogue with the spokespersons ofan
illegal armed group. From the outset, we have believed
that the ownership and autonomy of the Government are
essential in this process, as an any outside intervention
lacking the consent of the Colombian Government
would negatively interfere in that process. When we
believe support or mediation to be appropriate, we
will make that known. Therefore, we are grateful for
offers of good offices, and we welcome those voices
that support the peace process and the international
pressure to put an end to those violent acts and in
particular those against women.

Along those lines, it is worth mentioning some
of the good practices introduced by Colombia to
prevent, investigate and sanction sexual violence in
armed conflict. For example, our National Council for
Economic and Social Policy has used about $1 million
to coordinate all the institutional forces within our
country to implement the national public policy for
gender equality and the comprehensive plan to ensure
a life free of violence for women by implementing the
law on reparations for victims.

Strengthening the role and ability of women and
promoting the enjoyment and observance of their
rights is particularly important to the Government of
Colombia. In that regard, the contribution of the United
Nations system and the international community is
key within a framework of respect for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of all
States. As can be seen and has been underscored by
the Secretary-General in his reports, Colombia has
different measures and safeguards that mark a decisive
step forward in its efforts to comprehensively and
consistently address that problem.

