Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Russia backed the adoption of resolution
2272 (2016), on sexual exploitation and abuse in
peacekeeping operations. We approached with
understanding the initiative of the United States and
other States' delegations to send a signal through the
Security Council regarding the unacceptability of such
actions. We decisively condemn such crimes and deem
it necessary to strengthen peacekeepers' responsibility
for sexual exploitation and abuse.

During the course of intensive negotiations, we were
able to craft a text that expanded preventive measures
and the fight against this phenomenon, not only to the
United Nations but also other missions deployed with
Security Council consent. However, we believe it is
important to underscore once again that we cannot
accept attempts to exclude national peacekeeping
contingents enjoying the Security Council's mandate
from responsibility for the commission of sexual
exploitation and abuse. This is all the more true as
recently there has been a significant number of cases
that clearly point to the fact that such crimes were
committed byjust such contingents of foreign missions.

At a time when the majority of United Nations
contingents that are focused on in this resolution are
represented by countries ofAsia and Africa, it seems the
military personnel of Western countries would like to
enjoy immunity from prosecution for such actions. This
is fraught with the risk of undermining the effectiveness
of actions undertaken to fight this evil and could also
have an impact on the standing of the international
Organization. It could also become a time bomb for
the peacekeeping work of the United Nations. Russia
hopes that the Secretary-General will use the authority
he possesses pursuant to this resolution to ensure that
there is transparent and objective investigation of
existing cases and the punishment of the guilty in all
cases, without exception, regardless of the country of
nationality of the perpetrator.

We view the adoption by the Security Council of
the resolution today as an exception to the rule. We
continue to believe that the issue of the discipline of
peacekeepers is not related to the maintenance of
international peace and security. For many years these
problems have been discussed in various bodies of
the General Assembly - for example, the Secretary-
General submits his relevant reports to the General
Assembly. We strongly support the continuation of this
established practice, which has proven to be effective.

We would like to underscore that we are concerned
by the fact that the sponsors of the resolution ignored
the logical and wise amendments that were proposed by
Egypt and were backed by troop-contributing countries
(TCCs). This is a case in which the view of the troop-
contributing countries must be heard and must be
included in the work on Security Council resolutions.
We believe it is wrong to pit the Council up against the
General Assembly and, even worse, against TCCs.

