Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): I too want to thank
Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie Guehenno, Ms.
Angela King and Ms. Noleen Heyzer for their
statements.

I want to begin by saying that Under-Secretary-
General Jean-Marie Guehenno was a very brave man
when he began his remarks by saying that he had
encountered some scepticism. I believe that he said that
in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO)
this was an exercise in political correctness and not
really something of real value. To be completely
candid, I thought that in some ways Mr. Guehenno
tabled the most important point that we need to address
in today's meeting, because, looking around this room,
what I detect most of all is a huge, invisible elephant of
scepticism about the value of this exercise.

Of course, those who are sceptical about this
exercise are not going to come here and say "I am
sceptical about this exercise; it is just a pure exercise in
political correctness". But they exist, and to some
extent, that is reflected in the fact that only 11
countries have signed up for this debate. Also, the
number of seats that are occupied gives some
indication of the degree of scepticism.

I make this point at the beginning because I
thought that one useful contribution that both Ms.
Angela King and Ms. Noleen Heyzer could make in the
course of today's debate would be to try to slay this
invisible elephant in the room. One way of doing that
is to indicate that this is not an abstract exercise; it is
about real life situations and real people, whose lives
can and will be improved by our debate today.

It is useful to provide statistics that make the
case. For example, one statistic that I came across -
which I suppose is obvious - is that at the beginning
of the twentieth century only 15 per cent of the
casualties of conflicts were civilians, but since the end
of the cold war, 90 per cent of those killed in conflict
are civilians. Apparently, three out of four fatalities of
war are now women and children. So there has been
this huge sea change in the nature of conflicts.

If I may talk of the good old days - if I may use
that phrase - when the boys went out to fight boys
and then came home, those days are gone. Now
conflict directly involves women and girls, and that is
why we need to address this issue more directly. It
would help us if more details were provided along
these lines to make the case that this is not an exercise
in political correctness, but, as Mr. Guehenno
emphasized, it is an important issue that we have to
address.

We were asked to pose questions. I have one for
Mr. Guehenno and one for Ms. King and Ms. Heyzer.

I appreciate the point that Mr. Guehenno has
made that DPKO is fully committed to the whole
exercise of gender mainstreaming. I am sure that within
the Department in New York there is that commitment.
But, as he knows, many of the people who are sent to
the field are parachuted in from their countries. They
come in; they get briefings from DPKO, and then they
go out to the field. I suspect that they come with all
their cultural values and attitudes intact.

Here, since I cannot criticize other cultures, I will
just say that, as is known, Asian males tend to be very
chauvinistic, male chauvinists. I say this with some
knowledge because my wife complains that she has not
fully scrubbed male chauvinism from me. These
gentlemen are essentially brought up with these
traditional Asian values and martial traditions, and then
they are sent out into the field and told: I want you to
be sensitive in the way you handle women; I want you
to understand the needs of women, and so forth.

As Mr. Guehenno himself is an expert on the
whole question of values and how to handle values, I
am sure that it is a major exercise communicating
abstract points on paper to real people in the field. I
was wondering whether he had any thoughts on this.
Here I note that Ms. Heyzer bravely said in her remarks
that experts found that a gender perspective is not
sufficiently incorporated into peace operations. Rather,
it is isolated in the form of single staff persons or small
units lacking sufficient seniority or resources. This is
one question that I hope Mr. Guehenno will try to
address.

My next question is to Ms. King and Ms. Heyzer.
One of the points made in these discussions about the
role of women is that women actually can and do make
a difference when they are involved in delivering
peace. For example, I understand that President Clinton
said in July, after the Camp David talks, that "If we had
women at Camp David, we would have an agreement."

We also know that when they are involved in
peace, women actually make a difference in some
areas. I have been given the example of something
called Jerusalem Link, a federation of Palestinian and
Israeli women's groups. In 2000 apparently its platform
served as a blueprint for negotiations over the final
status of Jerusalem during the Oslo process. Of course,
we all know how difficult the Jerusalem issue is.

Are there concrete examples that can be provided
of where the participation of women has made a
difference in terms of delivering peace? It strengthens
the case for saying: let us get women more involved. I
noticed, for example, that, with regard to your debate,
Mr. President, on the West Africa workshop, we were
very concerned that all the good work that we had done
in Sierra Leone might be lost by the new fighting
breaking out in Liberia. I noticed that one of the two
experts, Ms. Ellen Johnson Salib, is from Liberia. In
my own brief visit to Liberia, I found the women in
Liberia quite engaged and outspoken. Can she illustrate
how the women of Liberia can play a role in trying to
contain a real-life dangerous conflict that is troubling
the Security Council now?

That is just one example. The others that can be
provided will be very helpful.

I do actually want to apologize to Mr. Guehenno,
Ms. King and Ms. Heyzer. If I am not here to listen to
their responses, I will be fully briefed. My apologies if
I attend to other commitments.

Finally, two concluding points. One is that I
would like to support the final concrete appeal that Ms.
Heyzer made at the end of her statement about the
women in Rwanda and providing some form of
sufficient protection from the obvious difficulties they
are facing. I hope that something can be done about
that.

Secondly, I wanted to congratulate you, Mr.
President, on the initiative of launching this debate. As
I explained earlier, I think that it is a real issue and not
one that should be dismissed. Even though there are
other voices in the corridors of the United Nations that
say that the Security Council's job is not involved in
norm creation but rather to handle specific issues, I
think that in this particular case the Council can make a
difference. I hope that, when the two reports come out
in October, the Council will use them to continue the
process. One debate is not going to change the course
of events, but it is part of a very important process. I
congratulate you, Sir, for participating in this.

