Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): We thank the Secretary-
General, the Executive Director of UN Women, High
Commissioner Pillay and Ms. Brigitte Balipou, the
representative of the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security, for their active involvement and
valuable contributions. We also welcome the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2122 (2013) by the Council earlier
today, calling for higher levels of women's involvement
in peacekeeping and peacebuilding. It is undeniable that
the role, views and leadership of women are essential if
we are to truly make and sustain peace.

As a country that hosts tens of thousands of
refugees as a result of aggression and war imposed
on Armenia, we attach particular importance to
this debate. It is nothing new to say that the costs of
conflicts are borne disproportionately by women and
girls and, since it is primarily women who pay the price
when peace is absent, they are important stakeholders
in peacebuilding. As such, the inclusion of women in
all stages of peace processes guarantees a more lasting
and representative settlement.

We view this open debate as an opportunity
to highlight the policies and programmes aimed at
supporting national ownership and reform of justice
systems that place women's rights and access to justice
for women at their heart. As the recent declaration of
the Peacebuilding Commission on women's economic
empowerment for peacebuilding underscores, societies
that invest in women see exponential dividends from
such investments. We believe that justice sector reform
must start with the reform of laws to ensure that women
have equal rights in all spheres. It must include reforms
to strengthen women's access to the justice system
and to promote and protect their rights and to protect
women from the Violence and insecurity that too often
accompany transitions from conflict.

Transitional justice mechanisms and reparations
programmes in particular have an important role in and
impact on societies recovering from conflict. When
linked to development efforts, such measures can have
sustainable and transformative impacts for Victims, and
for women victims in particular. The transitions that
follow conflicts present important opportunities not
only to address the injustices faced by women during
times of conflict, but also to transform underlying
inequalities and gender-based discrimination.

Having had the privilege to chair previous sessions
of the Commission on the Status of Women, I would
like to emphasize that the United Nations has made
significant gains in securing commitments to gender
equality and women's post-conflict empowerment.
Specifically, the Secretary-General's seven-point
action plan on gender-responsive peacebuilding is a
well-conceived and realistic set of targets for the United
Nations system.

Armenia also commends the efforts of the newly
appointed United Nations Special Envoy Mary
Robinson and Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Margaret Vogt and others in establishing the
gender-responsive mediation practices, in particular
over the past year, which saw the appointment of gender
advisers, early and regular consultations with women,
the establishment of women's advisory bodies, and the
implementation of the commitment to secure women a
place at peace talks.

Recently, the United Nations has developed an
increasingly sophisticated network for specialized
gender experts for deployment to mediation, transitional
justice and prosecutorial processes. Member States
should avail themselves of these important resources.
For example, the regular deployments of UN Women
to commissions of enquiry over the past three years
have produced a steady improvement in the extent to
which human rights abuses against women are reported
and acted upon. This is a direct result of the quality
of expertise and the regular deployment of experts to
those bodies.

To further promote the application of the women,
peace and security agenda, Armenia encourages
the Council to continue its efforts and to ensure the
consistent and regular application of the agenda across
all areas. The Security Council should recognize its own
role to create opportunities for women to participate
and exercise leadership.
We also believe that without women's civil society
strength and women's leadership, there will be no
effective prevention. Women's experiences of Violence
during and after conflict are much broader, and effective
protection from all forms of violence and violations
will be possible only through their empowerment and
participation.

In conclusion, let me express our readiness to work
closely with the Council, the United Nations bodies
and the non-governmental organizations concerned to
expand and implement the women, peace and security
agenda by improving the situation of women around the
world, including women affected by armed conflicts.

