Mr. Andrabi (Pakistan): I am privileged to make
this statement on behalf of my Permanent
Representative. Pakistan's delegation would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for arranging today's debate
and to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council. We also thank the Secretary-
General and Ambassador Peter Wittig of Germany for
their important briefings. We express our appreciation
of the Secretary-General's reports under discussion
today (S/2010/386 and S/2010/466). The reports enrich
the evolving discourse on peacebuilding and ameliorate
our collective response to addressing the challenge of
peacebuilding.

The Secretary-General's progress report on
peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict is a
substantive addition to its prequel of July 2009
(S/2009/304). In the earlier report, the Secretary-
General outlined an agenda for coherent, efficient and
predictable responses to the peacebuilding needs of
countries emerging from conflict. The present report
notes the progress achieved in implementing that
agenda. In that context, we note the positive role
played by the Integration Steering Group, which
includes peace and security, humanitarian and
development actors across the United Nations. The
Group can enhance the Secretariat's responsiveness to
peacebuilding needs.

Parallel improvement in cooperation between
Headquarters and the country team, along with
strengthening the office of the resident coordinator, are
also vital. At the same time, it would also be important
to clarify the linkages between peacebuilding and the
socio-economic development strategies put forth by the
United Nations Development Programme and other
multilateral donors.

We agree with the Secretary-General that the core
priority areas of peacebuilding are basic safety and
security, support to political processes, the provision of
basic services, restoring core Government functions
and economic revitalization. We believe that national
capacity development will remain a cornerstone of all
peacebuilding efforts. Security sector reforms, together
with strengthening national capacity to manage inter-
community conflicts, fill the gap in a country's ability
to build sustainable peace. However, in order to
succeed, all peacebuilding initiatives must be people-
centric in terms of the specific needs or circumstances
endemic in a post-conflict situation.

In the context of the human dimension of
peacebuilding, the Secretary-General's report on
women and peacebuilding is both candid and objective.
The report puts forth a seven-point action plan that
factors the gender perspective into peacebuilding
endeavours.
We believe that lasting peace after a conflict will
remain elusive without improving the conditions of
women and other vulnerable segments of society. For
long-term economic recovery and social cohesion,
women's access to health, education and
entrepreneurship is essential. Women's participation in
mediation and the formulation of policy in various
peacebuilding efforts can be a force multiplier.
However, adherence to merit, cross-board institutional
contexts and strict professionalism should not be
compromised.

The challenge of peacebuilding is complicated by
the proven risk of the relapse into conflict. Such
challenges can be tackled by more coordinated
assessment and planning for peacebuilding and
peacekeeping activities, where both processes must be
explicitly defined in a complementary relationship.
That is especially important in view of the fact that
long-term peacebuilding objectives are now enshrined
in at least 10 out of 16 peacekeeping missions. This
overlap should not obviate the specificity of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding disciplines.
Peacebuilding and peacekeeping can work together
only through the dynamic interplay of the General
Assembly, the Security Council, the Economic and
Social Council, international financial institutions,
troop-contributing countries (TCCs) and the relevant
departments of the Secretariat.

The Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), with its
unique composition and specific mandate, holds a
pivotal role in the peacebuilding architecture. The
achievements of the PBC in the first five years of its
existence should not be downplayed. The operation of
the PBC will improve as the global narrative on
peacebuilding further evolves and as our collective
response becomes more resource-rich. It is therefore
important not to tamper with the composition and
structure of the PBC. Any alteration in the composition
of the PBC, particularly with reference to the
representation of TCCs, should not be accepted, as it
would only weaken the institutional and other
important linkages between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding.

I would like to conclude by reiterating that there
is no silver bullet that can precipitate conditions
conducive to peacebuilding. Such conditions -
namely, security and political stability - can be
sustained only if the aim of our collective
peacebuilding endeavour is to win peace, and not to
earn or impose it.

