Mr. Nambiar (India): We are pleased to see you,
Sir, presiding over this meeting of the Council. The
subject under discussion in the Security Council today
is one of great importance, in view of the increasing
number of conflicts in which women and children find
themselves involved.

Let me begin by referring to the report of the
Secretary General (S/2002/ 1154) pursuant to resolution
1325 (2000), adopted unanimously in October 2000.
The Secretary-General made a very pertinent point
when he said that women suffered the impact of
conflict disproportionately but also that they held the
key to the solution of conflict.

The various action points listed in the report
provide practical recommendations that are designed to
ensure the full and equal participation of women in all
stages of conflict resolution, peacekeeping, peace-
building, peacemaking and the reconstruction process
following conflict.

As do many other delegations, we support the
proposal to integrate gender perspectives in the
planning and mandates of peace processes. We are
happy to note that the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations is developing concrete measures to help
mainstream these perspectives into the daily work of
mission components. While there have been calls for a
gender balance in the composition of peacekeeping
forces, we have some doubts about the overall
desirability of such a move. Would it be in the interest
of either peace or gender equality for women to
embroil themselves in conflict, even if it were in the
cause of the United Nations? We would, instead,
support a greater role for women as special
representatives, within the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and in negotiations for settling conflict, as
provided for under resolution 1325 (2000).

We see the logic of the establishment of gender
offices or focal points in field missions. That action
would undoubtedly contribute to increasing gender
mainstreaming in peacekeeping missions. Also
important is the inclusion of women, girls and child
soldiers in disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) programmes, which could be
applied to all future missions involving DDR
programmes.

A very pertinent point about the fact that in
conflict situations women and girls are the victims of
all forms of violence, particularly sexual violence and
exploitation, has been brought out in the report. This
element in conflict situations requires careful attention,
and is one in which the international community would
need to seriously consider remedial measures.
Reintegration of women is another important element
which requires due attention. Any peace agreements
under the sponsorship of the United Nations should
automatically incorporate the gender perspective,
including the role women play.

While women bear a disproportionately large
share of the burden of conflict, they have only a
marginal say in matters of war and peace. As was
mentioned in the debate yesterday, in the First World
War, 80 per cent of those who died were men, while in
today's conflicts 80 per cent of the victims are
civilians, mainly women and children. My delegation
has, in the past, drawn attention to the fact that gender
imbalances in our societies, as reflected in positions of
power and influence, are an important factor
contributing to the existing situation.

Clearly, another reason for the increasing
instances of civilian casualties in today's conflicts is
the increasing number of incidents of terrorism
worldwide. The attacks of 11 September 2001 were one
of the worst and most manifest forms of terrorism
witnessed by modern society. However, this phase of
terrorism was not unfamiliar to countries such as my
own or to many others. India has been the victim of
unrelenting terrorism, which primarily targets women
and children, for the past 20 years, resulting in almost
60,000 casualties.

In recent months, the world has been witness to
the most heinous instances of terrorism, whether in
Moscow, New York, Bali, parts of Jammu and
Kashmir, Gujarat or even New Delhi. The difference
between incidents in many other parts of the world and
those in India is that while many recent international
incidents have been perpetrated by nebulous groups
operating in secrecy and disclaiming State support,
those in India are the product of a carefully crafted,
hard-nosed strategy directed against us. Terrorism has
been used to conduct low-intensity conflict aimed at
soft targets, namely, women and children and unarmed
civilians. That policy perhaps had served its purpose
until the international drive against terrorism took root
in the aftermath of 11 September and came to be
enshrined in resolution 1373 (2001).

It must be understood that one can no longer
profess to be a part of the global coalition against
terrorism on the one hand and sponsor terrorism on the
other. It is no longer possible to run with the hare and
hunt with the hounds.

Two of the most reprehensible terrorist crimes
committed recently, mainly against women and
children, occurred in India. Both were attacks aimed at
provoking instability, fear and the prospect of a
backlash. I am referring to the Kaluchak massacre
perpetrated by terrorists on 14 May 2002 in the state of
Jammu and Kashmir, when three terrorists
indiscriminately opened fire on the passengers of a
transport bus, then moved to the family quarters of an
army unit in the area and once again fired
indiscriminately on army family members present on
the premises. As a result, 28 civilians were killed and
35 wounded, most of them women and children. In a
more recent instance designed to ignite communal
violence in the state of Gujarat, terrorists entered a
place of worship, systematically firing into the large
numbers of peaceful worshippers on the premises,
resulting in the deaths of more than 30 innocent men,
women and children and the wounding of hundreds of
others.

The women and children in our lives assure our
future. They must live in security. They must also be
assured a life of dignity. At the height of the Taliban
terror, a famous Pakistani poet, Kishwar Naheed, wrote
a lovely poem that began "Those who felt threatened
by girl children". There has to be a change of mindset
regarding women and children, the girl child in
particular.

While there is much talk of the need to safeguard
the interests of women and children, there is less talk

of cooperative efforts to ensure sustained economic
growth, which alone can eradicate the poverty and
deprivation which is at the root of their exclusion. The
renowned economic philosopher Amartya Sen speaks
of the right of people to "seek our identity as we
choose". It is that identity which should be assured to
all, irrespective of gender, if we are to create an
environment of peace and security for all in our
interconnected world.

