Mr. Ruiz Cabanas (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank your Government, Sir, for its initiative to
convene today's timely open debate to address one of
the most important challenges to the maintenance of
international peace and security - the use of sexual
violence as a tactic of war and by terrorist groups.

The unprecedented increase in sexual abuse and
exploitation during armed conflict in recent years is
indeed alarming. Mexico therefore echoes Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres' call to urgently address
the issue and raise awareness about the situation of
vulnerability in which millions of people live, in order
to seek effective solutions to the phenomenon. Rape,
sexual slavery, prostitution, pregnancy, abortion,
enforced sterilization and forced marriages and other
abominable practices that constitute sexual violence
affect women, men, boys and girls at all levels and in
all circumstances. The upsurge in armed conflict and
changes in tactics used by non-State actors, including
terrorist groups, have exacerbated the incidence of
sexual violence being committed. In spite of such
challenges, Mexico would like to acknowledge some
achievements that have been made.

With the adoption of resolution 1820 (2008), we
made the shift from an era of silence to one in which we
recognized the gravity of the phenomenon and became
aware of the urgent need to address it. Likewise, the
adoption of resolution 1888 (2009) and subsequent
resolutions has strengthened the regulatory framework
that ensures effective accountability. Similarly,
resolutions 2242 (2015) and 2331 (2016) acknowledged
the existence of terrorist groups using sexual violence
as a tactic to advance their goals. Despite that progress,
however, much more remains to be done to ensure that
the terrible stories about the use of sexual violence, with
which we are all too familiar are not repeated. Mexico
would like to make some proposals to strengthen the
development of a comprehensive strategy to address,
prevent and eradicate this type of violence.

First, in line with Goal 5 of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, above all, we must
continue to promote the full participation of women in
decision-making in all areas of public life, in order to
achieve inclusive and equitable societies.

Secondly, we must promote the participation
of women in designing strategies to combat sexual
violence, as well as in peace processes, in order to
foster national reconciliation based on respect and
gender equity.

Thirdly, we must redesign national policy
frameworks to ensure that victims of sexual violence in
conflict situations are recognized as being legitimate
and can achieve justice and comprehensive redress and
the proper access to sexual and mental health services.

F ourthly, we must strengthen broad-based programmes
that support victims of sexual violence, in line with
the recommendations put forward by the Secretary-
General. To achieve those goals, we must also continue
to draw the attention of the Security Council to the
issue, and work to ensure that our actions are properly
coordinated so as to avoid the duplication of resources.

Given the escalating violence confronting us, we
need to take concrete actions to ensure full respect for
human rights. For that reason, the prevention of armed
conflicts and the search for sustainable peace should
also be priority goals of the international community.

We call for a renewal of resolve of the membership
of the Organization and for a commitment to
mainstream the gender perspective as one of the core
aspects of the work of the United Nations. I reiterate
the commitment of my country to continuing to work
with the international community to tackle this terrible
scourge, which is so damaging to our societies.

