Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank you, Sir, having convened this open debate. We
all know that the original idea was to hold it precisely
one month ago under the Guatemalan presidency of the
Council, but Hurricane Sandy decided otherwise and
everything had to be placed on hold. We are therefore
gratified that the initiative has been revived, which
will give greater meaning to presidential statement
S/PRST/2012/23, adopted on 31 October.

We thank Ms. Bachelet for her briefing and
congratulate her on the high profile she has achieved
for UN-Women. We welcome the opportunity to
have an office of that new entity in our own country.
We also thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2012/732), which has served as the basis for this
debate, Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson and
Under Secretary-General Herve Ladsous for their
briefings. I am especially grateful to Ms. Bineta Diop
for having provided a collective and vivid vision of the
civil society organizations related to today's topic.

On this occasion, we recall the pioneering
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security, adopted in October 2000. The resolution
explicitly addresses the condition of women and girls in
situations of armed conflict. Each year, the Council has
been building on the central premise of the resolution
that, without security for women, no lasting peace
can be achieved. The more specific topic of today's
debate is the important role that women's civil society
organizations can play, alongside States, in contributing
to the prevention and solution of armed conflicts and in
peacebuilding.

As regards Guatemala, fortunately it has been more
than 15 years since we overcame our internal armed
conflict, which is the element of the agenda that falls
under the purview of the Security Council. However,
the dividing lines between peacemaking, peacebuilding
and economic and social transformation are not always
clear, with the result that, to date, our past concerns over
the situation of Guatemalan women and girls during the

more than 30 years of domestic conflict have become
intertwined with our current concerns about promoting
women's advancement in all sectors.

I should add that there are numerous fundamental
connections between both areas of concern, one
of which is the area of prevention. In that context,
resolution 1325 (2000) states that conflict-prevention is
the best way to ensure the protection of all civilians, in
particular women and girls, from the horrors of armed
conflict. But we also apply the prevention concept from
another vantage point. I am referring to policies, tools
and actions designed to enable women to break the
vicious cycle of poverty. A crucial part of those efforts
is the necessary achievement of women's economic
empowerment.

Another fundamental connection is violence, which
is a core characteristic of armed conflict but is also
widely seen in societies supposedly living in peace.
I am thinking of domestic violence, or perhaps more
dramatically, the extreme violence that Guatemalans,
and especially Guatemalan women, have been exposed
to as a result of the alarming increase in organized
crime, from youth gangs to transnational cartels
involved in the illicit trafficking of goods and services.

In that regard, if we address the root causes of
violence, we find that it frequently results from women's
dependence on those who harm them or subject them
to violence, either in armed conflict or societies at
peace. That is why we believe, for example, that efforts
on the part of States or civil societies to improve the
situation of women by ensuring them greater economic
independence and increased opportunity must form
part of the tool kit of preventive action against violence
against women. That is also why we support improving
the indicators that measure progress and achievements
under resolution 1325 (2000). That is important,
because those results will enable an analysis of how
many and which causes of violence against women
have been eliminated, or at the least mitigated, through
preventive measures, as well as the lacunae to be
addressed through new policies.

Clearly, the United Nations has an important role
to play in that area, and we applaud the establishment
of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and
the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) as an
important and unique institutional advance. We should
strengthen its capacities for leadership and evaluation
of accountability with respect to gender equality
throughout the entire system.

As to the mandate stemming from resolution 1325
(2000), we support women's increased participation in
peacebuilding efforts and in assessing civil society's
capacities in post-conflict situations with respect
to the topic of women, peace and security. In our
opinion, acknowledging women's contribution to the
building of peace and stability is crucial. The fact of
their having disproportionately suffered the impacts
of conflict highlights precisely the importance of their
participation in the peace process.

Lastly, and referring now not only to the Security
Council but to the entire United Nations system, we
firmly support the greater participation of women in the
work of the Organization, just as we support it within
our own Government and society. I strongly urge the
United Nations system to expand women's participation
at all hierarchical levels and to ensure that those efforts
are carried out in an equitable manner. In that context,
it is incumbent upon us to recall that all Member States
have something to contribute, particularly on the topic
of violence, of which we, unfortunately, have suffered
the consequences at first hand. However, we have also
learned certain lessons in that context.

