Mr. Gallegos Chiriboga (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I have the honour to deliver a statement on
the theme "Towards the successful implementation of
the women, peace and security agenda: moving from
commitments to accomplishments in preparation for
the commemoration of the twentieth anniversary of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000)". That was a
landmark resolution, as it was the first time that the
Council addressed the disproportionate and unique
impact of armed conflict on women; acknowledged
the undervalued and underutilized contributions that
women make to conflict prevention, peacekeeping,
conflict resolution and peacebuilding; and stressed the
importance of women's equal and full participation as
active agents in peace and security.

The State of Ecuador has a solid legal framework
that guarantees the validity, exercise and enforceability
ofwomen's rights, based on two fundamental pillars: the
Constitution, which makes explicit provision for gender
equality, and binding international instruments ratified
by Ecuador. In September 2018, Ecuador became
the fifth country in the world to ratify the 18 United
Nations conventions on the protection of human rights.
In the same vein, the country has signed and ratified all
international conventions concerning the promotion and
protection of women's rights, such as the Convention
on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women,
in October 1981, and the Inter-American Convention
on the Prevention, Punishment, and Eradication of
Violence against Women, also known as the Convention
of Belem do Para, in June 1995.

Ecuadorhas gradually shoulderedits responsibilities,
not only through the periodic submission of reports to
the committees established under those international
instruments, but also through the formal and tangible
implementation of the recommendations of those
committees. We are also committed to the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the Sustainable

Development Goals and promote compliance with Goal
5 on gender equality.

We welcome the progress made in securing the
rights of women and girls in various fields around the
world. However, we are aware that women continue to
face multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination.
In Ecuador, we are aware that, with regard to equal
rights for women and men and the eradication of
discrimination, much remains to be done, but we
redouble our efforts day by day.

Ecuador is committed to the political and economic
empowerment of women and acknowledges their
contributions to conflict prevention, peacekeeping,
conflict resolution and peacebuilding, as well as the
importance of meaningful and active participation in
the quest for peace. The Constitution of the Republic
of Ecuador establishes that Ecuador is a constitutional
State of rights, which will adopt affirmative action
measures that promote genuine equality for rights
holders who face inequality and establish priority
protection in the public and private spheres for the
victims of sexual violence.

The Constitution also establishes that the armed
forces are an institution for the protection of citizens'
rights, freedoms and guarantees. The incorporation of
women into the armed forces has grown since 2009,
when female soldiers accounted for 1.1 per cent of the
total. By 2012, that percentage had doubled to 2.11 per
cent and by 2018, it was 3.5 per cent. Ecuador currently
contributes female officers as observers in the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
and is in the process of incorporating women into our
national police force and United Nations peace missions.

The Ministry of National Defence incorporates the
concept of defence as a public good and, within that
framework, the gender perspective is included in its
defence policy agenda. The defence policy focuses on
human rights and promotes gender equality, practices
for peaceful coexistence and respect for the cultural
identity of the various members of the armed forces, as
well as the effective implementation of resolutions 1325
(2000) and 1889 (2009).

In conclusion, we welcome forums where we
can discuss the achievements and goals to be met
with respect to recognizing women's contributions to
conflict prevention, peacekeeping, conflict resolution
and peacebuilding. We express our sincere desire to join
efforts towards a productive and successful dialogue
that promotes gender equality and the advancement of
women, in all areas, as essential elements for honouring
the commitment to leaving no one behind.

