Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson for
attending today's meeting and for his statement. I have
listened carefully to the briefings by Ms. Bachelet,
Executive Director of UN-Women; Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations Ladsous; and
Ms. Diop, President of Femmes Africa Solidarite,

Women are a great force in the creation of human
civilization. The promotion of gender equality and the
protection of women's rights have a direct bearing not
only on women's vital concerns but also on world peace
and development. Although women tend to be victims
in conflict and post-conflict situations, they are also
important partners in the prevention and mediation of
conflicts and in post-conflict reconstruction.

In considering women and peace and security, it
is important that the Council not only focus on the
protection of women's security and safeguarding their
rights in conflict and post-conflict situations, but also
recognize the unique role played by women in peace
processes and seek ways to bring them onboard in
advancing global peace and security.

By adopting resolution 1325 (2000), the Council
laid the foundations for the international community
to establish cooperation in the field of women and
peace and security. In recent years, thanks to joint
efforts by Member States, international organizations
such as the United Nations and regional organizations,
progress has been made in the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). In furthering the implementation
of the Council's resolutions on women and peace and
security, I wish to make the following four points.

First, the Council bears the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
The Council should focus on the prevention of conflicts,
peacekeeping and post-conflict reconstruction and
on creating an enabling political, security and legal
environment for the protection and promotion of
women's rights. When deliberating on conflict and
post-conflict situations, the Council should include
as central elements the protection of women and their
rights. In honouring its commitment to women and
peace and security, the Council should abide strictly
by the mandate as conferred by the relevant Council
resolutions.

The primary focus of the Council is on conflict
and post-conflict situations. It is not an appropriate
platform for establishing universal standards with
regard to women's issues and human rights. The Council
should strengthen its cooperation with the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the
Human Rights Council with a clear division of labour,
thereby strengthening the exchange of information and
communication.

Secondly, the national Governments of Member
States bear the primary responsibility for protecting
women's rights in conflict and post-conflict situations.
In our efforts to protect women's rights and strengthen
their role in peace and security, we must respect the
ownership of national Governments. It is important
to respect the actions taken by national Governments
for the protection of women's rights in View of each
country's own specific conditions. In implementing
resolution 1325 (2000), the international community
may provide assistance to the countries concerned, on
the basis of full respect for the views of that country.

Thirdly, it is important to value and enhance the
status and role ofwomen at the different stages ofpeace
processes. In preventing conflict, keeping and building
peace, it is important to take into consideration
the special needs and concerns of women and to
ensure that women enjoy full rights to participate in
decision-making and the peace process, thereby helping
to improve their disadvantaged status and effectively
support their rights.

China supports the call for the Secretary-General
to appoint more women to high-level positions such
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General or
Special Envoy entrusted with mediation good offices.

Fourthly, the international community should
enhance its attention and support to the issue of women
and development. Achieving women's development
is the true foundation for achieving women's genuine
empowerment. At present, international development
support and technical assistance fall short of the needs
of women worldwide. Achieving women's development
therefore remains a daunting challenge in conflict and
post-conflict situations. The international community
should respond to calls from developing countries
effectively and step up assistance for women's
development in developing countries on a basis that is
fully respectful of national ownership. The international
community, while lending capacity-building support
to the countries concerned, should also take note of
the useful support role that women's groups and civil
society organizations can play in conflict prevention,
peacebuilding and national reconciliation.

