Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): First of all,
my delegation would like to thank France for organizing
this open debate during its presidency of the Security
Council, on an issue that is of the utmost importance to
Morocco - women and peace and security.

The historic adoption of resolution 1325 (2000)
represented international recognition of the role
played by women in peace and security, not only as
victims but also as agents of change and essential
players in restoring, maintaining and consolidating
peace. Maintaining peace and security requires the
integration of the gender perspective into all peace
efforts, in accordance with the provisions of resolution
1325 (2000) and the other resolutions that followed in
that regard.

Women's participation in negotiation processes
increases the chances of settling conflicts and
sustaining peace. That finding was confirmed by a UN-
Women-led global study in 2015, which revealed that
the presence of women in peace negotiations promoted
the sustainability of peace agreements, and that 35 per
cent of agreements negotiated by women lasted more
than 15 years. That means that the presence ofwomen in
peace negotiations is a great help for the sustainability
ofpeace agreements.

On 7 September, 2016, Morocco organized an
international conference on the topic of women and
peace and security. It contributed to the international
debate on the role of women in peace processes and
the implementation of national plans of action to
promote collective action on implementing resolution
1325 (2000). It was an occasion to reaffirm the
international community's consensus on the need to
strengthen women's participation in negotiations and
agreements concerning the settlement of conflicts and
peacebuilding, as well as to renew the United Nations
commitment to the issue of the inclusion of women
and gender equality in all peacebuilding and conflict-
prevention strategies.

During the conference, debates focused on
three areas: the role of women in mediation and
conflict-prevention processes, the role of women in
deradicalization and the lessons learned and best
practices in the prevention of sexual violence in
conflict. At the conference, my country announced the
creation in Rabat of an independent regional centre, a
think-tank, dedicated to studying the role of women in
peacekeeping operations and their contribution to the
achievement of sustainable development. The centre
could serve as a space for reflection, a think-tank and
a source of independent thought regarding the role and
place of women in peacekeeping and peacebuilding
operations in conflict zones. It is in keeping with the
priorities ofthe Security Council in promoting women's
empowerment and gender equality in the establishment
of peace and international security, the dissemination
of the culture of peace, ensuring access to justice and
the protection of civil rights.

Women and girls have special needs in the post-
conflict period, such as health services, livelihood,
land rights and property rights and employment.
They must also participate in decision-making and
the development of national strategies for post-
conflict economic recovery. Unfortunately, women
are often underrepresented in the decision-making
process associated with economic recovery and public
governance in the post-conflict phase. They are
not included in formal decision-making structures,
including key economic sectors, such as infrastructure,
extractive industries and commercial agriculture.
To that end, the preparation of an approach based on
gender and development in a post-conflict context is
imperative in order to ensure that, from the beginning
of the reconstruction process, there is sustainable
and equitable development where both women and
men share resources, opportunities, decision-making
and power.

In that context, the Kingdom of Morocco takes
this opportunity to commend the work of UN-Women
to promote the implementation of the Security
Council resolutions on women and peace and security,
particularly with regard to economic recovery and
reconstruction through the three areas of intervention:
post-conflict planning, economic recovery and
governance restoration.

The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
has placed great emphasis on peace, including the
prevention of conflict and the elimination of its root
causes through Sustainable Development Goal 16,
which seeks to promote peaceful and inclusive societies
for sustainable development, provide access to justice
for all and build effective, accountable and inclusive
institutions at all levels.
The universal 2030 Agenda, which advocates a
cross-cutting incorporation of gender in all Sustainable
Development Goals, emphasizes the need to redouble
efforts to prevent conflict and help countries emerging
from conflict, while ensuring that women are involved
in peacekeeping and reconstruction. In that sense,
the Goals demonstrate that gender, peace, security
and development are interconnected, interrelated and
inseparable from one another.

