Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): I would be
remiss if I did not begin by applauding the Japanese
presidency for its effective stewardship of this forum. I
would also like to thank you, Sir, for your initiative in
having organized this open debate. It is on a subject
dear to our hearts.

It has been six years since the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000). This landmark resolution -
one with which Bangladesh, as a member of the
Council at the time, was closely associated - was
based primarily on the simple thesis of equal access for
and full participation of women at all levels of the
power structure. The role of women in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts has been an essential
element in bringing about and sustaining peace and
security. To this effect, the Bangladeshi presidency of
the Security Council issued a statement on Women's
Day in March 2000. Eventually, that statement
culminated in the resolution. Needless to say,
Bangladesh is deeply committed to its full and
effective implementation.

Women suffer most as the victims of conflict. In
peace processes they are mostly deprived of the
dividends; their voices are not fully listened to - or
even heard. Six years after resolution 1325 (2000), we
need to reflect further on how best to advance its goal.
We need to analyse the challenges and how they can be
overcome. We need to ensure the adequate
representation of women at all levels of decision-
making in conflict prevention. This must include early-
warning mechanisms, both during hostilities and
during post-conflict reconstruction and rehabilitation.

Women's effective participation in peace
negotiations is measured not in numbers but in terms of
their decision-making power. It is undeniable that in
the consolidation of peace the role of women remains
vital.

We welcome the review of the System-wide
Action Plan this year. We hope that we will succeed in
overcoming its weaknesses through concerted efforts in
the years to come. It is our hope that in integrating a
gender perspective across the broad spectrum of the
United Nations system, geographical, cultural and
ethnic factors will be borne in mind. Adequate
resources should also be mobilized to that effect. The
active involvement of civil society and non-
governmental organizations is a sine qua non in this
respect.

Based on our national experience, we believe that
gender mainstreaming and the empowerment of women
are categorical imperatives for development, as well as
for social stability. Access to education and health care,
combined with the provision of microcredit facilities,
can unleash the entrepreneurial skills of women.
Women's empowerment tends to marginalize extremist
thought and action in the community. This addresses a
root cause of violence and terror. The award of the
2006 Nobel Peace Prize to microcredit pioneer
Professor Yunus of the Grameen Bank clearly
demonstrates the linkage between poverty alleviation,
women's empowerment and peace.

Bangladesh, despite many and varied constraints,
has set an example in this domain. It stands ready to
share best practices with others of comparable milieu.

The overall experience in implementing
resolution 1325 (2000) at all levels of decision-making
has been mixed. Sadly, violence against women
continues to occur in war. That is also the case in times
of peace. We have integrated gender perspectives into
some aspects of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. However, in post-conflict peacebuilding
efforts, much remains to be done. As one of the largest
troop-contributing countries to United Nations
peacekeeping operations, Bangladesh is ever-conscious
of its responsibilities to incorporate essential elements
of resolution 1325 (2000) in the pre-deployment
training of peacekeepers.

As a member of the Peacebuilding Commission,
we will remain vigilant in our focus on the provisions
of resolution 1325 (2000). That was evident during
deliberations on Sierra Leone and Burundi. We will
also do our best to ensure that our exhortations to all
United Nations agencies in this regard remain
sustained.

We believe that the protection of women and girls
from gender-based violence and abuse is a primary and
enduring responsibility. There should be zero tolerance
with respect to the perpetrators. We will brook no
impunity in this regard. All would agree that that is
truly a noble goal; indeed, a nobler goal would be hard
to find.

