Mr. Mayr-Harting: I am speaking on behalf of
the European Union (EU) and its member States. The
acceding country Croatia; the candidate countries the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro
and Serbia; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania
and Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine and
Georgia, align themselves with this statement.

We thank the Deputy Secretary-General; the
Under-Secretary-General and Executive Director
of UN-Women, Ms. Michelle Bachelet; the Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Herve' Ladsous; and the President of Femmes Africa
Solidarite, Ms. Bineta Diop, for their statements.

We find the focus of today's debate pertinent as we
move forward in the practical implementation of our
commitments in the field ofwomen, peace and security.
Conflict prevention, conflict resolution and building
sustainable peace require cooperation between all
stakeholders at all levels, and women's organizations
play a particularly important role in that regard. We
therefore welcome the focus on the contributions of
women's civil society organizations to peace and
security in the presidential statement adopted by the
Council on 31 October (S/PRST/2012/23).

The number of national and regional action plans
adopted for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) has continued to increase. This provides us
with an opportunity to compare different experiences
to guide the formulation of new plans and review the
existing plans. Moreover, with 26 out of 37 national
action plans now equipped with indicators, we are better
placed to evaluate their actual implementation and
results. The European Union adopted a comprehensive
approach for the implementation of resolutions 1325
(2000) and 1820 (2008) in 2008. It has also established
indicators to evaluate and assess gaps in its action
plans. In March 2012, the European Union reported on
its implementation of those resolutions in the context of
our Common Security and Defence Policy. More than
half of all European Union member States have by now
adopted national action plans.

We value the increased reporting and briefings
to the Council on the situation of women and girls
in armed conflict. We take note of the Secretary-
General's conclusion in his report (S/2012/732) that the
information flow to the Council and its response remain
uneven, and encourage further efforts in that regard.
We welcome the insights provided by the updated
information collected against the set of indicators on
women and peace and security, and look forward to the
continued provision and analysis of that data.

We need to continue to take real steps to move from
a culture of reaction to a culture of prevention. Eight
out of 16 peacekeeping missions include the protection
of civilians in their mandate. Early warning and
response tools have been established, and an increasing
number of actors, including civil society, are engaged
in assessing risks and the escalation of violence in
armed conflict, including through new technologies for
incident and crisis mapping. However, we agree with
the Secretary-General that the gains made in access to
information have yet to produce consistent early action.

We thank the Secretary-General for his report on
strengthening the role of mediation in the peaceful
settlement of disputes, conflict prevention and resolution
(A/66/811) and its annex I, entitled "Guidance for
Effective Mediation", which highlight the importance
of women's participation in peace processes. While
women were present in 86 per cent of the United
Nations mediation support teams involved in 14 peace
negotiations in 2011, only four of the negotiating party
delegations included a woman delegate. Only two out
of nine peace agreements signed contained women and
peace and security provisions.

Yet, as recent experience has shown, periods of
transition offer a unique opportunity to break the cycle
of women's marginalization and make significant gains
in women's participation. We need to address factors
discouraging women's candidacy and equal electoral
participation, and security for women in elections.
Provisions on women, peace and security should be
included in peace negotiations as early as possible. We
warmly welcome the concrete targets the Secretary-
General has set for women and mediation, especially
that of appointing a female United Nations chief
mediator.

Women's perspectives and voices are essential to
tackling the security, social and economic challenges
facing communities emerging from conflict. The
engagement ofwomen's leaders and organizations needs
to be systematically supported in peace processes to
ensure their involvement from the early stages. Lack of
security, limiting mobility and access, has an immense
and negative impact on women's participation in
decision-making in conflict and post-conflict settings.
Moreover, women who engage actively to promote
women's rights and perspectives often become targets
for violence. We urge the Council to continue to work
to ensure the protection of human rights defenders.

The EU Concept on Strengthening EU Mediation and
Dialogue Capacities aims to promote the representation
of women and the availability of adequate resources
for dedicated mediation gender expertise from an early
stage in mediation processes. Today, almost all of our
15 ongoing civilian missions and military operations
have a human rights and/or gender adviser on the
ground. We are stepping up predeployment training
efforts on gender and Security Council resolutions on
women, peace and security.
In July 2011, the EU set out an initial programme
in response to a Libyan request for capacity-building
training for both civil society and new public service
bodies. As part of those projects, a course for women
was delivered in Misrata in June to support women
in leadership positions and emerging women leaders
and managers. The partnership established with the
EU, UN-Women and the United Nations Development
Programme on enhancing women's participation in
peacebuilding and post-conflict planning aims to
promote close cooperation among all stakeholders.

The commitment to break down barriers to
women's political and economic empowerment was
also expressed at the high-level event on the margins
of this year's General Assembly ministerial week on
the Equal Futures Partnership, co-founded by the
United States, Australia, Benin, Bangladesh, Denmark,
Finland, Indonesia, Jordan, the Netherlands, Peru,
Senegal, Tunisia and the European Union.

In conclusion, we are deeply concerned about
the references in the Secretary-General's report to
the continued use of sexual violence and threats of
sexual violence as tactics of conflict over the past year,
including in Cote d'Ivoire, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Libya, Syria and northern Mali. We
welcome and further encourage drawing on the support
of gender experts in United Nations commissions of
inquiry.

We commend the work of the former Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Margot Wallstrom, and the
Team of Experts on the Rule of Law. We welcome
the nomination of the new Special Representative on
sexual violence in conflict, Ms. Zainab Bangura, who
brings extensive personal experience and a strong
commitment to the post.

Finally, our actions need to measure up to our
words. The European Union continues to be active
with regard to women and peace and security in
more than 70 countries. It supports the development
and implementation of national action plans,
non-governmental organizations and training for
governmental agencies. Let me affirm our commitment
to continue that work in cooperation with all partners,
including women's organizations, whose contributions
remain key to the legitimacy and sustainability of our
efforts.

