Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I want
to start by thanking Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Pramila Patten, for their very insightful speeches,
as well as Ms. Razia Sultana for her powerful speech,
which should challenge us to reflect on this topic.

I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate
our full support to the Special Representative and her
team of experts on the rule of law and sexual violence
in conflict to implement this agenda, which is a priority
for France.

At the outset, France aligns itselfwith the statements
to be made by the observer of the European Union and
by the representative Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security.
I will start by making several observations on
issues which are alarming before proposing an overall
response and several concrete ways to strengthen our
collective action against these hateful acts.

First, despite the Council's efforts, we remain
confronted with an intolerable situation. We are
horrified by the number of cases of sexual violence
mentioned in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/250), which still includes 51 listed parties, and
by the sometimes systematic use of sexual violence
as a tactic of war, a method of torture and a tool of
terror. In the 19 situations examined in the report,
sexual violence is also synonymous with restrictions on
freedom of movement. That is the case, for example, in
Syria, where sexual assaults are committed at crossing
points and where sexual violence in besieged areas is
described as systematic. The communities targeted are
also forced to move, thereby finding themselves in new
situations of vulnerability. At times, progress achieved
has been swept away, as in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, where an increase in violence has also led to
an increase in verified cases.

We condemn all those cases of violence with the
greatest firmness. International justice must be able
to convict the guilty. In that regard, we can highlight
some progress, for example, the conviction last August
of Colonel Becker for war crimes, including rape,
committed in 2015 by his soldiers in Musenyi, South
Kivu. We also note the end of equating rape with
adultery in Afghanistan, the Sudan and Somalia.

However, a great deal of progress is still needed.
For example, it is incomprehensible that no individual
associated with Da'esh or Boko Haram has been
convicted, even though we know those terrorist
groups have used sexual violence as a tactic of war on
a large scale. Furthermore, local and national justice
mechanisms, such as in Somalia or South Sudan,
sometimes subject victims to a double punishment by
forcing them to marry their aggressors.

The statement by Ms. Razia Sultana, as well as
the findings from the Special Representative's visit,
refer to the systematic use of sexual violence as a
tactic of war in Burma to terrorize the Rohingya and
make them flee. The Human Rights Council and the
General Assembly have already condemned that sexual
violence, and the Security Council must ensure that
justice is served against the guilty parties and that
adequate assistance is provided to the victims. We must
also be extremely vigilant with regard to the situation
in Kachin and Shan states.

The intolerable often takes root in intolerance.
Sexual violence is very often exacerbated or even
incited by discrimination, including that linked
to gender, inequality between women and men,
prejudice and stereotypes. Even after their liberation,
victims are often pursued by those prejudices and
face stigmatization.

Sexual Violence must therefore be fought throughout
the process, from prevention to rehabilitation and
reintegration. Victim support programmes, such as
those established in Colombia, Bosnia and Herzegovina
and Kosovo, are essential. Social, legal and medical
services, including psychological and social support,
as well as dialogue within communities, are crucial.
That response must be quick, as demonstrated by the
situation in the Central African Republic, where men
and boys are also victims.

This struggle must also be part ofa comprehensive
response to all the challenges that societies pose to
the rights of women. It is all the more effective when
women's participation in decision-making is assured
and when real attention is paid to their economic and
social emancipation. Sexual violence jeopardizes
women's economic and social process, and many are
forced to relinquish their right to land ownership,
for example. Such violence is also used as a threat to
prevent them from participating in politics. France will
therefore continue to call for a comprehensive response
through the effective implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda, as it did during the
debate on 27 October 2017 (see S/PV.8079), under its
presidency of the Security Council. It is not enough to
be outraged; we must act.

Today's excellent concept note (S/2018/311, annex)
has inspired us to reflect on prevention. Effectively
combating impunity is the best method of prevention.
Every effort must be made to ensure that the
perpetrators of sexual violence are tried by competent
national courts and, failing that, by international
criminal courts, including the International Criminal
Court. When judicial proceedings are impossible in
the short term, we must ensure that mechanisms are in
place to document crimes and enable proceedings at a
later stage. The Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic and the International, Independent and
Impartial Mechanism can play that indespensable role.
In addition, providing support to national authorities
must go hand in hand with protecting civil society actors
who work each day to combat sexual violence and assist
victims, and who are themselves often threatened.

The Council can now make its response more
specific and effective. First, it can include sexual
violence as a designation criterion, directly or indirectly,
in all sanctions regimes. It must have genuine recourse
to that tool. I propose that we work together to ensure
that it is employed.

Next, we must ensure that peacekeeping operations
have the necessary capacity to implement their
mandates. Protecting women is not optional; it is an
absolute necessity that must be firmly anchored at the
centre of operations. In that regard, the posts of gender
advisers and women's protection advisers are crucial
and must be preserved.

Lastly, the Council must be able to address the issue
of sexual violence in conflict more regularly - for
example, by issuing press statements when instances
of sexual violence are confirmed in theatres of
conflict. Several United Nations initiatives should
be commended and supported, such as UN-Women
and Justice Rapid Response, which comprise a pool
of experts to provide support to inquiry mechanisms.
On a broader scale, we commend the zero-tolerance
policy of the Secretary-General with regard to sexual
exploitation and abuse and sexual harassment. The
United Nations must set an example, and the "UN Too"
movement, which mirrors the Me Too movement, opens
the door for concrete responses.

As for France, to mention a few examples, we have
established a whistle-blowing unit and training courses
on various types of sexual violence for soldiers ahead of
their deployment, as well as for magistrates. Last year,
the Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs financed
civil society projects to combat violence against women
in Yemen and Nigeria, following similar initiatives in
the Central African Republic, Cameroon and Lebanon.
It is now funding the establishment of a holistic
treatment centre for victims of sexual violence in the
Central African Republic.

The international community, in particular the
Council, must redouble its efforts in response to
such odious and Vile acts. This is one of France's top
priorities, including within the context of its feminist
diplomacy. My country will continue to demonstrate
the utmost respect for that call. As President Emmanuel
Macron recalled, that requirement is the essence of
our dignity. More than ever, France is committed and
determined to act.

