Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this debate. I also thank
the Secretary-General for his informative briefing and
his thorough report on the situation of women and peace
and security. Brazil is also grateful for the briefing by
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka as Executive Director
of UN Women. She can count on our full support in
dealing with the challenges ahead. We thank the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Navi Pillay, for
her presentation. Let me also thank the representative
of the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and
Security for her intervention.

It is widely acknowledged that in situations of
conflict, the most vulnerable, women included, are
those who suffer the most. That makes prevention
especially important. The tendency to rush to military
solutions runs contrary to the idea of the protection of
civilians, since the use of force aggravates the risks to
the most vulnerable and further penalizes civilians, in
particular women and children.

The Security Council's engagement with the
issue of women and peace and security has greatly
contributed to our common efforts to improve the
lives of women in conflict situations around the world.
The resolutions adopted by the Council have created a
comprehensive body of norms and stimulated progress
on the protection and promotion of women's rights.

The scourge of sexual Violence in armed conflict
has rightly been the subject of attention by the Council.
It is warranted that we also focus on the importance of
furthering the equal rights of women and their right to
equal participation in decision-making processes.

The rule of law makes available to vulnerable
groups, such as women, normative tools that promote
their empowerment and emancipation. It is essential
to uphold the equal rights of women by ensuring their
full participation in governing institutions and the
judicial system. We must reaffirm the need to establish
a legislative framework that secures their full access to
justice.

Brazil embraces a comprehensive notion of the
rule of law that embodies a number of principles and
experiences. We are convinced that the rule of law and
development are strongly interrelated and mutually
reinforcing. The rule of law is intimately connected to
the realization of social and economic rights. In that
regard, we are proud to celebrate, in 2013, the twenty-
fifth year of the Brazilian Constitution, whereby we
acknowledged the centrality of social and economic
rights in the context of the rule of law and human rights.

The participation of women in conflict resolution
and mediation processes not only contributes to the
elaboration ofbalanced rules in post-conflict situations,
but is also an important factor in achieving sustainable
peace. Unfortunately, there is a long way to go before
women are fully and duly integrated into national and
multilateral peace efforts around the world. Viewed
from different points of View, such as the number
of women delegates and mediators; the numbers,
substance and relative importance of provisions in
peace agreements; and post-conflict strategies or
policies, women's participation in peace and security is
still insufficient.

Brazil believes that supporting and promoting
women's participation in the maintenance of international
peace and security is an increasingly important aspect
of the Security Council's responsibility under the
Charter. In that vein, we encourage further reflection
and debates on the role of women in promoting the
prevention and peaceful settlement of disputes.

In post-conflict situations, transitional justice can
be an important tool to shape a better future for women.
In many circumstances, knowing the truth about the
Violations committed against women is central to
achieving national reconciliation. Transitional justice
also plays a significant role in ensuring that the
permanent justice structure to be established will take
the interests of women into account in its foundations.

Important structural gender asymmetries curb
the options of women in most societies. Rural
women, in particular, have their potential as agents
of peace hindered, since they benefit less than men
from the wealth created by rural employment and
face new challenges owing to the impact of the still
ongoing economic crisis. Yet, rural women are key
contributors to global economies, playing a critical
role in both developed and developing nations. They
enhance agricultural and rural development, improve
food security and help reduce poverty levels in their
communities, thereby contributing to the promotion of
sustainable development with social inclusion and food
security, which are key to attaining sustainable peace.

When empowered, women can have an important
positive impact on the lives of the individuals in their
societies, particularly in countries emerging from
conflict. The Security Council is called on to continue
to make sure that such impact is fully felt in all relevant
situations on its agenda.

