The Deputy Secretary-General: I would like to
begin with a warm expression of appreciation to both
India and Guatemala, which, during their Security
Council presidencies, focused our attention on the
important contributions by women and women's civil
society organizations to preventing and resolving
armed conflict and to carrying out peacebuilding.

During a recent visit to Mali, I saw first-hand some
of the acute challenges that women face in times of
crisis and conflict. My time there left a deep impression
on me. I promised the women leaders with Whom I met
in Bamako that I would convey their message to the
Council. They told me disturbing accounts ofthe abuses
that women faced in the northern part of the country,
which is now under extremist rule and occupation.
Sexual Violence against women is widespread, and
I met women who had been raped. Despite being the
primary victims of a combined security, political and
humanitarian crisis, they remained excluded from the
various bodies that were seeking possible solutions.
They urged me to make known to the outside world
the need not only to ease their suffering, but also to
strengthen women's participation in resolving the crisis
and preparing for a better future.

As Council members well know, extremist
groups have started implementing exceedingly harsh
interpretations of sharia law in northern Mali. That
has led to the separation of boys and girls at schools,
forced marriages for young girls and targeted killing
or maiming of women accused of having children out
of wedlock. Women's rights are being dramatically
curtailed, including their right to work, leaving them
unable to sustain themselves or their families.

But women in Mali and across West Africa are
strongly resilient. They have already demonstrated their
ability, if they are given a chance, to bring about peace,

reconciliation and development. We must empower and
assist them further.

As the case of Mali clearly underlines, armed
conflict affects women and men differently, which
means that women have to be part of the solution. One
of the key messages of the Secretary-General's report
on women and peace and security (S/2012/732) is that
early and sustained engagement with women is crucial
to ensuring the sustainability of peace efforts, as well
as vital to deepening democracy and promoting respect
for human rights. Actively engaging women must be a
priority, not an afterthought.

The role of women's organizations across the world
in preventing violence, resolving conflict and building
the foundations for peace is well known. Our challenge
is to become more systematic in supporting and scaling
up such initiatives and making the necessary links to
formalpeace processes. Today's debate is an opportunity
to support that critical work and to address the obstacles
to women's participation in conflict mediation, peace
talks, national dialogues and donors' conferences. It
is also critical that we accelerate progress in reaching
the goals of the Secretary-General's seven-point action
plan on gender-responsive peacebuilding.

The Secretary-General and I welcome the
presidential statement on women, peace and security
issued on 31 October (S/PRST/2012/23), in which the
Council pledged to advance women's participation in
all aspects of conflict resolution, including transitional
justice.

The United Nations system is strongly committed
to strengthening the rule of law, particularly with
regard to women's access to justice during and
after conflict, which is precisely when it is most
needed but is least accessible. We are reviewing the
United Nations programming in order to galvanize a
stronger and more effective impact in that area. The
declaration adopted at the High-level Meeting on the
Rule of Law at the National and International Levels
(General Assembly resolution 67/1) has given new
impetus to that effort.

Through the evolution of the women and peace
and security agenda over the past 12 years and through
country-specific decisions and mission mandates,
the Security Council has demonstrated that decisions
made around this table can tangibly improve the
lives of women and girls in conflict and post-conflict
situations. We must, however, ensure that those issues

are not addressedjust once a year, on the anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000). I therefore welcome the renewal
of the Council's invitation to the Executive Director of
UN-Women to provide periodic briefings outside the
annual open debate cycle.

Finally, engaging women and promoting gender
equality as part of our work for peace and security is
a daily responsibility and an unfinished mission for all
of us. It is time for us to finally recognize the role and
power of women to help us build a peaceful world.

