The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.

I should like to begin by thanking all four of our
excellent briefers and by paying particular tribute to our
civil society briefer, Ilwad Elman, for bringing home to
us the devastating impact of trafficking and slavery in
conflict. She gave voice to the 46 million men, women
and children caught up in that tragedy across the world.
I am glad that so many ministers are here today to hear
that testimony, and I am grateful to them and to all
Council members for their statements.

The fullest response of each and every Member
of the United Nations is needed, and I look forward
to hearing the views of countries outside the Security
Council shortly because, as we have heard so clearly,
modern slavery is a global problem that extends far
beyond the 15 countries represented at this table.
It exists in nearly all societies, including my own. It
does not respect borders or jurisdictions. It does not
recognize the dignity or worth of the human person. It
just sees opportunities to exploit and lives to destroy.

Ifwe could hear the millions who are being coerced
and exploited today, their unwavering message to us
would be that we have simply not done enough and that
we have shut our eyes and dulled our senses to a crime
we hoped had been consigned to history. That is why
the United Kingdom called this open debate. It is why
my Prime Minister, Theresa May, first raised this issue
before the General Assembly last year (see A/71/PV.8)
and plans to do so again later this year. It is also why we
are taking such strong action in our own country and
across the world so that, together, we can eradicate it.

We know the root causes. Poverty, conflict and
instability lie at the heart of the suffering of so many
victims. When a State's authorities is eroded and its
responsibility to its people is unfulfilled, organized
criminal networks thrive, partnering with armed
groupds and terrorists to prey on the vulnerable - to
prey on those who have already suffered far too much.
We know what follows: sexual exploitation and sexual
slavery, forced labour and child labour, human rights in
tatters, conflict exploited and conflict sustained.

This should be a familiar tale to the Council.
We heard it ourselves in north-eastern Nigeria only
last week. We saw it in the hands in the air when we
asked the women there whether they had lost a child
to Boko Haram. We saw it in their tears as they spoke
of abducted daughters, of mass rapes, of grandchildren
being born only to be enslaved. In response, we need a
more forceful and unified United Nations approach to
human trafficking, modern slavery and forced labour.
We look forward to the Secretary-General's report in
November on exactly that, and we encourage him to
focus on making existing structures, including the
Inter-Agency Coordination Group against Trafficking
in Persons, work effectively.

We also need to combine our efforts across the
mandates entrusted to us. We in the Council have a
responsibility - no, a duty - to maintain international
peace and security, to end the instability in which
modern slavery thrives. As United Nations Members, we
have frameworks for action, including the commitment
under the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development to
ending trafficking, modern slavery and forced labour,
and the General Assembly's Global Plan of Action to
Combat Trafficking in Persons.

But we also need to take responsibility as individual
Member States. That means doing more to disrupt and
disband serious organized criminal networks engaged
in people trafficking. It means all of us ratifying the
1956 Supplementary Convention on the Abolition of
Slavery, the Slave Trade, and Institutions and Practices
Similar to Slavery, and the Protocol to the International
Labour Organization Convention Concerning Forced
or Compulsory Labour. And it means taking real steps
to strengthen our own national systems to identify,
investigate and prosecute those committing these
abhorrent crimes.

If we take these steps, at home and here in the
United Nations, we will have begun to turn the page.
But ifwe are to truly consign this terrible tragedy to the
history books, we will need sustained commitment that
endures long after this meeting is over. Modern slavery
must become a recurring theme for the Council and
other parts of the United Nations to return to, including
at this year's session of the General Assembly, so that
we can accelerate our efforts to end this abhorrent
practice once and for all.

I resume my functions as President of the Council.

I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with statements longer than that are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version, within the time limit, when
speaking in the Chamber.

I wish to inform all concerned that we will be
carrying on this open debate right through the lunch
hour, as we have a large number of speakers.

I now give the floor to the representative of Argentina.

