Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French): Last
year, when we were assembled here in the Chamber to
commemorate the tenth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000), I mentioned that I had travelled to Burundi to
meet with women's peace organizations whose
peaceful demonstrations had a significant impact in
limiting violence during the elections (see S/PV.6411).
I am very happy that those women's actions for peace
were honoured with the 2011 Nobel Peace Prize. Like
my colleague from Luxembourg, who spoke before me,
I would like to take this opportunity to thank and
congratulate the three Nobel Prize recipients and all the
women for peace whom they represent.

The events of the Arab Spring have highlighted
the leading role of women and emphasized the urgency
of including them in efforts to form their Governments
and shape policies. That is why we would like to thank
the Nigerian presidency for choosing women's
participation as the theme of this debate. This key
aspect of resolution 1325 (2000) remains a core
objective of Swiss foreign policy, in particular of our
national action plan, which contains specific measures
to mainstream the gender dimension into its mediation
programme. For example, we strive to ensure the
balanced participation of women and men in our
Government's annual peace mediation training courses,
in which United Nations staff regularly participate.
Furthermore, our mediators take gender-specific
aspects into account in their work. Finally, although
still a challenge, we actively promote the role of
women as mediators.

I am honoured to make the following comments
on behalf of the Human Security Network, namely,
Australia, Chile, Costa Rica, Greece, Ireland, Jordan,
Mali, Norway, Slovenia, Switzerland and Thailand, as
well South Africa as an observer. The Human Security
Network is an informal group of States that advocates a
holistic approach to security based on the individual,
which complements the more traditional understanding
of national and international security.

The tenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000)
brought significant progress in the normative and
institutional areas. As a result, the Security Council
now has an adequate set of instruments for time-bound
and measurable actions in order to move forward with
the agenda set forth in resolution 1325 (2000).
UN-Women was created and has now issued its first
strategic plan, with an initial set of indicators on
resolution 1325 (2000) having been put in place. We
believe that these are useful tools and we are hopeful
that the established targets can be achieved with
concerted action.

However, we conclude in a rather sober
assessment that those achievements are still not
matched by the necessary political will. The Human
Security Network encourages the Security Council to
continue its efforts to meet its women, peace and
security obligations, in particular by means of issuing
concrete instructions in resolutions mandating or
renewing United Nations peacekeeping missions - a
practice that the Secretary-General mentions
approvingly and encourages in his report
(S/2011/598*); regular encounters with women
stakeholders during missions; and frequent exchanges
with UN-Women and the Special Representative to the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflicts.

I now return to speaking in my national capacity.
We would like to draw the attention of the members of
the Security Council to the monthly action points of the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security,
and the Women, Peace and Security Handbook
published by Peacewomen, both supported by
Switzerland and Liechtenstein. These two instruments
are now also available as an iPhone application. They
are, in our view, excellent tools for supporting the
gender-mainstreaming policy in the context of the
Security Council, and we encourage members to make
use of them.

This year's report of the Secretary-General again
shows that the increased participation of women in
peace promotion remains a challenge. Capacity-
building exercises for women mediators are ongoing in
different parts of the world to provide a cadre of well-
prepared women to be involved in future peace talks. I
note, for example, the training activities undertaken by
Swisspeace in West Africa, with the cooperation of the
United Nations Office for West Africa and UN-Women,
and in Kyrgyzstan with UN-Women.

However, our experience shows that it is not
enough to train women as mediators. The Security
Council and Member States need to put strategies in
place to facilitate the active involvement of women and
women's rights in peace processes, including by
including women mediators and by ensuring that
women's rights are integrated into peace agreements.

