Ms. Colakovie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I thank
you, Madam President for organizing this important
and timely debate. Our thanks also go to all of today's
speakers We take their remarks very seriously.

Bosnia and Herzegovina aligns itself with the
statement delivered earlier today by the observer of the
European Union.

At the outset, I will quote the Secretary-General's
statement of 1 October in Geneva to the Executive
Committee of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees:

"Never before in United Nations history
have we had so many refugees, displaced people
and asylum-seekers. Never before has the United
Nations been asked to reach so many with
emergency food assistance and other life-saving
support."

In the context of these alarming words, we want
to express our deep concerns about heavy civilian
casualties, massive displacements of population,
serious human rights violations and worsening
humanitarian situations in several parts of the world.
We are distressed by the global trends report, which
shows that 51.2 million people were forcibly displaced
in 2013 alone. In the same year, 2.5 million people
from one single country - Syria - became refugees
and 6.5 million became internally displaced persons
(IDPs). Furthermore, all statistics shows that women
and children, who make up the majority ofrefugees and
IDPs, are the most vulnerable part of the population.
We had the same situation in the 19905 during the war
in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Bearing all this in mind we strongly call upon the
entire international community, the United Nations
and major players and stakeholders to provide a more
comprehensive response to the current crisis in order
to protect civilians and human rights. We recognize the
achievements made at the normative level through the
adoption of resolutions 2106 (2013) and 2122 (2013),
and we especially welcome the commitments made in
the areas of woman, peace and security regarding the
situation of refugees, IDPs and stateless women and
girls.

We appreciate the work of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in
Conflict, and all her activities to highlight the need for
more sustainable protection of women and girls in that
regard. A crucial element in women's protection is the
implementation of the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and all
international human rights, refugee and humanitarian
law. In that regard, we strongly support the work,
activities and role of UN-Women and all its initiatives.

My country is committed to the provisions of the
declaration on preventing sexual violence in conflict
adopted by the Foreign Ministers of the Group of Eight
in London in 2013. We believe that the prosecution of
sexual violence crimes, as well as national ownership
and responsibility in addressing of the root causes
of sexual violence in armed conflict, are central to
preventing such acts. Sexual violence in conflict cannot
be accepted as a cultural phenomenon. Bearing in
mind that sexual violence in conflict and post-conflict
situations affects women and girls, as well as men and
boys, we see it as the most brutal manifestation of
discrimination against the human being. The victims
very often have to fight outside factors - such as
social stigma, where the victims are blamed and
penalized - yet perpetrators are free to lead a normal
life. Therefore, we advocate the importance of victims'
access to justice in conflict and post-conflict situations.

My country has a track record ofaction to implement
resolution 1325 (2000), and we were the first country in
Central Eastern Europe to develop and comprehensively
implement a national action plan. For example, our
plan requires that a zero-tolerance approach be applied
to any form of illicit sexual behaviour on the part of
peacekeeping personnel. In this context, we would like

to stress the importance of recent tangible changes in
the mandates of peacekeeping and special political
missions, which includes monitoring training for
peacekeepers in the prevention of violence against
women refugees and IDPs.

Integrating a gender perspective into peacekeeping
policies, the promotion of women's participation
in peacekeeping operations, and the deployment of
women protection advisers to missions is fundamental
to a more effective performance on the ground. Bosnia
and Herzegovina is a police- and troop-contributing
country. The authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina
have adopted a policy to ensure that one-third of the
nominated candidates for peacekeeping missions
are women. Accordingly, among the deployed police
officers from my country in South Sudan, Liberia and
Cyprus, 21 per cent are female. Women peacekeepers
have an operational advantage by empowering local
women, girls and society as a whole. Education should
be one of the priorities, as refugees and displaced
girls are often short-changed on education. We want
to highlight this issue as an essential to ensuring the
safety and empowerment of the individual.

Finally, we would like to point out that the time has
come to strongly convert our commitments and promises
into real actions on the ground in order to prevent
violence, protect individuals, punish perpetrators and
provide redress to victims. My country stands ready to
contribute to those efforts.

