Mr. Gillerman (Israel): At the outset, allow me
to congratulate the Ghanaian presidency on its able
stewardship of the Council this month and to thank it
for convening this open debate on women and peace
and security.

As we mark the seventh anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), I also wish to
thank the Secretary-General, the Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations and Ms. Rachel
Mayanja for their informative statements.

Next year, the international community will reach
another milestone when it celebrates the sixtieth
anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. The Declaration, universally recognized as an
international instrument of the highest importance, is
of increasing significance as a unifying factor among
all peoples and cultures. It remains a living document
that continues to inform and inspire the struggle for
rights and freedoms of all people around the world. In
this regard, the spirit of resolution 1325 (2000) lives
and breathes within the Declaration.

My delegation would like to commend the efforts
of the various entities within the United Nations,
among them, the Division for the Advancement of
Women, the United Nations Development Fund for
Women and the International Research and Training
Institute for the Advancement of Women for their
efforts in promoting resolution 1325 (2000) and for all
that they do to make the voices of women heard.

Israel strongly believes that women must play an
equal role in all aspects of State and civil society. We
have no doubt that the advancement and progress of
women will translate into nothing less than the
advancement and progress for all. As such, Israel
remains committed to the principles and goals of the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, as well as
the principles outlined in the World Summit Outcome
(General Assembly resolution 60/1) adopted by our
leaders in 2005.

The deliberate acts of violence against women
and the girl child, especially in situations of armed
conflict, are particularly alarming. Women, and
children, for that matter, are severely affected by the
consequences of armed conflict. We have even seen
and are continuing, unfortunately, to see the heinous
crime of rape used as a political weapon. The severity
of such graphic exploitation, abuse and violation of
human rights cannot be overstated, and the perpetrators
of these crimes must be brought to justice.

Israel welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General on women and peace and security
(S/2007/567) and its System-wide Action Plan review
and update. Similarly, we are pleased at the Secretary-
General's efforts to identify women as candidates for
senior level positions within the United Nations
system, with particular attention given to special
representatives. We hope to hear in the future of new
appointments of women in senior roles.

With this in mind, we commend the appointment
of our former colleague, Ambassador Ellen Loj, as the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Liberia. I am sure that her impressive tenure at the
United Nations, and especially in the Security Council,
will have prepared her well for this important mission,
and we wish her well.

Nevertheless, a great deal remains to be done.
National mechanisms and machineries for the
advancement of women need to be strengthened to
ensure women's active participation in public policy
formulation on matters of peace and security. The
mainstreaming of gender into all policies and
programmes at the international and national levels is a
crucial factor in the prevention of sexual
discrimination, exploitation and abuse. If women are
ever to truly see their needs recognized and their
interests represented in peace accords, they must have
access to peace negotiations from the earliest possible
stages. In that regard, Israel has been working through
Government and non-governmental channels to
increase awareness and amplify the voice of women in
peace negotiations and conflict resolution.
In Israel, implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) continues on a variety of levels, including but
not limited to distributing Hebrew translations of the
resolution, distributing and disseminating information

on the resolution to national, regional and non-
governmental organization (NGO) bodies, campaigning
to raise awareness through public relations work and
media coverage and monitoring and documenting the
impact of conflict on women and girls. Similarly, the
Israeli Women's Equal Rights Law was amended in
past years in the spirit of resolution 1325 (2000)
mandating that the Israeli Government include women
in any group appointed to peacebuilding negotiations
and conflict resolution.

I wish to note that this commitment is not merely
in theory, but also in practice. We do not just preach it;
we practice it. My Minister, Ms. Tzipi Livni, Vice-
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, was
appointed just last week to lead the negotiations with
the Palestinians. Due to the important choices being
made on the ground - namely, the existence of a
Palestinian Government that accepts the Quartet
principles and is committed to a dialogue and process
with Israel - a sense of renewed hope and optimism
can be felt on the ground. As Israeli and Palestinian
leaders continue to meet, our goal is to reach an
understanding on the widest possible common ground
in order to enable progress on the way forward towards
the realization of the two-State vision. This is for the
benefit of all citizens of the region, men and women
alike. Similarly, there is a movement of Israeli and
Palestinian women working together from across civil
society and the political spectrum to advocate for
peace. The recognition and effectiveness of such
advocacy organizations and NGOs is a testament to the
vibrancy of Israeli democracy and pluralism, and Israel
takes great pride in their leadership.

Spinoza, the famed seventeenth-century
philosopher, once said that peace is not the absence of
war: it is a virtue, a state of mind, a disposition for
benevolence, confidence and justice. Indeed, peace is a
holistic state of existence. To truly achieve it, one half
of the population cannot be ignored. Only with full
participation of women in all aspects of conflict
resolution, peacemaking and security will there be a
viable social, economic and political subsoil for
democratization, sustainable development and peace to
grow.

Israel, for its part, is determined that women
should play an increasingly active role in peace
negotiations and is committed to advancing the role of
women in all aspects of society. Israel is hopeful that
an enhanced role for women in peace negotiations will

build lasting bridges of understanding with our
neighbours and usher in a dawn of harmony and
prosperity for all.

