Mr. Al Musharakh (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in French): I thank you, Mr. President, for having
organized this important debate on conflict-related
sexual violence.

(spoke in Arabic)

Also allow me to thank the Arab Republic of
Egypt for its efforts in the presidency of the Council
last month.

We also wish to thank Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, and all those who have
provided briefings on the subject of this debate.

Today's debate is being held in the context of
the International Day for the Elimination of Sexual
Violence in Conflict. On that day, the world pays
homage to survivors and supports their efforts to end
that inhuman crime. Several years ago, the international
community came to recognize the threat posed by
conflict-related sexual violence to international peace
and security. In resolution 1820 (2008) and subsequent
resolutions, the Security Council recognized sexual
violence as a tactic of war, constituting a threat to
international peace and security. The various forms of
sexual violence are considered to be war crimes and
crimes against humanity, and therefore require the
international community to firmly address them.

The international community's consideration ofthis
important issue and the establishment of mechanisms
to assist national authorities to combat such crimes,
confront their perpetrators and provide support for
victims require us to make further efforts, especially
in the light of the growing phenomenon of the traffic in
women and girls for the purpose of sexual violence by
extremist terrorist groups, such as the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant, and the escalating use by terrorists
and extremists of sexual violence as a tool to terrorize
civilians in the countries affected by internal conflict,
where the smuggling of and trafficking in women and
girls have become part of the political economy of
those wars, as well as an ideological strategy to subdue
and humiliate communities under the control of those
extremist groups.

The United Arab Emirates believes that conflicted-
related sexual violence can be ended only by including
relevant stakeholders. In that regard, the United
Arab Emirates emphasizes that the protection and
empowerment of women and girls, the promotion of
women's participation and support for women's role in
local contexts are essential to ensuring the success of
those efforts. We also stress the importance of adopting
strategies to combat extremism online and in social
media, which are exploited by extremist groups to
promote all forms of sexual violence against women
and girls and trafficking.

In addition to settling conflicts and finding
peaceful solutions, we therefore believe that we have
to counter extremism and terrorism at all levels,
including online and in social media. Through the
Sawab Center - a joint initiative of the United Arab
Emirates and the United States to combat extremist
messages through social media - we are intensifying
the online debate and presenting moderate and tolerant
voices from across the region to amplify inclusive and
constructive narratives. The Sawab Center has launched
numerous campaigns aimed at revealing the crimes
committed by terrorist and extremist organizations
against women and exposing their inhumane treatment
and exploitation of women to achieve their appalling
and despicable ends.

The responsibility for promoting gender equality
and the empowerment of women to build more stable
and secure communities lies with the international
community and national authorities. That requires
strengthening regional and international cooperation
and coordination, particularly in the exchange of
experiences of and information on the services provided
to victims and survivors, the capacity-building of
relevant sectors, holding perpetrators accountable, the
rehabilitation of victims, and providing the necessary
assistance to the affected countries in order to enhance
their ability to respond. The United Nations recent
conclusion of agreements and memorandums of
understanding with a number of regional organizations
is an important step in strengthening the desired
cooperation. Those agreements seek to increase the
exchange and analysis of information, provide training
and capacity-building, and extend the necessary
medical, psychological and social services to the
victims and their families.

In that regard, I commend the efforts of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, and United Nations
Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict. I also
wish to express the appreciation of the United Arab
Emirates for the important role played by the Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict in providing assistance to the Governments of
affected countries to enhance their ability to address
conflict-related sexual violence. By building national
capacities, we can assist Governments in strengthening
accountability for crimes of sexual violence.

In conclusion, I reiterate the support of the United
Arab Emirates for the efforts of the United Nations
and international partners to address and end conflict-
related sexual violence.

