Ms. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Sexual violence is one of the most devastating
weapons of war. It wreaks intense destruction on the
bodies and souls of the victims. It disrupts families,
displaces communities and destroys entire societies'
basis for reconciliation. That is why Switzerland would
like to thank the delegation of the United Kingdom
for organizing this debate and for making conflict-
related sexual violence a priority for both the Security
Council and the Group of Eight. We would also like
to thank the Secretary-General and the other briefers
for their valuable contributions. We hope that today
we can together generate a strong political will that
can enable us to improve the implementation of the
existing Security Council instruments, strengthen
the mechanisms of national and international law and
increase assistance to the victims.

In an unprecedented partnership, civil society
organizations, the Council and the United Nations as a
whole have put in place a visionary framework based on
five resolutions on women and peace and security. That
framework not only asks us to fight sexual violence
effectively in times of conflict, it also commits us
to supporting women as active agents for change.
The United Nations has developed indicators; the
Security Council has created a mandate for a Special
Representative and made the decision to establish
the monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements
mechanism. With our partners from Liechtenstein,
Switzerland has supported the NGO Working Group
on Women, Peace and Security, PeaceWomen and the
Global Network of Women Peacebuilders in making
available to Council members a bulletin of monthly
action points, a handbook and even an iPhone app, and
in ensuring close ties between policymaking levels in
New York and the realities on the ground. All these
instruments and resources should be utilized in order
to implement the framework based on resolution 1325
(2000) without further delay. We therefore gratefully
welcome today's resolution 2106 (2013), which will
support those efforts.

First and foremost, however, prevention is essential.
We must break the cycles of violence. All parties to a
conflict must make specific commitments to combat
sexual violence and hold perpetrators accountable. I
would also like to voice a particularly serious concern
about the fact that the risk of systematic sexual violence
often increases considerably after or around high-level
visits. It is therefore imperative to ensure careful follow-
up and to prevent acts of revenge by strengthening local
capacities.

In his latest report (S/2013/149) the Secretary-
General encourages Member States to include specific
training courses for their peacekeeping troops.
Nevertheless, our methods have not been sufficiently
successful in fighting these crimes. That scourge
continues to undermine the credibility of United
Nations peacekeeping missions - not to mention the
immense harm done to the individuals and communities
affected by the behaviour of those who were deployed
in the field to protect them and ensure peace. The zero-
tolerance policy must be urgently implemented, and
everyone must be resolutely committed to bringing
perpetrators to justice.

International humanitarian law prohibits rape
and other forms of sexual violence. Such crimes can
constitute war crimes, crimes against humanity or
genocide. International tribunals, especially the
International Criminal Court, play a key role in
punishing and preventing such crimes. For that reason,
it is crucial that all States lend their full support to
those institutions, not forgetting that the fight against
impunity for perpetrators of sexual Violence must
primarily be carried out at the national level.

Let us never forget that the very raison d'etre of
the United Nations, as set out in its visionary Charter,
is the abolition of war and all related crimes. As John
Lennon sang,

(spoke in English)

"You may say I'm a dreamer, but I'm not the only

a)

one .
(spoke in French)

All around the world, men and women, communities,
civil society organizations, United Nations staff
and representatives and country representatives are
working hard to prevent and abolish war. Switzerland
is steadfastly committed to joining in those efforts.

