Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French):
My delegation welcomes the holding of this meeting
under your presidency Madam, devoted to sexual
violence in armed conflict. We also welcome the
participation in this debate of His Excellency
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, whom we thank for
his introduction of his report (S/2010/604) on the
follow-up to the implementation of resolutions 1820
(2008) and 1888 (2009). We reiterate to him Gabon's
full support in the fight he has carried out since 2008
as part of the UNiTE to End Violence against Women
Campaign, along with the participation of all the
partners involved in this cause. We also thank
Ms. Margot Wallstrom, Mr. Alain Le Roy and
Lieutenant General Babacar Gaye for their respective
briefings. I would like here to reiterate to
Ms. Wallstrom Gabon's strong support in her work.

Sexual violence against women and girls is
simultaneously a war crime, a crime against humanity
and a grave threat to peace and security. In spite of the
enormous efforts made by the international community
on the ground to bring it to an end - in
implementation of resolutions 1820 (2008) and 1888
(2009) - too many women and girls continue to be
victims of rape, sexual slavery and every other sort of
sexual violence. Basing myself on the report of the
Secretary-General, I should like to refer to three
aspects, namely, improving protection for vulnerable
populations on the ground, especially women and girls;
strengthening legal provisions to better combat
impunity; and strengthening the means for preventing
outbreaks of sexual violence during conflicts.

With regard to improving protection for
vulnerable populations, Gabon would like to
underscore the importance of ensuring better protection
for women and girls in the field. In that regard, we
would like to highlight the enormous efforts made by
peacekeeping missions, which too often operate in
difficult situations and in places that severely challenge
their efforts to ensure effective protection for those at
risk.

However, the incidents of widespread systematic
rape in the Walikale region in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo illustrate both the
limits of our ability and the scope of the challenge to
overcome. This is a huge and complicated undertaking
that demands that we bolster our monitoring and
communications capabilities in order to provide better
information about reality on the ground.

In that regard, we support the Secretary-General's
recommendation underscoring the need for better
analysis of information and reporting of sexual
violence committed during armed conflict, with a view
to better coordination in the field. We should also
improve our rapid-deployment capacity in affected
regions, as recommended in paragraph 26 of resolution
1888 (2009).
However, our efforts will not produce the desired
results without more sustained dialogue with all parties
to a conflict. Among other things, such a dialogue
come about by providing psychological support for
victims and carrying out awareness-raising efforts
among those involved. It is our belief that women
themselves could play such roles.

With regard to strengthening provisions to
combat impunity, my delegation believes that it is
essential to make that concern part of the system for
comprehensive protection against sexual violence in
armed conflict. In that regard, we should welcome the
progress made in international criminal law in this
area. The International Criminal Tribunals for the
Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda were the first to
announce indictments for the use of rape as a weapon
of war. Likewise the Tribunal for Sierra Leone has for
the first time issued a guilty verdict for sexual slavery.

In the same vein, we are convinced that the
Secretary-General' proposal to annex to his reports on
this issue a list of the names of those who carry out
sexual violence should serve as a effective instrument
for deterrence. However, as we noted during the last
debate on the protection of civilians (S/PV.6427),
combating impunity is chiefly the responsibility of
States. That is why my delegation highlights the need
to help countries emerging from conflict to develop
reliable judicial structures.

The fight against sexual violence in armed
conflicts requires prevention first and foremost. From
that angle, the Member States, the United Nations,
donors and civil society must resolutely take that
approach. Raising awareness regarding the serious
danger that sexual violence can create in society should
guide their actions. Early warning mechanisms that can
detect indicator signs in due time are also essential
pillars for actions aimed at eradicating sexual violence
in armed conflicts.

It is equally vital in that exercise that a privileged
place be given to women themselves. As we have seen
from experience, their perceptions and commitment are
undeniable and unparalleled. Not to take that fact into
account would mean to deprive ourselves of an
advantage in the fight against the discrimination and
violence of which women and girls are the chief
victims. That is particularly true in the context of the
truth and reconciliation processes, which are a proven
means to help battered societies and peoples recover
from the agony of war and violence.

Resolution 1960 (2010), adopted earlier today by
the Security Council and which was co-sponsored by
my country, takes into account the chief concerns that I
have just mentioned and represents accordingly an
important step for targeted, strengthened action on the
part of the international community with respect to that
matter.

