Mr. Minami (Japan): At the outset, my delegation
would like to extend its appreciation to the Secretary-
General for his briefing, which stressed three points:
ending impunity, protection and support for victims,
and ensuring accountability.

It is regrettable that allegations of sexual exploitation
and abuse by peacekeepers persist. According to the
Secretary-General's report (A/70/729) released last
week, 69 allegations were reported in 2015. Bearing
in mind that peacekeepers are deployed to protect
people and that they are sometimes the last hope of
people suffering in conflicts, sexual exploitation and
abuse by peacekeepers is absolutely unacceptable.
It is also unacceptable that sexual exploitaiton and
abuse has significantly damaged the credibility of the
United Nations. Japan therefore strongly supports the
Secretary-General's zero-tolerance policy and believes
that effective measures must be taken until there are no
cases of sexual exploitation and abuse.

Japan supports the Secretary-General's decision to
repatriate contingents where there is a demonstrated
pattern of misconduct. The main aim of that measure
is not to point fingers at the contingents but to urge
troop- and police-contributing countries to take action.
We need to realize that investigating the allegations
of sexual exploitation and abuse is primarily the
responsibility of the troop- and police-contributing
countries, and they have to take appropriate actions
with regard to the allegations and hold those personnel
accountable for sexual exploitation and abuse. By
doing so, troop- and police-contributing countries can
demonstrate their commitment to the zero-tolerance
policy and preserve the honour of the vast majority of
peacekeepers who are fulfilling their tasks seriously.

Japan has supported and will support the Secretary-
General's efforts in tackling sexual exploitation and
abuse through concrete contributions. One contribution
is providing financial support for the online training
of all categories of peacekeepers. Without sufficient
training, no field personnel can maintain a high standard
of conduct and discipline. With Japan's support,
peacekeepers will be trained under the United Nations
e-learning programme on the prevention of sexual
exploitation and abuse, which is to be operational in
May this year. We are convinced that this programme
will be a firm step towards the eradication of sexual
explotiation and abuse.

Another concrete contribution that Japan is
considering is in the area of support for victims. As the
Secretary-General has recommended, it is necessary to
secure specialized assistance to the victims of sexual
exploitation and abuse. At the second peacekeeping
summit, held last September, Japan already expressed
its commitment to providing support for a remedial
action programme for victims of sexual exploitation
and abuse. We welcome the initiative of the United
Nations to establish a trust fund to support victims, and
we stand ready to consider the proposal.

Let me conclude by saying that all of
us - the Secretariat, the Security Council and all
Member States - have to cooperate in tackling such
shameful misconduct by taking concrete measures for
the sake of both victims and peacekeepers. Japan will
continue to support the efforts ofthe Secretary-General
in this area. Japan also hopes that the Council will adopt
this draft resolution as soon as possible.

