Mr. Apakan (Turkey): I would first like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Margot Wallstrom and Special Adviser Rachel Mayanja
for their extensive and thought-provoking briefings. I
10-33085
also wish to congratulate Ms. Wallstrom on her
appointment as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and
to reiterate our support for her mandate.

Rape and sexual violence continue to be the most
unfortunate consequences of conflict. We should do
everything possible to counter that scourge.
Undoubtedly, the appointment of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and the introduction of new
mechanisms by resolution 1888 (2009) constitute a
sound basis for the United Nations to pursue its efforts
to combat the threat against women and girls in
conflict situations. Indeed, impunity should end,
women must be empowered in a broader sense, our
political leadership should be mobilized and awareness
must be raised. Finally, we must ensure a more
coherent response from the United Nations system.

Having heard Ms. Wallstrom's remarks, our
conviction is even stronger that there is an urgent need
to boost the efforts of the United Nations membership
to fully implement resolutions 1820 (2008) and 1888
(2009). Today's meeting not only allows us to take
stock of developments on this important subject; it also
sends the message to the international community at
large that this issue is high on the agenda of the
Council and that we are determined to follow through
on our commitments. I would therefore once again like
to thank the Japanese presidency for organizing this
timely meeting.

Although the momentum gained with the
adoption of resolutions 1888 (2009) and 1889 (2009) is
promising, and despite the renewed commitment of all
stakeholders ahead of the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of landmark resolution 1325 (2000), there
remain formidable challenges before the goals
contained in those resolutions are fully realized,
including those of resolution 1820 (2008). Indeed, as
Special Representative Wallstrom pointed out, there is
still a lot more to do if we are to be able to claim that
women in conflict situations enjoy the safety and
prosperity they need to fully participate in
peacebuilding efforts in their societies. The gaps
mentioned by Ms. Wallstrom are particularly worrying.
We strongly support the five-point agenda she has
outlined.

In that regard, we highly appreciate the recent
work of the Secretariat, under the auspices of
11

Ms. Mayanja's Office, to develop indicators to track
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We
believe that those indicators will be extremely useful in
helping the United Nations and Member States to
assess the status of the resolution's implementation and
to determine the actions needed to overcome
challenges thereto.

In the months ahead, as we continue to further
develop those indicators, the need to collect necessary
data, find the right balance between quantitative and
qualitative indicators and take into account the special
circumstances of each conflict will be important issues
to be dealt with. To that end, the continuation of
consultations with the wider United Nations
membership will certainly help us to reach consensus
on an agreed set of indicators, and thus ensure a sense
of broad ownership that will strengthen and facilitate
implementation. In that respect, we believe that the
tenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) will
provide an excellent opportunity to further galvanize
this process in the right direction.

Before I conclude, I would like to touch upon two
specific points in the context of the resolutions on
women, peace and security that I believe call for
particular attention. The first pertains to the parallel
work taking place in the context of resolutions 1820
(2008) and 1888 (2009). As we see it, both resolutions
are designed to advance the broader goals on women,
peace and security reflected in resolution 1325 (2000).
We therefore believe that the work on both fronts
should be considered integral parts of the same whole.
We look forward to having the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General support that approach. After
all, our efforts to address sexual violence will be most
effective if a holistic approach is adopted and the
issues of participation, protection and prevention are
addressed comprehensively.

The second point I would like to make relates to
the need to increase awareness in the wider
international community about the four resolutions that
the Council has adopted on women, peace and security
issues. To that end, we believe that we should make
better use of the role that parliamentarians could play
in advancing the goals of those resolutions. Indeed, it
is rather unfortunate that the implementation of such
important resolutions is left to foreign or defence
ministries alone. We must therefore enlarge ownership
of those resolutions and engage parliamentarians in this
endeavour.

The months ahead in the run-up to the tenth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) will provide
ample opportunity to translate words into deeds in
order to ensure the basic human rights of women all
around the world. Turkey is fully committed to that
goal. I would like once again to reiterate here our
continued support for the implementation of all the
Council's resolutions on women, peace and security.

