Mr. Rakhmetullin (Kazakhstan): I thank you,
Sir, for having convened this open debate on women
and peace and security, which enables the Security
Council to focus on the paramount role of women and
their civil society organizations in contributing to the
prevention and resolution of armed conflicts, as well
as to peacebuilding. Today's deliberations provide a
valuable opportunity to assess the extent of the real,
positive and lasting change that we can make in the
lives of women affected by armed conflicts.

Promoting the rights of women is at the core of the
human rights policy of my country, and Kazakhstan,
as a member of the Executive Board of UN-Women,
wholeheartedly supports the multilateral effort in that
direction. At the same time, we need to assess and
overcome the factors facing women's organizations,
such as the lack of security, resources and access to
information, to ensure their effective involvement in
the peace and security agenda. Those and many other
obstacles can be overcome by including women's groups
in strategies for the prevention, resolution and recovery
from conflict. It is therefore critical to strengthen
women's interventions not just at the international but
also the national and regional levels.

We believe that the fourth ministerial meeting of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, to be held
in Jakarta this December, will reaffirm such a strong
commitment to implementing resolution 1325 (2000)
as an integral part of the development agenda. My
delegation also appreciates the efforts made by the
United Nations system to strengthen mechanisms for
monitoring and reporting on regional initiatives. We
propose encouraging Member States to report on their
commitments and actions plans related to women and
peace and security.

My country is of the conviction that gender
mainstreaming is an absolute necessity and a
prerequisite for ensuring a place for women on the
peace and security agenda. Gender mainstreaming
should be an inalienable component of peacekeeping
and peacebuilding, and not an add-on or secondary
concern. We have seen a positive trend of women
themselves being the driving force for bringing the
gender perspective to conflict and post-conflict
situations. In this regard, Kazakhstan welcomes the
increasing number of national action plans that are
being designed and implemented worldwide, as well
as the broad inclusion of indicators to assess women's
participation in peacekeeping and peacebuilding in
these national plans.

It is noteworthy that half of the field missions
managed by the Department of Political Affairs have
gender advisers. We fully support the process of
including women's participation in field missions to
ensure that programmes focus on the specific needs of
girls and women as a means to advance gender equality
and the empowerment of women.

As we assess progress, there is also an
acknowledgement of the reality that much more needs
to be done so that resolution 1325 (2000) is no longer
merely a statement of aspirations, with little action to
record since 2000. We have to be conscious ofthe voices
of women around the world who feel unrepresented in
international and regional peace processes.

In designing peacebuilding strategies, we need
to be more sensitive and take into consideration the
knowledge and insights of local women at the grass-
roots level. It is also important to gather information
about the incidence of sexual violence, insecurity and
human rights violations as perceived by women, and for
women to be represented at all levels. Local women's
networks and grass-roots organizations therefore need
to be consulted in the process of designing our gender-
responsible policies and programmes. We also need to
draw on traditional and indigenous methods of conflict
resolution used by local women's groups and avail
ourselves of the wisdom of elder women.

Advisers on gender issues must also consistently
take account of and utilize the information gathered
by local women's organizations. Every effort must be
made to ensure that their perspectives are heard and
considered by the highest decision-making entities and
structures. It is equally important that women be fully
represented in those bodies in field missions and all
other platforms. Wherever necessary, training, capacity-
building and assistance need to be provided for women's
full participation in the areas of non-governmental
organization leadership skills, advocacy, management,
administration, communication and dealing with
the media, for only then will true empowerment be
possible. We can benefit from best-practice models,
lessons learned and exchanges of information between
missions and United Nations country teams.

My delegation would therefore also propose
United Nations system-wide coherence on gender
empowerment in conflict resolution through closer
coordination between United Nations agencies, funds
and programmes. Furthermore, the best results will
be achieved if all stakeholders, together with Member
States, the private sector, academia and the media form
a strong partnership to achieve our common objective.

In conclusion, we commend the Security
Council's continuing attention to the urgent and
critical issue of further promoting the full realization
of resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security, and at the same time we call for greater efforts
on our part to include women in our deliberations.

