Ms. Lusenge (spoke in French): I am the Director
of the Congolese Women's Fund and the President of
Solidarite feminine pour la paix et le developpement
integral. I am also here on behalf of the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security.

Seven years ago, in 2008, I came to New York
to speak in the Security Council. I described the
conflict in my country, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. I set out in detail the sexual violence, murders
and massacres. I came to ask for concrete action for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
the integration of the fight against sexual violence
in peacekeeping missions. Today, 15 years after the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) and seven years
after my first briefing to the Council, I am once again
addressing this body. I thought long and hard before
deciding to come back here, and wondered whether or
not it was worth the effort.

Resolution 1325 (2000) was replete with hope.
But what change has it brought about in women's
lives - we women in conflict situations? Yanar, Alaa
and I come from different regions and situations, but
we share common experiences: the exclusion of women
in the political, social and economic spheres. That is
precisely why nothing has changed. Women should
be actively included at all levels of decision-making
and peace processes. If we want - and if the Council
wants - genuine security and world peace, the Council
should at last seriously and definitively include women
in all stages of the peace process, whether at the level of
women in villages or at the Government level. Coming
from the Violence in our daily lives, we Congolese
women force the door to participate and thus take our
place in peace processes, in accordance with resolution
1325 (2000).

In 2013, during the talks with the Mouvement

du 23 mars (M-23) armed group in the Democratic

Republic of the Congo, as that group was decimating

the population and women were suffering violence and

unimaginable atrocities, women in North Kivu asked to

participate in the process. Does the Council know the

answer? There are only two sides in the conflict: either

you are with the Government or you are with the M-23.

Therefore, what is the message to our brothers, our
sisters and our young people? We must take up arms
to be able to come to the table for peace talks. There
will never be lasting peace without the participation of
women.

Women are the first victims of the war, but they are
the key to peace. At the moment, women in Rutshuru,
Beni and my own region in North Kivu are being
murdered, massacred, slaughtered and eviscerated.
They suffer rape and sexual violence, abduction and
sexual slavery. They are us: my nephew was killed
by rebels of the Ugandan Allied Democratic Forces. I
could even provide the number and names of the women
killed in the course of a year. In Beni, more than 234
were either killed, strangled or eviscerated.

That is why I and all women ask the Council to
implement resolution 1325 (2000) via concrete actions.
The Council has heard the desperate cries of women
many times, without really hearing them. Do not let
them go ignored today. I hope today will finally be the
day to put an end to this cycle of violence.

On the ground, we are ensuring that Victims become
survivors by providing a holistic approach. We help
women acquire skills for economic empowerment and
to know their rights. We facilitate their reintegration
into their communities so that they can participate
in development as agents of change. In that way they
regain their dignity. The Council must therefore support
women's grass-roots groups and the environment for
peace they create at all levels.

Women are actively working to build peace. Armed
groups attack us and threaten us. They injure us. They
try to rape our colleagues. But despite all that, we
continue to work. Unprotected, we sensitize young
people to dissociate themselves from armed groups
and create a welcoming environment for dialogue that
can build lasting peace in villages, the country and
the region. Those efforts must be supported, not only
with words and applause but with concrete actions and
means.

The United Nations must identify various
approaches to ensure that women have official positions
in the building of peace. In that regard, I welcome the
Secretary-General's briefing today. I also welcome
the appointment of a woman to lead the peacekeeping
mission in my country. The platform for women
with regard to the Addis Ababa Accord, initiated by
Ms. Mary Robinson as Special Envoy to the Great
Lakes Region, is a mechanism that can involve women
in the peace process. Unfortunately, the Members of
the United Nations are not supporting that innovative
mechanism. In the end, three countries have indeed
supported it. That has enabled us to bring together
the women of Rwanda, Burundi, Uganda and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo around the Addis
Ababa framework agreement. The United Nations and
the international community must demand the presence
and participation of women in the peace talks. We must
provide women with the means to enable them to attend
formal negotiations, and not only at the junior level of
the talks.

Justice consolidates peace, and peace is nourished
byjustice. My colleagues and I contribute to the training
of police and magistrates so that they understand the
law and the participation of women, so that women
can bring complaints to the police and the latter can
carry out fair investigations. Police commissioners
and certain magistrates and judges now call on us
and work with us when there are new cases of sexual
violence. And we have won judgements, always in the
quest for fair justice. For us, therefore, justice reform
boils down to the effective training, equipping and
staffing of judicial actors, as well as improving their
working conditions and rebuilding prisons. A victim
reparations programme should urgently be developed.
All perpetrators of crimes of sexual Violence, including
United Nations peacekeeping soldiers, must be brought
to justice.

We urgently need specialized mixed chambers such
as those set up for Sierra Leone and Timor-Leste, so as
to address the serious international crimes that have not
been addressed by the International Criminal Court.
Beyond that, however, we also need a comprehensive
reform of our national justice system.

The international community must continue to
support the peace efforts in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to root out armed groups and secure
the places were women live. The leadership of
peacekeeping missions should meet regularly with
women's organizations and community leaders. They
must listen to and quickly investigate allegations made
by the local population, and not just dismiss them as
rumors. The voices and needs of local people must
drive the missions. The Security Council and the United
Nations should continue to support local efforts towards
stability. A peacekeeping mission cannot become a
career; it must be focused and produce concrete results.
The destruction of the Congo has lasted for over
20 years. That is enough now. After 15 years of good
intentions, it is high time to give women the authority
and the tools with which they can build a better world
for everyone.

In conclusion, sanctions must be put in place against
leaders who carry out acts of terror and violence during
elections. For there can be no democracy and lasting
peace without fair elections under safe conditions.

