Mr. Beck (Solomon Islands): Let me thank your
delegation, Mr. President, for convening this meeting
on the follow-up action on resolution 1325 (2000). My
delegation also wishes to thank the Secretary-General
for his report on women and peace and security
(S/2010/498).
Before I contribute to this debate in my national
capacity, I would like to associate myself with the
statement to be made by the representative of Papua
New Guinea on behalf of the Pacific small island
developing States.

The role of women as actors in the search for
peaceful settlements of today's conflicts is an
indispensable requirement for sustainable peace and
development for developing countries, in particular
countries such as mine, which is one of the 18 among
the 49 least developed countries that are emerging from
conflict.

During our ethnic conflict, a group of women
from multi-ethnic backgrounds gathered under their
own initiative to approach and speak to militants on
both sides. As mothers, they used their respective
cultural norms to draw militants' attention to the social
and human consequences of their actions. In so doing,
they gained their trust and confidence in order to
provide essential items across conflict lines. Mine is a
country of more than half a million people who speak
some 87 different languages.

For the past seven years, Solomon Islands has
been assisted by the Regional Assistance Mission to
Solomon Islands (RAMSI). The Mission is made up of
Pacific neighbours, led by Australia and strongly
supported by New Zealand. RAMSI has provided us
space and support to promote and implement resolution
1325 (2000) nationally and throughout the
Government. In that respect, Solomon Islands has
restructured its State security institution. For the first
time in our young history, we have more women in our
police force. The police force has also established a
unit to deal with post-conflict sexual and gender-based
violence, in coordination with other line ministries and
staffed with officers trained in gender sensitivity and
human rights.

On the issue of mainstreaming gender funding
within the Government system, that is a work in
progress. I am pleased to say that baseline data have
been established, allowing small women's machinery
in the country to develop strategies to enhance gender
capacity within the national system.

Having said that, the challenge ahead is huge.
The social-system structures, institutions and values of
Solomon Islands are centred on our natural resources.
Eighty per cent of Solomon Islands land is customarily
owned and undocumented. Traditional land operates
under three land-tenure systems: matrilineal, patrilineal
and chiefly.

To localize resolution 1325 (2000) in small island
developing States, we must look at the challenges
women face on a daily basis, in particular the impact of
climate change, which is now a threat multiplier.
Climate change has induced population relocations and
is uprooting populations from low-lying islands to
higher ones. People leave their ancestral land and move
into other land-tenure systems. If not well managed,
that will create another time bomb, as land allocated to
relocated populations is fixed and suffers from overuse
for agricultural production. It is a matter of time before
we see displaced populations entering customary lands,
which will trigger future hot spots of conflict.

The frequency of natural disasters has created
food insecurity for women and has, to some extent,
disempowered them, as their land is swallowed up by
the rising sea. Water insecurity is forcing mothers to
make difficult choices, including having to spend more
time seeking food to put on the table and neglecting
children and not sending them to school. Equipping
Solomon Islands women with technologies for storing
traditional crops will better prepare them to manage the
frequent disasters they face.

On the issue of governance, Solomon Islands
adopted a political system - the Westminster system -
that does not recognize the traditional decision-making
role of women in tribal societies. Women's traditional
role gets subsumed in the modern decision making-
process, which further weakens the power base of
women in their traditional setting.

I am pleased to say that Solomon Islands has not
shied away from looking at the issue of gender
representation in our national Parliament. An ambitious
plan for temporary measures to advance women's
participation was launched last year. However, it did
not receive enough support and needed more
consultation. We hope that it will receive attention over
time. The initiative did generate a tsunami of interest,
and we have an ongoing conversation on it. I merely
mention that because women in our part of the globe
live and operate in two worlds, the traditional and the
modern world.

Solomon Islands has adopted various conflict-
prevention mechanisms in an effort to prevent the
country from sliding back into conflict. The South
African model of a truth and reconciliation commission
is operating, allowing Victims to seek justice and
offenders forgiveness. The Government is looking at
the notion of complementing that with a forgiveness
bill to bring about a process for former militants who
seek reconciliation with society.

The challenges faced by my country in
implementing resolution 1325 (2000) include the
establishment of a gender early warning system.
However, it was project-driven, and the initiative
slowed when the project ended. It is important that,
whatever gender-related activities are carried out, it is
done on a sustainable way and established within
existing gender institutions, in particular faith-based
women's groups that are rural-based, community-
focused and meet frequently.

Secondly, there needs to be a shift in approach by
the United Nations in supporting the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), away from a one-size-fits-all
approach of over-regionalizing issues while
disregarding the varying levels of development within
Pacific small island developing States and country-
specific development needs. In that respect, over the
years, Solomon Islands has continued to call for
upgrading the United Nations presence in our country,
as we are currently managed from a regional office
abroad.

Thirdly, it is important that the multilateral
system work for small countries. Too often, we see that
we are too small for the global system to work for us.

In conclusion, Solomon Islands joins others in
welcoming the operationalization of UN Women, looks
forward to working with the new gender entity and
reaffirms its commitment to resolution 1325 (2000).

