Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): We thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting
under your leadership.

The adoption of resolutions 1820 (2008) and
1888 (2009) were seminal steps towards enhancing the
protection of women and girls from sexual violence in
conflict situations. The widespread abuse of women
and children in conflict situations has caused much
revulsion in civilized minds. Humankind had to take
action to deal with this appalling reality. Sri Lanka is
particularly thankful that the Security Council has
adopted those proactive measures. Even though the
devastation accompanying armed conflict does not
discriminate along gender lines, it has been our
common experience that certain conflict situations
subject women and girls to a disproportionate share of
violence, degradation and deprivation. Their
vulnerability has been ruthlessly exploited by armies
and armed groups consisting mainly of men.

In post-conflict environments also, the challenges
faced by women remain formidable. Often they are
forced to contend with family dislocation, shattered
livelihoods and being the sole breadwinners. Many
face the everyday reality of being single mothers and,
in some contexts, that increases their vulnerability to
sexual harassment, exploitation and violence. Gender
parity and equity continue to elude women in many
parts of the world in post-conflict contexts.

Sensitive to the vulnerabilities of women in post-
conflict situations, the protection of war-affected
women and children is a priority for the Government of
Sri Lanka. Every effort is being made to ensure that
their lives are returned to normalcy, as far as possible
and as speedily as possible. Although resource-
constrained, Sri Lanka has set up special women's
protection units with female police officers and
women's centres in the camps for internally displaced
persons, and is continuing to provide psychosocial
counselling services in the formerly conflict-affected
north and east. Many women in those areas were
psychologically devastated by the conflict and the
attendant terrorism that lasted over 27 years.

With the end of the 30-year struggle against
terrorism in May 2009, Sri Lanka has now entered a
post-conflict phase that is challenged by many issues.
They include resettlement, rebuilding livelihoods, the
rehabilitation and reconstruction of dilapidated
infrastructure, and bringing normalcy to the conflict-
affected areas. Many of the economic rehabilitation
activities implemented in the north and the east have
women at the centre.

In addition, as an incremental step to enhance the
mechanisms to safeguard the rights of women that are
already in place in Sri Lanka, the Government has
developed a national action plan for the promotion and
protection of human rights, which has been approved
by the Cabinet of Ministers. The national action plan
contains a specific section dedicated to the rights of
women, covering a plethora of issues. The priority area
on women in this new mechanism focuses on
enhancing and strengthening the rights of women
through proactive measures. Currently, the national
action plan is at the implementation stage. It
characterizes the Government's commitment to
promoting and protecting human rights, especially
those relating to women.

In addition, His Excellency President Mahinda
Rajapaksa appointed the Commission of Inquiry on
Lessons Learnt and Reconciliation in May 2011, which
heard testimony in many parts of the island, especially
in the former conflict-affected areas. The Commission
submitted its report in November 2011 and,
subsequently, it was introduced in Parliament on
16 December 2011. It is now a public document. The
report offers detailed observations and recommendations
on international humanitarian law issues and on
grievances, in particular those of women, relating to
the final phase of the conflict.

While the Government will continue to adopt
social, economic and security measures relating to
women and children, which also have relevance to the
Commission's findings, courses of action will also be
taken in response to the Commission's
recommendations. The Government finds the
Commission's suggestions regarding institutional
mechanisms to deal with land documentation and user-
right issues to be valuable, as the resolution of
competing equities of land titles in the former conflict-
affected areas is strikingly complex.

Sri Lanka has had a very constructive
engagement with the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict. We appreciate the open and
transparent manner that has been adopted by the
Special Representative's Office in working with Sri
Lanka on this important issue. In this area, too,
reporting from the field must contain verifiable
information that would enable Governments that are
committed to sincerely addressing issues of sexual
violence in post-conflict situations to investigate and
provide redress to the affected. It is equally important
that monitoring missions do not confuse common
criminal activity with such gender-based violence.
Such a distortion would smack of politically motivated
targeting of Member States.

Sri Lanka stands ready to extend its support to
achieving gender parity in United Nations
peacekeeping activities and in carrying our gender-
related mandates of the peacekeeping missions.
Necessary predeployment training has been completed
to deploy an all-female battalion comprising
855 personnel and 28 female officers, at any time.

Sri Lanka is happy to note that the issue of
women and peace and security continues to receive the
attention it deserves in the Security Council and in
the Secretary-General's reports. We congratulate
Ms. Margot Wallstrom and her staff on the effective
work that they are doing to assist women and children
in conflict situations. It is unquestionably our
collective responsibility as Member States to ensure a
world free, safe and fair for all women and girls.

