Ms. Marinaki: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union and its member
States. The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.

The European Union welcomes Bolivia's initiative
to focus today's discussion on the political and economic
aspects of the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda. We join the Secretary-General in
calling on Member States to build the necessary gender
advisory capacity in order to systematically integrate
a gender perspective in all analyses, planning, conduct
and evaluation of United Nations activities, including
in peacekeeping missions. The European Union focuses
on four main priorities within the women and peace and
security agenda.

First, we put emphasis on our efforts aimed
at increasing women's political participation and
leadership. The following are just a few examples. In
Afghanistan, the European Union has been providing
training and coaching to female members of the
Afghan High Peace Council, thereby enabling them
to play an active role in the peace agreement between
the Government of Afghanistan and Hizb-e-Islami. In
Syria, the European Union and its member States have
been supporting the Syrian Women's Advisory Board
established by Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura. In Mali,
the Follow-up and Evaluation Committee overseeing the
implementation of the 2015 peace agreement, including
the relevant gender-equality and women and peace and
security commitments, has also been supported by
the European Union. Furthermore, in March 2018, in
Turkey, the European Union launched the Gaziantep
Women's Platform - a network of women involved
in the Geneva peace process consisting of activists
and non-governmental organization representatives
active in Syria - to address issues related to women's
empowerment, women's rights and sexual and gender-
based violence.

Secondly, we have prioritized action against sexual
and gender-based violence in conflict. We continue
to support United Nations efforts to combat conflict-
related sexual violence. In that context, the European
Union has taken concrete action in committing to
working together with the United Nations to eliminate
all forms of violence against women and girls
worldwide, through the Spotlight Initiative. We would
like to ask other stakeholders to join us in helping to
promote the women and peace and security agenda by
aligning our efforts to ensure the security and safety
of all women and girls. Since June 2017 the European
Union has been chairing a worldwide initiative, the Call
to Action on Protection from Gender-Based Violence
in Emergencies. We have also systematically followed
up on our commitments to the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila Patten, whom we
fully support in her excellent work.

Thirdly, we have prioritized the promotion
of proactive policies for women's economic
empowerment, which will also generate sizeable
returns for our economies and societies. In January
2018, the European Union, together with UN-Women
and the International Labour Organization, launched
WE EMPOWER, a programme promoting women's
economic empowerment at work through responsible
business in the countries of the Group of Seven,
designed to advance women's economic empowerment
by creating an enabling environment where the active
engagement of the corporate sector combines with
public-policy efforts.

Fourthly, we have prioritized strengthening the
national frameworks for implementing the women and
peace and security agenda in European Union member
States, such as national action plans and similar strategic
documents. While the European Union can point to a
number of success stories through the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions,
and while 20 of the 28 European Union member States
have their own national action plans, there is still much
to be done. We are happy to report that we are in the
final stages of adopting our new European Union
policy - the European Union strategic approach on
women and peace and security - before the end of
the year. The European Union is working constantly to
improve its procedures and practices in its civilian and
military missions and operations. We have enhanced
the role of our European Union gender focal points
network in order to increase exchanges of best practices
in real time. We have also been investing a great deal
of effort in further reinforcing our partnerships with
civil society.

We recognize the crucial role of UN-Women,
together with that of other relevant stakeholders, in
helping our common efforts. Together with other
regional organizations such as the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, NATO and the
African Union, we will continue ourjoint commitment
to integrating a stronger gender dimension into all
peace and security efforts. We welcome and engage in
all initiatives that help strengthen those efforts, such
as the Global Network of Gender Focal Points, the
Mediterranean Women Mediators Network and the
Women Mediators Networks.

Finally, in view of the upcoming twentieth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) in 2020, the
European Union reiterates its commitment to helping
all United Nations efforts for an even faster and more
ambitious implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda. The United Nations can rely on our
unwavering support, not just in New York but across
the globe.

