Mr. Mashkoor (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation would like to thank the delegation of the
United Kingdom for convening today's debate. We wish
the United Kingdom every success in its presidency of
the Security Council this month.

Trafficking in persons undermines the rule of
law and fuels transnational organized crime, which
exacerbates insecurity. Iraq became party to the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime in 2009 because it is a central pillar in the
fight against international crimes. To comply with its
obligations under the Convention, Iraq adopted Law No.
28 of 2012 on combating trafficking in persons, with a
view to establishing mechanisms to assist victims of
trafficking, put an end to the crime and punish such
a reprehensible act. In addition, the Iraqi Constitution
contains articles that prohibit forced labour, slavery
and trafficking in women and children.

Trafficking in persons, slavery and forced labour
are practices that help to finance terrorist groups.
Da'esh criminal gangs have kidnapped thousands of
Iraqi citizens, in particular Yazidi women and children
and have exposed them to human trafficking and
slavery. Such victims have been subjected to the worse
forms of inhumane treatment. Iraq therefore requires
support to liberate victims and restore their dignity.
Iraq calls upon member States to implement the relevant
resolutions, including resolutions 2195 (2014) and 2242
(2015). In those two resolutions, the Council indicated
that sexual violence is a part of the strategic and
ideological objectives advocated by terrorist groups.

In order to implement those two resolutions,
Iraq started work with the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, and those efforts led to the
signing of a joint statement with Ms. Zainab Bangura
on 23 September 2016 at United Nations Headquarters.
That agreement is the start of joint efforts between
Iraq and the United Nations to address head-on such
violations and barbaric acts perpetrated by Da'esh and
other parties. Ms. Bangura, along with a group of legal
experts, visited Iraq from 25 February to 3 March.
During that visit, she spoke with the President of the
Governing Council, religious leaders and the presidents
of various institutions to explore the various legal
options. Iraq calls upon all countries to honour their
obligations and strengthen efforts to uncover trafficking
in persons operations and put an end to them.

