Mr. Hassan (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
on behalf of the Sudan, I express my appreciation to the
President for having organized this debate on women
and peace and security. We also welcome Ms. Zainab
Hawa Bangura, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict. We
take note of the contents of the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2015/203).

The Government of the Sudan attaches particular
importance to women's issues, as reflected in a number
of our initiatives, including our 25-year women's
strategy for the period 2003 to 2027, the national
strategy for combating violence against women,
the national women's empowerment policy and the
national plan for the advancement of women. We also
established a unit to combat violence against women,
as well as an independent human rights commission,
in accordance with the Paris principles. Both of those
institutions are headed by women. The Government
also devotes particular attention to addressing violence
against women, in particular in refugee camps in
Darfur, Blue Nile and South Kordofan states. We do
so in cooperation with the United Nations Population
Fund (UNFPA) and the human rights division of the
Sudan United Nations country team.

On this day, as the Security Council is discussing
this topic, voters in my country are freely exercising
their constitutional rights in casting their votes in
presidential and parliamentary elections for the second
day in a row. Women participated fully at all stages of
the preparations for the elections and are now voting
side-by-side with men. The rights to run for office
and to vote have been enshrined in our legislation
and Constitution since the 1950s. Women now occupy
28 per cent of parliamentary seats, including that
of Deputy Speaker of the Parliament. In terms of
political participation, women have run as candidates
for President of the republic. Women now hold several
prominent positions, as presidential advisers and
ministers, and not only at the helm of ministries related
to women's rights but also dealing with other areas of
Government.

The Government of the Sudan has adopted
legislation aimed at preventing the dangers posed
to women and girls by human trafficking. As a
transit country for this phenomenon due to our wide
expanses of desert, the Sudan hosted a conference to
combat human trafficking in the Horn of Africa. That
conference attracted broad participation.

With regard to the economic empowerment of
women, the Government has implemented the rural
women's development programme and established
economic empowerment projects, including a women's
portfolio, revolving loans and microfinancing projects
for women. Sudanese law guarantees equal rights for
men and women with regard to property and inheritance
without discrimination - in fact, it provides safeguards
for women's rights to inheritance that in some cases
surpass the percentage accorded to men. Women also
enjoy the right to health care, which has resulted in
reduced maternal mortality thanks to programmes
implemented with UNFPA and UNICEF.

The Government of the Sudan is devoting efforts
to deliver services to displaced persons in Darfur, Blue
Nile and South Kordofan states. Those efforts have
been very fruitful, although this is not the appropriate
time to list them exhaustively. We must point out that
the rebel groups continue to undermine those efforts
and are seeking to destabilize the situation through acts
of violence, resulting in a severe humanitarian situation
for all vulnerable populations, including women. The
Government of the Sudan has therefore endeavoured
to facilitate the voluntary return of displaced persons
through development programmes once situations have
regained significant stability.

I must take this opportunity to reject the content
of the report presented today and the naive allegations
that were previously propagated by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General with regard
to the actions in Darfur. I also recall the evidence
that we previously presented to the Security Council,
some of which has been issued as official documents.
That evidence was sufficient to dispel those naive and
baseless lies, which no sane person would believe. The
members of the Security Council should know that
this microphone has been used as a mouthpiece for
lies. There is quite a difference between Amsterdam
and Darfur. It is enough that the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) has
visited the site and presented a report that has proven
those allegations to be lies. We therefore denounce the
fact that they have been mentioned again in another
report, in particular since reports presented to the
Security Council in the name of the Secretary-General
must rely on accurate and credible information, not just
rumours.

It is unfortunate that the paragraphs regarding the
Sudan in the report do not include any reference to, or
condemnation of, the acts of rebel groups. Anyone who
reads those paragraphs would get the impression that
the Government of the Sudan is the only killer - as if
it were fighting against itself and its own citizens. That
is naive, and no sane person would believe it.

The paragraphs disregard the significant improvements
in the humanitarian situation during the reporting
period. The Security Council is currently considering
recommendations regarding the future of UNAMID
because of the great strides that we have taken in this
regard. In the concluding part of the report regarding
Sudan, there is a request for cooperation from the
Government to allow access to the regions. Apart
from the fact that this is an issue of sovereignty, it is
also inaccurate because the Government has been
cooperating fully with the United Nations and its
agencies operating in the Sudan. Immunity was never
an obstacle to prosecuting the perpetrators of crimes.

In conclusion, the delegation of the Sudan calls for
the adoption of a comprehensive approach to fighting
crimes against women. This is a noble cause that has
been corrupted by politicization. We must therefore
prioritize conflict resolution and provide assistance
for reconstruction and addressing refugee issues, and
all matters related to the cause of women in conflict.
The Sudan also calls for the lifting of restrictions that
hamper national efforts in various areas, including
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. I
refer in particular to the debts and unilateral sanctions
imposed on some conflict regions, including the Sudan.
The Sudan reiterates the importance of verifying the
accuracy of information, especially before including it
in reports presented to the Council.

