Mrs. Asmady (Indonesia): My delegation thanks
you, Mr. President, for convening this important
meeting and the Secretary-General for his timely report
(S/2006/770) on the progress being made in putting
into effect the United Nations System-wide Action Plan
for the implementation of Security Council resolution
1325 (2000).

The report presents us with a mixed picture of
opportunities seized and opportunities missed.
According to the report, the Plan is being implemented
in a limited way by some specialized agencies. But,
some challenges remain, such as inadequate
understanding of gender analysis and mainstreaming,
poor leadership and commitment with regard to the
Plan's implementation, weak coordination and
insufficient use of available expertise. To meet those
challenges, there must be a general change in attitudes
and perceptions regarding the importance of women as
peacemakers and peacekeepers.

Even now, after much effort to make gender
mainstreaming commonplace throughout the United
Nations system, it remains true that not all United
Nations agencies and bodies focus on or mention
gender in their work. Nevertheless, the report provides
the basis for some optimism about the future,
especially in relation to women's role in the system's
peacekeeping and peacemaking activities. But, much
more needs to be done in that area.

However, what continues to be a matter of
concern after eight months of the Plan's
implementation is weak coordination, which can be
included among the institutional gaps and challenges
affecting the United Nations system. System-wide
efforts to infuse gender into peace and security matters
would greatly improve if overlapping and duplication
were to be minimized. Agencies must be made aware
of what their counterparts are doing and should not
engage in the same activities. Remedying that situation
will require better dissemination and sharing of
information among United Nations bodies.

My delegation underlines the urgent need for
further action to accelerate the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) by the relevant United Nations
entities, particularly in their efforts to continue their
vigorous and multi-pronged engagement with Member
States.

My delegation takes note of the measures adopted
by various United Nations entities to implement the
resolution at the national and community levels.
However, it is essential that such endeavours be
undertaken in full consultation with national
authorities.
At the international level, the establishment of a
working group or focal point on women, peace and
security within the Security Council, in keeping with
the recommendations in the report, should also be
given full consideration. But it would be equally
beneficial if, as proposed in the report, the Council
were to permit wider participation by the United
Nations membership in its work. That would increase
sensitivity regarding the issue of women's actual and
potential contributions to peace and security and
strengthen commitments in that regard.

Indonesia believes that the implementation of the
Action Plan represents the first phase in achieving a
well-coordinated, results-based, system-wide strategy.
If it is to succeed, that strategy will require committed,
sensitive leadership throughout the United Nations
system, actively supported by women in decision-
making positions, whose actions will help to
consolidate peace. It would also be good protocol if the
Council were to interact more closely with other major
United Nations organs so as to enrich its insight in
terms of taking action and to achieve better decision-
making.

