Mr. Komarek (Czech Republic): The Czech
Republic aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
on behalf of the European Union.

We would like to thank to French presidency of
the Security Council for convening this open debate.
We would also like to thank Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres for his valuable report (S/2017/861)
on women and peace and security, as well as for his
strong commitment to implementing the agenda in
terms of women's participation in the work of the entire
Organization, including its security pillar.

The Czech Republic supports the special focus of
the Secretary-General on the meaningful participation
of women in conflict prevention, conflict resolution
and post-conflict peacebuilding and reconstruction
so as to establish sustained peace in conflict-affected
countries. The Czech Republic is happy to recognize
that the women and peace and security agenda has
gained increased attention from the United Nations
Member States since its adoption as resolution 1325
(2000) by the Security Council in 2000. The number
of national action plans for implementing the women
and peace and security agenda is increasing, as is the
number of related projects.

On the other hand, it is a less encouraging fact that
national action plans relating to the agenda have been
adopted by only 68 of the 193 United Nations Member
States, and that the vast majority of projects are small,
short-term and underfinanced. As the global study on
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) concluded
in 2015, one of the key obstacles to implementing the
women and peace and security commitments has been
the lack of financing.

The Czech Republic adopted its national action
plan on women and peace and security in January
2017. The plan contains concrete, measurable tasks. I
would like to take this opportunity to thank Sweden
and Austria for sharing their national experiences in
helping us establish the Czech national action plan. The
Czech Ministry of Defence adopted its own action plan
to implement resolution 1325 (2000) in 2015. Based on
its successful specialized projects, the Czech Republic
became the lead nation of a programme dedicated to
training Jordanian female soldiers in the disposal of
explosive ordnance. Gender mainstreaming belongs
to the cross-cutting principles of the transition and
promotion programme of the Czech Republic. The aim
of the programme is to promote democratic principles
in countries in transition, for example by encouraging
women's participation in decision-making.

In the framework of development cooperation and
humanitarian aid, the Czech Republic has implemented
a number of projects totalling $6 million in 2016, with
a strong focus on gender equality and/or women's
empowerment, including projects aimed at preventing
sexual violence and abuse of women and girls. Those
projects were implemented in Georgia, Serbia, Kosovo,
Syria, the Central African Republic and Afghanistan.
Women, however, are still underrepresented in the
decision-making positions in the Czech Republic,
including in diplomatic posts. Therefore, an action plan
for a balanced representation of women and men in
decision-making positions for the period 2016-2018 was
adopted by the Czech Government in July 2016.

The Czech Republic is supporting global gender
activities, including activities in the framework of the
women and peace and security agenda of UN-Women,
through regular voluntary financial contributions.

Let me assure you, Madam President, that the
Czech Republic remains strongly committed to the
women and peace and security agenda at the national
and international levels.

