Mr. Baror (Israel): Earlier today my colleague
took her place around this table and expressed the need
to have more women involved in matters of peace and
security and portrayed some of the ways Israel promotes
this agenda, including between Israelis and Palestinians
hoping for a better future for both peoples. It is with
regret that we take the floor once again to highlight the
fact that those who should have advocated the agenda
more than anyone else chose a different path.

The Bolivian presidency of the Security Council
has chosen to invite the head of a Palestinian
non-governmental organization to speak on behalf of
civil society. Civil society has a major role to play in
promoting women's involvement in matters of peace
and security, and in Israel civil society groups are key
partners in that process. However, Bolivia has chosen to
invite Randa Siniora Atallah, the head of the Women's
Centre for Legal Aid and Counselling (WCLAC), which
is a little more of a questionable choice.

The Women's Centre for Legal Aid and Counselling
is a Palestinian organization that is supposed to assist
Palestinian women and advocate on their behalf. But
in too many cases WCLAC uses its mandate to spread
hatred and promote violence, all the things that we
believe women's involvement could diminish when it
comes to issues of peace and security.

WCLAC takes pride in Manal Tamimi as one of its
key members, While Manal calls for violence against
Israeli citizens and uses her social media accounts to
describe how the vampire Jews presumably drink the
blood of Palestinians on their High Holy Days. That is
who the Women's Centre for Legal Aid and Counselling
characterized as a human rights activist in its report to
the United Nations.

But perhaps we should not be surprised with the
Bolivian decision to invite such a person as its speaker
of choice. Bolivia itself is far from being a role model
for human rights, let alone peace and security, as is
well documented in Bolivia's latest Universal Periodic
Review. Israel, on the contrary, is a free and open
society. What we do and how we do it is open for
ongoing scrutiny, first and foremos by our very own
courts, which are renowned for their strong stand on
behalf of human rights, although, when it comes to
Israel, the world is always watching as well.

The facts are out there and are not hard to find. The
truth, sadly enough, is that the biggest enemy of the
Palestinian people are the Palestinian Government and
Palestinian non-governmental organizations, which are
invited to take a seat at the table but would rather throw
stones at it instead.

