Mr. Kvelashvili (Georgia): I thank you,
Mr. President, for allowing us to take the floor a second
time in response to the statement that was just made by
the representative of the Russian Federation.

There is a lot of irony to what the representative of
the Russian Federation has just said. The point is that
Georgia is a democratic country, an open society with
a Government whose leadership changes every term
through a democratic process. We have hundreds and
hundreds of non-governmental organizations (NGOs).
We have international NGOs operating in Georgia.
The Georgian Government and the Georgian State
encourage support to those NGOs. We are now talking
about the proposal of the Russian Federation, which is
not an open society nor a democratic State, and which,
in addition to that, exercises effective control over the
occupied Georgian territories. It is not only officials
who have Russian passports, it is ethnic Russians
who run those territories of Georgia - 20 per cent
of Georgian territory. Moreover, hundreds of thousands
of Georgians, citizens of Georgia, have been displaced,
have been ethnically cleansed, from those territories.
The Russian military has been an instrument behind
that displacement.

Of course, we are open to all kinds of discussions.
We are open to different forums - Geneva, Tbilisi, New
York or other places. At the same time, what we request
and what we require from the Russian Federation is to
allow the return of the ethnically cleansed population.
Again, we are talking about the majority of the pre-war
population of the Abkhazia and Tskhinvali regions. We
are unable to exercise State control on that 20 per cent of
our territory for the reasons just cited. Effective control
is exercised by Russia, which signed agreements with
those regimes that it itself established on Georgian soil.
Those agreements envisage full integration. This is
akin to annexation, nothing less than annexation.

Georgia stands for a full, peaceful negotiated
settlement of the conflict between Georgia and Russia.
But we would reiterate once again that, in order to
materialize that settlement, Russia has to comply with
the agreement it signed with us in August 2008. That
agreement excludes any unauthorized military force
on Georgian soil. Once again, we call on the Russian
Federation to fulfil its obligations under that and
other international agreements and to withdraw all its
occupying forces from Georgian soil.

I apologize for the lengthy statement, but I think
matters have to be clarified from time to time.

