Mr. Kelapile (Botswana): Mr. President, we
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of April, and we
thank you for convening today's important thematic
debate. We also appreciate the briefings provided by
the Secretary-General, the Special Representative
on Sexual Violence in Conflict and the Nobel Peace
Laureates, and the statements of the other speakers who
took the floor this morning.

Botswana supports the statement delivered by the
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the United
Nations, Ms. Fatima Mohammed, but we wish to add a
few points in our national capacity.

Conflict-related sexual violence undoubtedly
represents one of the most serious forms of violation of
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
Ending such violations is a moral imperative and one
which we must collectively address. This is all the more
crucial in conflict situations.

Our delegation welcomes the Secretary-General's
report contained in document S/2019/280, which offers
useful analysis and recommendations for dealing with
conflict-related sexual violence. The report once again
highlights, inter alia, the fact that sexual violence is
applied as a tactic of war and terror. It is observable
that such methods are often used by both State and
non-State actors.

As rightly noted in the Safe Schools Declaration,
conflict situations do not only destroy infrastructure
in educational institutions. Forced occupation of
educational facilities by parties to conflict exposes
children and youth to vulnerabilities stemming from
sexual violence, abuse and exploitation. That is why
Botswana co-sponsored the Safe Schools Declaration.

Considering the dire dimensions of the problem and
its implications for international peace and security,
we agree that conflict-related sexual violence can be
comprehensively tackled through a multidimensional
and coordinated approach to conflict prevention
and sustaining peace. Beyond their being subjects of
violence in conflict situations, women must be enabled
to play a meaningful role in conflict resolution,
preventive diplomacy and peacebuilding. They must
be empowered to act as active agents of peace and
transformation by creating an enabling environment
where they can freely participate on an equal footing
without any fear of violent acts or intimidation.

The international community has indeed come
a long way in designing policies and strategies on
women, peace and security. We therefore believe that,
through the combination of the commitments and
measures adopted globally, we are much better situated
than before to achieve the purposes of resolution 1325
(2000) and other relevant resolutions addressing sexual
exploitation and abuse. Clearly, there is no lack of good
intentions and efforts on this issue.

Urgently needed are implementation of the common
tools and frameworks and better utilization of the data
and information already collected on women, peace and
security. These would greatly enhance evidence-based
policy decisions and identification of obstacles in our
way. Importantly, this year we mark two very important
occasions: the lead-up to the commemoration of the
twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) on
women and peace and security and the tenth anniversary
of the establishment of the mandate of the Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict.

At the continental level, our delegation notes
that Africa, as a region that is affected by conflicts,
is playing a key role in this important agenda. We are
well advised that a total of some 42 instruments on this
issue have been adopted by the African Union (AU)
and its regional economic communities and regional
mechanisms. At the national level, we also note that
close to half of the member States of the AU have put in
place national action plans in this area.

Our delegation welcomes these and other ongoing
efforts to respond to sexual violence, exploitation
and abuse. We particularly note the determination
to strengthen the system-wide approach through
enforcement of the existing United Nations zero-
tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse,
as well as such other accompanying initiatives as
the United Nations Action against Sexual Violence
in Conflict.

We also believe that enhanced coordination and
collaboration among all relevant stakeholders would
strengthen global efforts aimed at addressing sexual
violence. In this regard, we support, inter alia, the
work of UN-Women and the strengthened respective
mandates of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict. We therefore encourage
closer partnership with other relevant institutions
working in this area, such as the AU's Women, Gender
and Development Directorate and the Special Envoy on
Women, Peace and Security.

The Member States have the responsibility to
strengthen the capacities of their national institutions as
a critical means for ensuring accountability, prevention
and deterrence, including compliance with relevant
obligations to prosecute all perpetrators of all forms
of sexual violence, exploitation and abuse. Targeted
training programmes aimed at raising awareness
against gender-based violence and sexual exploitation
and abuse for personnel deployed in conflict situations
should remain central to these efforts.

Equally important is provision of adequate
protection for the rights and needs of victims of sexual
Violence in conflict environments. We believe that
victims deserve platforms where they can be involved
in processes of healing, rehabilitation, reconciliation
and reintegration into their societies. We therefore
support the continued emphasis on survivor-centred
responses. In this regard, we note the work of the Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence
in Conflict, mandated under resolution 1888 (2009),
to assist Governments with criminal investigation
and prosecution, protection of victims and witnesses,
and reparations.

In conclusion, Botswana pledges its commitment to
working with the international community on effective
strategies to prevent violence against women and
children in conflict situations. We remain optimistic
that, with our collective will, we can bring an end to
these shameful crimes against humanity.

