Mr. Guillermet-Fernandez (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): Costa Rica thanks the German presidency for
convening this open debate. We also thank the briefers
for their valuable contributions to this debate.

My delegation endorses the statement made earlier
by the representative of Qatar on behalf of the Group of
Friends on the Responsibility to Protect.

We also join others in condemning the horrendous
attacks committed in Sri Lanka this past Sunday. We
stand in solidarity with the Government and the people
of Sri Lanka.
Sexual violence is unacceptable at any time and
place, and its widespread use as a tactic of terror and a
weapon of war and terrorism is especially deplorable.
It is therefore essential to address its causes, as well
as the structural gaps in our systems, to ensure that
it is eradicated in a systematic and robust way. The
primary responsibility for protecting populations
rests with States, which must establish robust legal
and institutional frameworks in order to lay firm
foundations to prevent and address the existing gaps
in victim protection. While women and girls deserve
special attention, we must also expand the scope of
protection measures to include the most vulnerable
populations, including ethnic and religious minorities,
women in rural areas, women and girls associated with
armed groups, the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender
and intersex population and men and boys, who are
equally vulnerable to sexual violence. Sexual violence
as a cause of forced displacement is equally worrying,
as are the growing risks ofviolence in situations ofmass
movements, where migrants, refugees and displaced
persons are subject to sexual extortion, human
trafficking, assault and rape, among other abuses. It is
important to consider conflict-related sexual violence
when awarding refugee status or asylum, with policies
on victim assistance and the provision of adequate
protection for such populations.

Any act of sexual violence must be punished with
the utmost firmness through the rigorous application
of existing international legal mechanisms including, if
applicable, referral to the International Criminal Court,
with a View to completely eradicating impunity in
these cases. These acts ofviolence are war crimes, which
is why a rigorous zero-tolerance policy is required for
those who commit, order or condone sexual violence in
conflict situations.

Similarly, amnesties and immunities for this type
of crime should be prohibited, as should procedural
and evidentiary impediments to justice for victims,
especially the restrictive statute oflimitations for filing
complaints, as well as the intimidation or discrediting
of victims. Similarly, transitional justice arrangements
should be included in peace and ceasefire agreements.

The use of sanctions in cases of sexual violence in
the context of armed conflict and terrorism should be
consistent. For this to be effective, relevant sanctions
committees should deploy sexual and gender-based
violence specialists as part of their investigative work,
recommending measures applied under international
law to target all those involved in financing, planning
or supporting groups with connections to acts of sexual
violence, be they civilian or military.

Prevention is key. The systematic inclusion of
women's protection advisers in the strategic planning
processes of political missions, peace operations and
mediation is essential. We highlight the work done by
Justice Rapid Response in partnership with UN-Women
and its roster of judicial experts on gender-based
sexual violence in processes to ensure criminal justice
and accountability in conflict situations. In addition,
more women should be incorporated into national
police forces and political and peacekeeping missions,
with adequate training in prevention and response to
cases of sexual violence, in recognition of the positive
correlation between reporting rates of sexual violence
and the number of women in such contingents.

It is essential that all the foregoing efforts be
focused on the victims. There must therefore be a
guarantee of multisectoral assistance for survivors of
sexual Violence, including medical services, including
access to comprehensive sexual and reproductive health
care, as well as psychosocial and legal services. In this
regard, we regret that resolution 2467 (2019), adopted
today in the Council, excluded this provision on health,
since access to services and sexual and reproductive
health is essential to guarantee the dignity of the victim
of sexual violence.

Legal frameworks must be established at the national
level to protect victims and combat the stigma associated
with sexual violence and abuse, where reparations and
compensation are provided, taking into consideration
that different forms of sexual violence require different
solutions and responses. The meaningful participation
of survivors and civil society, including women's and
women-led organizations, should also be encouraged as
a central element of prevention.

Finally, it is essential to involve women and girls
in decision-making processes and leadership positions.
The lack of opportunities, the dearth ofnational policies
for their protection and inclusion, and structural
barriers in all areas that promote discrimination against
women perpetuate circles of poverty, exclusion and
cycles of violence, inhibiting the enjoyment of their
rights. We welcome the framework for cooperation
between the Office of the Special Representative and
the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of
Discrimination Against Women in recognition that
conflict-related sexual violence is intrinsically linked
to structural gender inequalities and discrimination. It
is therefore necessary to guarantee equal opportunities,
access to education and the economic, political and
social empowerment of women and girls so that they
can assume a transcendental and transforming role in
their communities during and after conflicts, enabling
them to regain their dignity and the full enjoyment of
their rights.

