Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation wishes to express its appreciation for
the presence of the Secretary-General at this meeting.
It is through his presence here that the report on
women, peace and security is being brought before the
Council. The report that is the basis of our work today
is undoubtedly the subject upon which the Security
Council will have to work in order to fulfil the
provisions of resolution 1325 (2000). We also want to
thank the Secretary General's Special Advisor on
Gender Issues and the Advancement of Women,
Angela King, for having supervised the preparation of
the study, and her staff and all the experts and bodies
that contributed to the preparation of the document,
including, in particular, international organizations and
non-governmental organizations that took part in the
Inter-Agency Task Force as observers. These two
documents, together with the UNIFEM. study by
independent experts - which will be published shortly
but whose recommendation have already been
publicized - will serve as guidance in achieving the
objectives of resolution 1325 (2000), which as the
Secretary-General has noted, is a historic resolution.

This research gives us a full and detailed picture
of the strong impact, both physical and psychological,
that armed conflicts have on the lives of women and
girl children, one that we should all regard as
intolerable. The documents also speak, inter alia, of the
role of women in promoting and building peace, and of
the importance of having the gender perspective
systematically integrated into peacekeeping operations.

At the same time, the documents present a
number of specific measures to strengthen and speed
up the achievement of the objectives and
recommendations of resolution 1325 (2000). My
delegation is of the view that it is important that
Members of the United Nations, the United Nations
system in its entirety, and civil society take into
account the Secretary-General's recommendations. We
should embrace them and begin to put them into effect
as soon as possible. The recommendations of the
independent experts, which concur with or supplement
those of the Secretary-General, are also valuable
instruments that will enable us to achieve their
objectives.

Once we have begun to put these
recommendations into practice, it will be necessary to
carry out detailed, regular and frequent follow-up of
the progress in fulfilling the objectives of resolution
1325 (2000). My delegation supports the
recommendations of the Secretary-General and is ready
to take an active part in the process of action and
follow-up so that the objectives set in the resolution
may be a central element in all the actions of the
United Nations in the interests of peace and security.

I wish to highlight some of the conclusions in the
Secretary-General's report which have caught the
attention of my delegation in particular, some of which
concur with what we stated at the Council's meeting on
the same item in July.

The report affirms what had ready been stated in
resolution 1325 (2000): the fact that women and
children suffer from the effects of armed conflict in a
different manner than men and boys, although,
generally speaking, civilian populations are the hardest
hit by current conflicts, in contrast to the aftermath
suffered in earlier ages. Women and girls are the
victims of all forms of violence, particularly sexual
violence and exploitation. Much of this aggression, as
the report indicates, enjoys the support of the high
command of the combatant forces and of the regular
armies. This is due to the fact that in most of today's
wars, women have effectively taken on a symbolic
value as military objectives. Thus my delegation
supports the recommendation of the Secretary-General
that peace agreements under the aegis of the United
Nations should rule out any possibility of amnesty for
those committing war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide, including gender-based crimes.
In addition to highlighting the special
vulnerability of women, the report recalls that women
may also play an active role in conflict and at times are
even responsible for acts of violence against other
civilians. Women are often rejected by their
communities of origin if they are associated with
former combatants, irrespective of whether the
association is a result of voluntary decision or of an
imposition.

Thus, women and girls need to be included in
programmes of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration into civilian life, and that reintegration
should be particularly stressed. It is important for such
programmes to include measures to prevent violence
within families, especially in families of former
combatants, in view of the clear tendency for violence
to be perpetuated or even intensified in post-conflict
periods. One factor that increases the risk of domestic
violence and violence against women in the post-
conflict period is the proliferation of small arms. For
this reason, women and girls often participate actively
in arms collection programmes.

The report also underlines the positive role that
women play in the promotion of peace. The way in
which they tend to be excluded from the formal peace
processes and the reasons for that are circumstances
that must change. One of the recommendations in the
report to remedy this situation specifically involves the
responsibility of the United Nations: that any peace
agreement sponsored by the Organization should
systematically and explicitly incorporate the gender
perspective, both in terms of recognition of the way in
which conflicts affect women and with respect to the
role women play in peace processes and their specific
needs in post-conflict phases.

Another recommendation is to ensure the
involvement of women in negotiations of peace
agreements at national and international levels. One of
the participants in the Arria-formula meeting that has
been referred to here, held a few days ago, was very
emphatic in that regard, noting that the United Nations
simply should not promote the negotiation of any peace
agreement which did not, from the start, include the
full participation of women. Such participation must
not be symbolic in nature. It is necessary for women
and women's organizations to be able to rely on
advisory services and training so that they can have a
real effect on the results of the negotiations.

One positive factor is the fact that, as is noted in
the report, international law and existing strategies and
guidelines within United Nations entities provide a
strong framework for addressing gender perspectives
within the context of armed conflict and its aftermath.
It is simply a matter of taking advantage of these
instruments, expanding their impact and associating
them continuously and systematically with Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000).

The report contains very specific
recommendations about the phase of reconstruction and
rehabilitation after a conflict. Among other aspects, it
highlights the need to develop clear strategies and
action plans on the incorporation of gender
mainstreaming in rehabilitation and reconstruction
programmes, which would need to include monitoring
mechanisms.

A fundamental factor in achieving sustainable
and lasting peace is ensuring that attention to gender
perspectives in economic reconstruction entails
analysis of economic policy-making from a gender
perspective, and increased participation for women in
economic decision-making along with incorporating
gender perspectives into all support for national budget
processes, in line with the outcome of the International
Conference on Financing for Development, held in
Monterrey.

My delegation would like to say that we have
previously spoken in favour of enhancing the
participation of women on all levels and in all aspects
of peacekeeping operations, in particular at the
decision-making level. Likewise we have voiced our
support for setting up a focal point for gender at United
Nations Headquarters, specifically within the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO),
along with the inclusion of gender specialists in
peacekeeping missions. In that regard, we welcome the
targets the Secretary-General will be setting for the
appointment of women as his special representatives
and special envoys, with the aim of achieving the
overall target of 50 per cent by the year 2015.

To ensure that the scale of the violations of the
human rights of women and girls in conflicts is
consistently recognized, the specific needs of women
in conflict and post-conflict situations must be
recognized and must receive the attention they deserve.
We must ensure that women have a better level of
participation in peace-building. In order to achieve all
of this, it is essential for the United Nations to
demonstrate leadership by systematically
mainstreaming the gender perspective within the
Organization itself.
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) and the
report and the study which stemmed from it have the
potential of arousing serious expectations in civil
society, specifically among women who have been
directly affected by conflicts. We have seen a clear
example of this at last week's Arria-formula meeting
when Ms. Angelina Atyam, of northern Uganda,
Chairperson of the Concerned Parents Association,
asked us how that resolution and subsequent Council
decisions could help end the violence committed
against civilians in that region by the so-called Lord's
Resistance Army, which led to the abduction and
disappearance of her daughter and of thousands of
other boys and girls. Those hopes must not be betrayed.
This represents a major challenge for the United
Nations and its Member States, and is yet one more
reason for us to work consistently towards achieving
the objectives set forth in resolution 1325 (2000).

