Ms. Colakovic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I wish
to thank your delegation once again, Mr. President, for
having convened this important open debate. I also thank
the Secretary-General; the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Zainab Hawa Bangura; and the NGO Working Group
on Women, Peace and Security for their very important
briefings today.

Bosnia and Herzegovina aligns itself with the
statement delivered today by the observer of the
European Union and welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2013/ 149) on the implementation
of Security Council resolutions on women, peace and
security and the recommendations contained therein.

Conflict and post-conflict situations are often
marked by violence and the deprivation of rights. In
armed conflicts, sexual violence represents one of
the most serious forms of violation of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
The lack of progress on the issue of sexual violence
in situations of armed conflict, in particular against
women and girls, remains of great concern for us. We
condemn all forms of crimes against women and girls,
and we emphasize the importance of bringing those
responsible for such crimes to justice. All parties to
armed conflict need to take appropriate measures to
protect civilians, especially women and children, from
all forms of sexual violence. It is essential to ensure that
all reports of sexual violence committed by civilians or
by military personnel be thoroughly investigated and
the alleged perpetrators brought to justice.

Bosnia and Herzegovina attaches the utmost
importance to confronting the grave issue of sexual
violence and is particularly encouraged by the
commitment of the Security Council to keep the matter
on its agenda. That commitment was unequivocally
demonstrated by the adoption of resolutions 1820
(2008), 1888 (2009) and 1894 (2009), which paved the
way for concrete action aimed at preventing sexual
violence. We fully support the work of the United
Nations in addressing sexual violence in armed conflict,
particularly that of UN-Women, and the mandates of
the Secretary-General's Special Representatives on
Children in Armed Conflict and on Sexual Violence in
Conflict.

We underscore the responsibility of States
and parties to conflict to observe and uphold their
international obligations and respect international
humanitarian law, which grants special protection to
women and children.

Involving women in conflict prevention and
mediation is therefore essential to building peace and
reinforcing the foundations of democracy. Women's
participation remains low in both the official and
observer roles. We therefore need to intensify all our
efforts to ensure women's full participation in the
processes of conflict prevention and resolution, the
maintenance and promotion of peace and security,
and early peacebuilding and post-conflict planning, as
well as in enhancing women's role in decision-making
processes.

Integrating a gender perspective into peacekeeping
policies and the promotion of women's participation
in United Nations peacekeeping operations is
fundamental to a more effective performance on the
ground. Recruiting women in the civil, military and
police components of peacekeeping missions can
encourage local women to report incidents of sexual
violence and can also contribute to establishing better
communication with local communities. We will
spare no effort to advance on that issue. The relevant
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina have adopted a
policy that one third of the nominated candidates for
peacekeeping missions must be women.

We believe that countries should work on adopting
national action plans or strategies in order to integrate
issues related to women and peace and security, and
gender issues, into their national policies and create
a broader basis for the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). Moreover, it is also important to increase
State institutions and services' knowledge and capacity
in order to implement the resolution and collaborate
effectively with international organizations and
civil society. Here I would recall that Bosnia and
Herzegovina has adopted both a national action plan
for the resolution's implementation and a gender action
plan. Those two documents are crucial to streamlining
activities related to the women and peace and security
agenda in the relevant sectors and to accelerating the
resolution's implementation in our country.

With the aim of improving the overall situation of
women victims of rape, the Ministry for Human Rights
and Refugees of Bosnia and Herzegovina is finalizing
the drafting of the document entitled "Programme for the
victims of rape, sexual abuse and torture in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, 2013-2016", which will seek to improve
the position of all the victims. One of the goals of the
programme emphasizes the obligation of the State to
provide access to reparations programmes for victims
of war and the need to provide legal and psychological
support to victims and witnesses during and after court
proceedings. The draft strategy on transitional justice
has been prepared, and we are currently in the process
of obtaining the opinions of all levels of Government in
that respect.

Finally, we would like to point out that the
international community has taken noteworthy steps,
including the adoption of the relevant resolutions,
to tackle the issue of sexual violence. But more
importantly, the time has come to start converting
commitments and promises into real actions on the
ground to prevent violence, protect individuals, punish
perpetrators and provide redress to Victims. Bosnia and
Herzegovina stands ready to contribute to those efforts.

