Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM).

First of all, I would like to praise Angola for having
taken the initiative of organizing this debate on the
role of women in conflict prevention and resolution
in Africa and for having prepared the concept paper
(S/2016/219, annex). I also thank the briefers.

Women's call for peace has been unfailing and
widespread. They play an important role in conflict
prevention and resolution. Their participation is
generally crucial to the effectiveness of all peace and
security efforts when they are meaningfully involved.
As the concept paper suggests, in cases where women's
groups are able to exercise a strong influence on
the negotiation process, the chances of reaching an
agreement are higher and sustainability increases
by at least 20 per cent and continues to grow over
time. Women have proven to be pertinent partners in
discussions on the prevention and resolution of conflict,
the maintenance ofpeace and security, and post-conflict
peacebuilding. Women's participation in conflict
prevention in Africa has facilitated a more inclusive
appreciation of the causes of and alternative solutions
to conflict. Women's inputs into conflict prevention
continue to bolster actions that address varying needs,
thereby creating broader buy-ins to peace accords and
ultimately producing sustainable peace.

In Africa, several mechanisms, policies and
structures have created an environment enabling
women to play a key role in peace and security. The
2003 Protocol to the African Charter on Human and
Peoples' Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa and
the 2004 Solemn Declaration on Gender Equality in
Africa committed African Union member States to the
full and effective participation and representation of
women in peace processes, including the prevention,
resolution and management of conflicts and post-
conflict reconstruction in Africa, as stipulated in
resolution 1325 (2000).

Women across Africa are also playing unparalleled
roles in early warning and the prevention of violence,
including election-related violence, and they have
developed innovative platforms for peaceful elections
in several countries preparing sensitive elections. At the
same time, there are various obstacles and challenges
that prevent the full integration of those endeavours
into more formal approaches and policies. A limited
degree of gender analysis of conflict and peace factors,
the sparse inclusion of gender issues in early warning
initiatives and the recurrent challenge of providing
a timely response to indicators of conflict often lead
to ignoring information both from and about women
that can help devise comprehensive and sustainable
response strategies.

We welcome General Assembly resolution 66/255,
on civilian capacity in the aftermath of conflict
in support of national capacities for post-conflict
peacebuilding and efforts to broaden and deepen
the pool of experts, giving particular attention to
mobilizing the capacities of developing countries, in
particular among women, as vital to successful United
Nations peacebuilding activities. In that regard, we
underline that the Secretariat's effective outreach for
those purposes should be undertaken in accordance
with the existing rules and regulations and in close
consultation with Member States. NAM. hopes that
this open debate will contribute to ongoing efforts to
integrate the women, peace and security agenda into
conflict prevention, with a focus on Africa.

