Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
want to thank you, Madam President, for organizing
this important open debate on the issue of sexual
Violence in conflict, an issue to which my delegation
attaches great importance and which, unfortunately,
remains very topical. I thank the Secretary-General
for the presentation of his second annual report on
sexual violence in conflict (S/2013/l49). I also thank
Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura for her very committed
statement and the remarkable work she has carried out
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
with the support of the Team of Experts on the Rule
of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict. Finally,
I would like to thank Ms. Saran Keita Diakite of
Mali, who delivered a strong message on behalf of
non-governmental organizations on the need to combat
sexual violence, in particular in crisis areas in Africa.

With resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and
1960 (2010), we have given ourselves the means to act
in the fight against the scourge of sexual violence in
conflict. Today's open debate is an opportunity to take
stock of the implementation of those resolutions and the
challenges that lie ahead.

I fully align myself with the statement soon to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union.

The evidence is clear: sexual violence in conflict
spares no one. It affects adults and children, men as
well as women, as evidenced by the increasingly
frequent acts of sexual violence against men and boys
as a tactic of war or in the context of incarceration
or interrogation. The violence documented in Syria,
Mali and the Democratic Republic of Congo is the sad
illustration of those facts.

The situations of sexual violence in conflict are
varied and widespread. That is why it is important for
the Security Council to choose, from the arsenal at its
disposal, the tools most suited to the different situations.

The Council's actions set an example, and its
responsibility in this area is essential. That is clear in
the explicit references to the agenda on women and
peace and security in the agreed conclusions recently
adopted by the Commission on the Status of Women,
whose main theme, as I recall, was the elimination and
prevention of all forms of violence against women.

Less than a week ago, I am pleased to say, the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Group of Eight
in London adopted a declaration on preventing sexual
violence in conflict, which explicitly seeks to carry
forward resolution 1325 (2000) and its successors, and
contributes to the normative framework of resolutions
on children and armed conflict. That declaration rightly
recalls once again that the promotion and protection of
the human rights and fundamental freedoms of women
and children are at the foundation of our fight against
sexual violence in conflict.

The Council must be fully informed before acting,

which is why it is so important to establish follow-up,
analysis and information-exchange mechanisms within
peacekeeping operations and political missions and to
provide for the deployment of sufficient numbers of
women protection advisers, who have a crucial role
to play in the coordination of the implementation of
Security Council resolutions on conflict-related sexual
violence. Luxemburg will remain committed to ensuring
that future mandates, as well as the renewal of existing
mandates, take into consideration this important aspect.
As the Secretary-General underscored this morning, it
is important to constantly incorporate that aspect into
mission planning and budgeting.

Once the perpetrators of sexual violence have
been identified, the Council can and must, through the
adoption of targeted measures, step up pressure on those
responsible so that they are brought to justice before
a competent court and judged. The Council should be
able to draw on such an instrument systematically, in
our view, following the practices established by the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004), concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo for the inclusion on Sanctions Committee lists of
those suspected of acts of sexual violence. Information
provided by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General would be highly useful in that regard.
It is under national jurisdictions that perpetrators
should primarily be tried, and we must therefore
support national Governments in their fight against
impunity. Based on the principle of complementarity,
international criminal justice still has an important
role to play, and we very much welcome the efforts
undertaken in that regard by the International Criminal
Court.

In that context, it is noteworthy that a second
arrest warrant has been issued against General Bosco
Ntaganda, incorporating the major accusations of
crimes against humanity, rape and sexual slavery.
Today, Bosco Ntaganda is in The Hague to be judged
for his crimes. I would like to take this opportunity to
thank all Member States that contributed to his transfer
to the Court.

Every victory against impunity is a victory against
sexual violence, for only the certainty that a crime will
not go unpunished is a real deterrent. The fight against
impunity is also the first step in reinstating the rights
of victims. It is not the only step: it is also necessary to
take measures such as granting compensation to repair,
as far as possible, the consequences of the damage
caused.

We know the extent to which crisis resolution and
post-conflict situations are volatile and precarious.
That is why it is important once again to ensure the
involvement of women in peace processes so that peace
and ceasefire agreements fully and systematically take
into account the issue of sexual violence.

The fight against sexual violence must also be
integrated into all security sector and justice reform
processes worthy of the name. In that regard, Luxemburg
has supported a number of workshops, including in
South Sudan and Liberia, aimed at strengthening
the contribution of United Nations peacekeeping
operations to the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). In particular, they sought to ensure that women
were better represented at all decision-making levels
in national, regional and international institutions
and mechanisms for the prevention, management and
resolution of conflicts.

Conflict-related sexual violence is not inevitable.
But to bring it to an end, we must take into account
the magnitude of this scourge. The alarming report
before us today makes it cleat that sexual violence in
conflict, although it varies with context, is systematic
and universally widespread. It is up to us all to take on
our responsibility to bring it to an end.
In conclusion, we hope that today's debate, the
Special Representative's briefings to the Council on
specific situations, such as that on Syria tomorrow, as
well as the discussions the Council will hold over the
coming months on this topic will enable real results
to be achieved. In terms of follow-up, it would be
particularly worthwhile to establish, as proposed by the
Secretary-General, a system that would better enable us
to monitor the fulfilment of commitments undertaken
to fight sexual violence by the parties to a conflict in
implementation of resolution 1960 (2010).

