Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for holding
this important debate. We also extend our thanks to
Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed and to
all of the briefers for their valuable contributions.

This year's report (S/2017/249) of the Secretary-
General on conflict-related sexual violence was issued
after the adoption, last December, of resolution 2331
(2016), the first Security Council resolution on human
trafficking in situations of armed conflict. That
report condemns all of the aims of human trafficking,
including sexual exploitation, which in most cases are
being pursued by extremist terrorist groups that seek to
terrorize civilians and/or generate revenue by enslaving
women and girls, in particular those belonging to ethnic
or racial minorities, and by selling those women like
goods at the market. In that connection, Egypt would
like to make the following points.

First, it is crucial that the reports of the Secretary-
General on conflict-related sexual violence respect the
limits and duration of the mandates assigned by the
Council in conflict and post-conflict situations.

Secondly, we support the efforts aimed at promoting
the contributions of women in decision-making and
political processes through investments in training
and capacity-building programmes, as well as
the documentation and spread of information on
the contributions that women are able to make in
peacekeeping operations. Since 2009, Egypt has made
political and military contributions through our female
staff deployed on mission in the Sudan and Western
Sahara, as well as in the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur.

Thirdly, it is important to bear sexual violence in
mind in the national training of peacekeeping staff. In
that regard, the regional centre in Cairo has worked to
promote the resolution of conflict and the maintenance
of peace in Africa, in coordination with the Egyptian
Defence Ministry. The centre addresses the fight against
sexual violence in conflict in meetings for Egyptian
personnel prior to their deployment to United Nations
peacekeeping forces. Since that element was included
in the training curriculum, 3,600 staff of all ranks have
been trained. The centre has also organized 12 basic
courses on the concept of gender in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. These sessions have been offered to
some 3,600 military, police and civilian staff.

Fourthly, we welcome the measures taken by the
United Nations to address sexual violence in armed
conflict, including an increase in the number of
women protection advisers in the field. It is essential
that we consolidate and build on national institutional
capacities and launch the United Nations initiative to
combat sexual violence.

Fifthly, we are committed to the Secretary-
General's policy of zero tolorance for crimes of sexual
exploitation. We are pursuing our work with the
Security Council and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations to end all violence against women in
peacekeeping operations. We also expect the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
pursue the efforts ofhis or her predecessor in the context
of the Special Representative's mandate to resolve
issues of sexual exploitation and abuse committed
by United Nations or other forces deployed under the
United Nations flag.

Sixthly, we welcome the work of the Team of
Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict, particularly with respect to strengthening
the capacity of States in armed conflict or in the post-
conflict period in criminal investigations, military
justice, the preparation of witnesses and the provision
of compensation to victims. It is also important to pool
international efforts to assist religious and national
leaders in raising the awareness of communities
of the need to reject stereotypes and to fight the
stigmatization of victims of sexual violence, thereby
ensuring that the terrorists and extremists will lose the
ideological battle and fail in their attempts to legitimize
rape from a religious point of view. We know the role
played by religious leaders against fatwas issued by
terrorist organizations against the status of women in
conflict areas.

Finally, the reports of the Secretary-General on
conflict-related sexual violence must respect their
mandates established by the relevant Security Council
resolutions in order to achieve the stated goals.
Egypt reaffirms the importance of deepening the
understanding of States of the phenomenon of sexual
violence as a tactic of war and terrorism in order to
officially recognize that the victims of sexual violence
are indeed victims and the need for an anti-terrorism
strategy and to provide the necessary reparations to
those victims.

