Mr. Bairagi (Nepal): Let me congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for the month of October. I would also like
to take this opportunity to express my sincere
appreciation to you for organizing this timely meeting.
I also thank the Secretary-General for presenting his
comprehensive report on peacebuilding in the
immediate aftermath of conflict (S/2010/386) and on
women's participation in peacebuilding (S/2010/466).

Building peace is far more than just making and
keeping the peace. It is a multifaceted and long-term
task that requires national commitment, ownership and
coordinated, coherent and integrated international
support. Building national capacity to take charge of
governance and development activities is fundamental
to the peacebuilding task. Peacebuilding interposes
itself between security and development, and it takes
the two aspects together to ensure the sustainability of
peace in countries emerging from conflict. It is
therefore important that we look at both aspects clearly
and coherently.

A one-size-fits-all approach does not work in
peacebuilding. The international community has to
look into the socio-cultural, economic and political
aspects with deep insight in order to ensure the success
of the mission.
Continued political dialogues among stakeholders,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
security sector reforms, legislative reform and
institution-building for governance are part of the
transformation process.

The working group on lessons learned of the
Peacebuilding Commission has come out with a
recommendation that the implementation of quick-
impact projects is critically important. This is
necessary to deliver something concrete for conflict-
stricken people in the form of peace dividends.
Unemployed youth in the immediate aftermath of
conflict are a great source of trouble and violence.
Youth employment, income-generating rural work and
essential services must receive the highest priority.
This will greatly contribute to creating an environment
for sustained peace and economic growth.

The efforts of the national and international
community in the early post-conflict period should
ensure predictable support in the core areas of
peacebuilding, namely, basic safety and security,
support to the political process, the provision of basic
services, restoring core government functions and
economic revitalization. A fair balance between them is
necessary to quickly stabilize the situation.

The United Nations is not a lone player in the
field of peacebuilding. International financial
institutions, particularly the World Bank, regional
organizations and civil society organizations have
important roles to play on their respective fields. To
strengthen the coordination between the United
Nations and the World Bank, my delegation supports
the call for creating a mechanism for regular,
headquarters-level consultations on crisis and post-
crisis countries of common concern on the basis of the
2008 Partnership Framework Agreement.

Women should not be on the receiving end of the
pains of conflict, with all the psycho-social trauma and
stigmatization that entails. They are peacemakers and
they are the very foundation of social cohesion and the
long-term sustainability of peace. They are an inherent
part of the reconstruction and rebuilding of any
country. The adoption of resolutions 1325 (2000) and
1820 (2008) have not only drawn the attention of all
Member States to act concertedly for protecting women
and children from violence during conflicts, but also
emphasized the role of women as peacemakers and
peacebuilders.
The report of the Secretary-General rightly
identified women's role as partners in shoring up the
three pillars of lasting peace: economic recovery, social
cohesion and political legitimacy. We support a greater
role for women in peacebuilding, including the
promotion of gender equality within the work of the
United Nations. The legal provision for ensuring
women's representation in political bodies, gender
mainstreaming, empowerment, affirmative action and
targeted programmes are some of the essential
measures to bring women to the forefront of every
walk of life.

The 2010 review process of the Peacebuilding
Commission has provided an excellent opportunity to
engage all Member States and other interested
stakeholders in seriously taking stock of the
achievements and constraints of the United Nations
involvement in peacebuilding. The time has come to
redouble our efforts to make the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture more effective and efficient
in order to meet the aspirations of conflict-stricken
people for peace, stability and sustained economic
growth. They need constant attention here and an
enhanced level of support to stabilize the situation and
make peace sustainable.

We believe that the Peacebuilding Commission
needs to be fully consulted by the Security Council
whenever the country in question is discussed here. As
the Peacebuilding Commission's co-parents, we have
also asked for stronger coordination with the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council.
Similarly, we call for the integration of peacebuilding
work in peacekeeping operations early on, so that early
efforts at peacebuilding-related work will help stabilize
the situation sooner rather than later.

