Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I would like to
commend Uganda, as President of the Security
Council, on the initiative to commemorate the tenth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000). Allow me also,
Sir, to very warmly greet President Michelle Bachelet,
to congratulate her on her appointment to head UN
Women and to assure her of Portugal's full support in
her demanding tasks.

Portugal naturally shares the views that will be
expressed by the representative of the European Union
later regarding the implementation of the resolution,
but let me underline some aspects of particular
significance to my country.

As so many before me have said today, resolution
1325 (2000) is a landmark in recognizing the urgent
need to mainstream a gender perspective in the
prevention, management and resolution of armed
conflicts and in all stages of peacebuilding processes.
Portugal believes that important progress has been
accomplished in the implementation of the resolution
and the other important resolutions that have followed.

However, we all recognize that significant
challenges still remain. On the one hand, women are
still underrepresented at all levels of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding efforts and are poorly represented in
formal peace negotiations. On the other hand, violation
of the human rights of women is still a dominant
feature of conflict, and sexual violence is too often
widespread in both conflict and in post-conflict
situations.

It is our shared understanding that women are
indispensable actors of change and development.
Therefore, it is fundamental to overcome the traditional
view of those actors as mere vulnerable victims in need
of protection and to implement measures that guarantee
that their perspective is taken into account at all stages
of peacebuilding processes by the international and
local actors involved. Indeed, women have a crucial
role to play in rebuilding war-torn societies and in
promoting social cohesion.

In that context, we should seize this opportunity
to reaffirm our commitment to ensuring women's
effective participation in peace and security and to
translate that commitment into enhanced action. This
open debate of the Security Council and the many side
events that are taking place this week are an excellent
opportunity to review the progress achieved in
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), to recognize
our main achievements but also our shortcomings, and
to discuss how we can boost its impact on the ground.

Portugal will certainly continue to pursue the
objectives set out in the resolution and to increase its
own accountability. We stand ready to contribute to
that process in the forthcoming months in the Security
Council. In that area, as in many others, the
international community has to move in a concerted
way with an integrated approach.

Portugal strongly believes that national action
plans constitute an important mechanism to accelerate
progress in implementing resolution 1325 (2000). A
year ago, we adopted a national action plan that
encompasses our commitment to its implementation
and corresponds to the consolidation of a gender
perspective in national politics. Under that action plan,
we have established five main strategic objectives,
translated into 30 specific objectives, for which
implementation, monitoring and evaluation
mechanisms have been identified and developed.

The first of the five main objectives is to increase
women's participation and to mainstream gender
equality in all phases of peacebuilding processes and at
all levels of decision-making. The second is to promote
capacity-building for those involved in peacebuilding
and development aid efforts with regard to gender
equality and gender-based violence, as well as other
aspects covered by resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008).

The third objective is to promote and protect
women's human rights in conflict areas and in post-
conflict scenarios, taking into consideration the need,
on the one hand, to prevent and eliminate all gender-
based violence perpetrated against women and girls
and, on the other, to promote the empowerment of
women, both politically and economically, and their
participation in all post-conflict activities.

The fourth objective is to invest in and
disseminate knowledge on issues concerning women
and peace and security, including training and
awareness-raising actions among decision makers and
the broader public. The final objective is to promote
the active participation of civil society in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and in the
national action plan.

As I have stressed before, Portugal remains
available to engage with the United Nations and other
international actors in sharing experiences and good
practices that allow us to move forward in this decisive
area.

