Mr. Tsymbaliuk (Ukraine): I thank you, Sir,
for giving the floor to Ukraine to contribute to this
important and timely debate. Let me also thank all
briefers for their important messages.

Ukraine is alarmed by the fact that civilians
continue to account for the majority of casualties in
conflicts. Many of those civilians are women and girls.
The high number ofinternally displaced persons (IDPs)
is disturbing as well.

The year 2015 marks 15 years since the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), which established the basis
for the women and peace and security agenda and
called for special protection for, and the full and equal
participation of, women in all conflict prevention,
resolution and post-conflict peacebuilding efforts. The
resolution has proven to be an effective instrument
for Member States to implement their policies in this
important area. We look forward to the global review of
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in 2015.
We hope that it will provide additional impetus to fulfil
all our commitments on women and peace and security.

Ukraine actively supports the efforts of States
Members of the United Nations on the implementation
of resolution 2122 (2013) on the need to address the
full range of human rights violations and abuses
experienced by women in armed conflict and post-
conflict situations.

Ukraine is very alarmed at the latest United Nations
reports on the violence in countries where women have
been directly targeted and disproportionately affected
by mass displacement. We fully agree that women's
rights are under threat and that the role of women in
countering terrorism and extremism is underutilized.

A national action plan in accordance with
resolution 1325 (2000) to promote women's full and
equal participation in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts, peacebuilding and peacekeeping and
incorporate a gender perspective in all areas of
peacebuilding is being developed by the Government
of Ukraine in close consultation with United Nations
agencies and civil society. We expect the plan to be
adopted in Ukraine this year and we are ready for its
full implementation.

The terrorist groups armed and supported by the
Russian Federation continue to act openly in the east
of Ukraine. Civilians, including women and children,
continue to die from Russian bullets and shells that
are illegally brought into the country. According to the
latest official statistics, the number of the internally
displaced persons in Ukraine due to Russian aggression
stands at 921,640 people.

About two thirds of adult IDPs are women. The
Government fully understands their specific needs, as
most IDP families include elderly and unaccompanied
women with children. In that regard, the law on IDPs
was adopted in Ukraine on 20 October 2014, and was
welcomed by the international community, including
the Office ofthe United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees. The law is aimed at ensuring the rights and
freedoms of IDPs, including women, and at addressing
key issues in this area, including through facilitating
humanitarian assistance.

In its recent report, the United Nations Human
Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine finds that, in
the Donetsk region, women comprise about 15 per cent
of those killed and 15 per cent of those wounded as a
result of the conflict. There have also been incidents of
abductions and sexual violence by illegal armed groups
whose whereabouts remain unknown.

We are particularly alarmed by the fact that people in
the territory of Ukraine are being abducted and illegally
transferred to the Russian Federation for interrogation.
Ukrainian servicewoman Nadiya Savchenko, captured
in the Luhansk region in July last year, remains in a
detention facility in the Russian Federation without
any legal grounds and has been subjected to inhuman
practices that constitute a flagrant violation of
international law and a breach of obligations under
bilateral treaties. Even after obtaining international
immunity as a member of the Parliamentary Assembly
of the Council of Europe, Nadiya Savchenko remains
in prison.

The most ironic and bullying aspect of this situation
is that Savchenko is now being charged by the Russian
authorities for illegally crossing the Russian border. We
demand the immediate release of Nadiya Savchenko
and will make every effort to ensure that those involved
in her abduction and illegal detention are brought to
justice.

