Mr. Errazuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
congratulates India on its presidency and thanks it for
having convened this important open debate in the
Security Council on women and peace and security.

My delegation thanks the Deputy Secretary-
General for having introduced the report (S/2012/732),
as well as the Executive Director of UN-Women
Michelle Bachelet for her statement, and Mr. Herve'
Ladsous and Ms. Bineta Diop.

The present debate is without a doubt an opportunity
to strengthen action in the implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda. This year's theme
reflects the central role played by women's groups in
the implementation of this agenda and the work they
carry out in favour of peace and the empowerment of
women.

Twelve years after the adoption of the historic
resolution 1325 (2000), the Council has continued to
make progress in providing guidance for the greater
protection of women in armed conflict situations.
Nevertheless, it can be seen that the situation of
women in conflict and post-conflict situations has
not improved. Likewise, many women's organizations
around the world face particular risks and challenges,
especially those in violent situations.

The international community bore witness to the
case of Malala Yousafzai. In that regard, we view
women human rights defenders are often targets of
attack in conflict situations, which is greater protection
and support are need for the participation of women and
girls in peace processes and reconstruction.

The report of the Secretary-General presents
the progress made since last year relating to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in four areas
of action: prevention, participation, protection, and
relief and recovery. It also covers the steps announced
with a view to improving monitoring and evaluation
systems aimed at fulfilling commitments relating to
women and peace and security.

It should be underscored that in 2008 my
country established a working group, composed of
representatives of the Ministries for Foreign Affairs
and of National Defence, the National Service for
Women and civil society organizations, with the aim
of developing a national action plan in keeping with the
requirements of resolution 1325 (2000). In that regard,
we have sought to create an action plan through an
inclusive process of open and participatory discussions
to faithfully represent the interests of our society.
The Chilean national action plan covers a range
of actions aimed at promoting the inclusion of gender
perspective in the understanding of and approach
to conflict-prevention and post-conflict processes;
respecting, guaranteeing and protecting the rights of
women and girls; and generating conditions for the
equitable participation of women in peace processes
and decision-making with regard to international peace
and security.

In our View, it is important to promote the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) through the
exchange of experiences and international cooperation,
both bilaterally and within the regional peacekeeping
mechanisms in which Chile participates, in particular
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti. We
also believe it is important to join forces and pool
resources to collect data and provide technical support
so as to improve indicators for the adequate monitoring
and evaluation of national action plans.

The universal promotion of fundamental human
rights is one of the basic principles of Chile's foreign
policy. In that regard, we will continue to join ongoing
efforts to ensure women's participation in and
contribution to conflict prevention and mediation.

