Mr. Mnatsakanyan (Armenia): I wish to thank
you very much, Madam President, for having initiated
the present open debate and providing an excellent
concept note (S/2017/889, annex). We thank Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres for his comprehensive report
of 16 October (S/2017/861), and we recognize and
support the consistency of the policy recommendations

and conclusions contained in the report with the overall
priorities and reform agenda of the Secretary-General.

At such an important stocktaking open debate
of the Security Council on the past 17 years of the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda of the United Nations, Armenia reiterates
its full commitment to the resolute pursuit of such a
transformative agenda and the consistent strengthening
of the link between the empowerment of women and the
sustainability of peace and development at the national,
regional and international levels. At the national level,
the implementation of our strategic action plan on
gender policy and on combating gender-based violence
is a continuous works in progress.

Shortly, my Government will be presenting to the
Parliament a draft law on the prevention of domestic
violence and the protection of victims. Our national laws
and provisions of equal rights and equal opportunities
for women and men and identifying and assisting
victims of trafficking and human exploitation, as well
as numerous other legal and normative acts, remain
important instruments for the promotion of gender
equality and the protection of the rights of women.
Gender equality and the empowerment of women
received considerable prominence in Armenia's overall
national strategy and action plan for the promotion and
protection of human rights.

Following the adoption of a new Constitution in
2015 and the new electoral code in 2016, the quota
for women's representation in elected bodies has been
raised to 25 per cent from 20 per cent. There is an
aim to gradually increase that figure to 30 per cent by
2021. Presently, the representation of women in our
national Parliament stands at nearly 20 per cent, which
is a considerable increase from the previous level of
11 per cent. Promoting gender balance in the judiciary
represents another important priority for Armenia. As
a result of the implementation of our respective national
action plan, the number of female judges has reached
25 per cent.

The empowerment of women and the promotion of
their rights represent an important agenda in Armenia's
work within regional and international bodies.
Presently, the Government is considering modalities for
setting up a working group for the implementation of
Armenia's international commitments, including those
stemming from the national report on Beijing + 20 and
its concluding observations. Furthermore, domestic

procedures have been launched to sign the Council
of Europe Convention on preventing and combating
violence against women and domestic violence.

I am also glad to inform the Council about
the setting up of an inter-agency working group
for the elaboration of a national action plan on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), with a view
to its adoption in 2018. In 2015 and 2016, the Minister
of Defence of Armenia, in collaboration with the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and the United Nations
Population Fund, initiated and conducted workshops on
the national implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
The publication in 2016 of a reference book on women
and the army, as well as the elaboration of a concept
note and a draft action plan that is to be approved soon
by the Minister of Defence concerning women's rights
and equal opportunities in the field of defence, are
important building blocks in Armenia's national efforts
for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
In all of our work, the Government of Armenia
relies heavily on the strong engagement, cooperation
and contributions of its very vibrant civil society
organizations, particularly those dealing with
issues of women. We strongly commend and thank
our civil society activists for their important work
and commitment.

We support the Secretary-General's observations
about the need to elevate the women and peace and
security agenda to systemic, large-scale, transformative
programmes and approaches to preventing conflict
and sustaining peace. Overall, that resonates strongly
with the Secretary-General's concept of placing
prevention at the heart of the actions of the United
Nations - a concept that we support. In that respect, the
empowerment of women, the promotion and protection
of women's rights in general and, in particular, the
women and peace and security agenda should not be
viewed as a standalone agenda. Rather, it should be
firmly viewed as an indispensable and integral part
of the broader objective of securing durable solutions
to crisis situations and addressing the root causes of
violence and conflicts. Gender-based vulnerability
often represents an exacerbating factor in targeting
groups on the grounds of their broader identities, such
as, for example, national, ethnic, religious or racial
identities. The reinforced emphasis on the promotion
and protection of all human rights, the strengthening
of national institutions to that end and reinforced
international corporation to promote the human rights
agenda remain significant objectives, both at national
and international levels.

In conclusion, Armenia particularly underlines the
role of women in establishing an environment conducive
to the peaceful resolution of conflicts and promoting
confidence-building among conflicting parties. We
recognize the significance of the role of civil society
organizations, in particular women-led organizations,
for that purpose. Armenia consistently emphasizes the
importance of dialogue and confidence-building in
the context of the peaceful settlement of the Nagorno
Karabakh conflict. However, meaningful effort to
promote such dialogue and confidence-building
measures is considerably undermined by persistently
flaring hate speech, intolerance, xenophobia and
ethnic profiling of Armenians. The glorification of
hate crimes, especially encouraged by the political
leadership in the neighbouring States, as well as
violence and the imprisonment of human rights
defenders, including women.

Armenia remains firmly committed to the
peace process and reiterates its deep appreciation
for the support of the international community, of
the Council and of the Secretary-General for the
efforts of the co-Chairs of the Minsk Group of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
In the context of the present debate, we recognize and
underline the significant role of women as catalysts for
sustainable peace.

