Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): It is an
honour to have you, the German Federal Minister of
Defence, among us today, Madam President, presiding
over the Security Council during the joint presidencies
of the Council. France and Germany have made the
women and peace and security agenda a top priority, as
demonstrated by our open debate with you as President
today. We are particularly grateful to you for that. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General, Major
General Kristin Lund and Ms. Lorna Merekaje for their
very insightful briefings and their commitment to the
women and peace and security agenda, which are a
source of inspiration for us. I would like to reiterate our
full support to the Secretary-General and his team for
the ambitious and effective strategy that he has put in
place to achieve parity within the United Nations.

I also associate myself with the statements to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union and
the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends ofWomen and Peace and Security. The Security
Council should step up its efforts to still further
integrate the women and peace and security agenda into
peacekeeping operations. Significant progress has been
made but we must do more to truly place that agenda at
the centre of peacekeeping operations.

In mandates, that integration covers several
realities: from prevention and protection against sexual
violence in times of conflict to women's participation
in political processes. We must continue to promote that
comprehensive approach in particular by ensuring the
deployment of gender and women protection advisers.
We all know that that is an ongoing task both in the
Council and the Fifth Committee. During a ministerial
meeting on the margins of the General Assembly, the
Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs, Mr. Jean-
Yves Le Drian, recalled that peacekeepers "engage
in situations in which no nation is ready to engage
alone". We must therefore ensure that the necessary
training and logistical support are provided not only to
those men but also increasingly to the women who are
committed to peace.

Secondly, the increasing participation of women in
peacekeeping operations is essential to the success of
our agenda and to peacekeeping operations themselves.
As is clearly documented, the increased participation of
women directly helps to strengthen the effectiveness of
operations. It is true that in all fields, across the board,
the added value is particularly strong in areas such as
access to local communities and victims' access to care
and justice, to take just two examples among many
others. More generally, no position should be reserved
only for men.

Progress has been made but it is still insufficient.
That must be said. There are still 27 units without
women, compared to 49 last year. Women represent
5 per cent of the troops and 8 per cent of the police
contingents, which is still far from the goals set by
the Council. It is primarily the troop-contributing
countries that should fully assume that responsibility.
The feminization rate of French troops in peacekeeping
operations was 5.5 per cent in 2018, which is already a
higher rate than the United Nations target of 5.25 per
cent for 2019. In February, the rate was 8.4 per cent.
That is significant progress but, of course, much
remains to be done. We are the first to say it, including
with regard to us. We must in particular increase the
number of women appointed to staff officer positions.

For States to assume that responsibility, as you,
Madam President, said, they must lead a real paradigm
shift in their national armies. That is what France is
firmly doing, with conditions and in a voluntary way.
The French army now has one of the highest levels of
women's participation in the world, with a rate of 20 per
cent overall and 15.5 per cent for military personnel.
France wants to go further. On 7 March, the eve of
International Women's Rights Day, the Minister of
the Armed Forces, your colleague Florence Parly,
announced a gender-equity plan to support France's
operational performance, which has three main
objectives: to recruit women, to retain them throughout
their careers and to promote gender diversity in the
armed forces. Those goals will be achieved through
very concrete measures, such as women's participation
in military leadership or a new approach to access to
ranks and responsibilities.

As our Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Le Drian, recalled, the involvement of women
in our national army and peace operations will be
integrated into our third national plan to implement
resolution 1325 (2000), which is currently being
drafted, and specific cooperation actions will be
undertaken in that direction. France also supports the
participation of women in police and military training
schools in several African countries, including courses
on violence against women and girls and on the role of
women in mediation.

Member States can count on France to continue
to actively promote women's participation in
peacekeeping operations and in the overall women
and peace and security agenda. The President of the
Republic, Mr. Emmanuel Macron, expressed the wish
that equality between women and men, a major national
cause of the five-year period, would also become a
major international cause. That was a priority goal of
our presidency of the Security Council in March. It is
also a priority of our current presidency of the Group
of Seven. The anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) in
2020 and the Beijing + 25 forum, which will take place
in France the same year, provide a unique opportunity
to give a fresh impetus to that agenda, despite the odds,
and to ultimately enable its full implementation.

To echo the words of Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie,
we should all be feminists, including those on the
Security Council. The agenda that we are discussing
today is at the heart of the revolution currently under
way within the United Nations to promote the role of
women and parity on every front. That revolution is
of course essential in itself, but also for the success of
multilateralism, to which we are committed now more
than ever. That is to say how much France intends to
continue to be a driver of this revolution, which nothing
and no one can stop.

