Ms. Saiga (Japan): At the outset, I would like to
express my appreciation for this opportunity to present
the views of Japan at this open meeting to
commemorate the second anniversary of the historic
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). I also pay tribute
to the President of the Security Council, Ambassador
Belinga-Eboutou of Cameroon, for demonstrating his
commitment to this agenda item by convening today's
meeting.

I welcome the report of the Secretary-General on
women, peace and security, as well as the study
prepared by his Special Adviser on Gender Issues and
the Advancement of Women in cooperation with the
Inter-agency Task Force on Women, Peace and
Security. The recommendations contained in the study
will provide useful general guidance in strengthening
international efforts for the protection of women and
girls in armed conflict, the promotion of women's
participation in peace-building, and the integration of
gender perspectives in peace processes and conflict
resolution. I also look forward to the field-based
assessment by the two independent experts under the
auspices of the United Nations Development Fund for
Women, to be issued later this week.

Today, I would like to offer three general
comments on the Special Adviser's study.

First, I would like to underscore the importance
of education, training and capacity-building, which is
repeatedly stressed in various contexts throughout the
study. Education and public awareness are key to
preventing violence against women and girls, and the
training and capacity-building of women are critical to
increasing their participation in various aspects of a
peace process. Japan's strong belief in women's
education is reflected, for example, in the economic
assistance it has provided to Afghanistan for the
rehabilitation of a damaged girls' elementary school in
Kabul last April and for the construction of a
vocational training centre for women.

The second point I wish to make is that, while the
78 recommendations in the study provide useful
general guidance, it is necessary to formulate detailed
strategies for translating them into concrete actions and
for following them up on a regular basis. This will
require ongoing discussion by Member States and the
Secretariat. Japan, for its part, would like to suggest
that the Security Council, in consultation with
interested Member States, formulate a road map
identifying which agencies are to assume responsibility
for what kinds of actions, in which areas and according
to what timetable.

Thirdly, it is my delegation's view that, since the
recommendations cover such a wide range of areas,
implementation and follow-up should not be left solely
to the Security Council, but should involve the United
Nations system as a whole. My delegation therefore
hopes that the Inter-agency Task Force on Women,
Peace and Security will continue its efforts to
strengthen coordination and collaboration among the
various United Nations agencies.

At the same time, let us not forget that the issue
of women, peace and security is intricately intertwined
with two other issues - children in armed conflict and
the protection of civilians in armed conflict - which the
Council has considered in recent years. Japan therefore
believes that the Council, the United Nations primary
organ for the maintenance of international peace and
security, should address all three of these issues in an
integrated manner. At the same time, the offices within
the Secretariat responsible for these issues - the Office
of the Special Adviser on Gender Issues and the
Advancement of Women, the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary- General for Children
and Armed Conflicts and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs - should
collaborate more closely and identify best practices
among their activities.

Today's open meeting demonstrates the
importance which the Security Council attaches to the
issue of women, peace and security, and provides us
with a valuable opportunity to exchange our views on
the issue. But the issue of gender mainstreaming in
peace and security is too important to be considered
just once a year on a special occasion. Indeed, it should
be integrated into ongoing discussions and activities
throughout the United Nations system, including in the
Security Council. Japan would therefore like to engage
other interested Member States, as well as the
Secretariat, in substantive discussions aimed at
implementing the recommendations contained in the
study.

