Mr. Apakan (Turkey): At the outset,
Mr. President, let me thank you for organizing this
high-level open debate. I commend the efforts of the
Ugandan delegation in the preparation of the
presidential statement we adopted earlier today. We
also welcome the presence of ministers from Austria,
the United States and Japan, as well as of other
ministers and high officials and representatives of civil
society organizations. I wish also to express our
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report (S/2010/498), which contains
valuable recommendations on addressing the
challenges regarding women and peace and security.

I take this opportunity to welcome
Under-Secretary-General Michelle Bachelet and to
assure her of my country's full support and cooperation.

As we mark the tenth anniversary of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000), Turkey is strongly
committed to the full implementation of that resolution
and three subsequent resolutions on women and peace
and security.

Since the adoption of the landmark resolution
1325 (2000), there has been progress across a broad
range of issues with regard to the protection and
promotion of women's and girls' rights in conflict-
affected situations. Thanks to the efforts of the
international community, a strong understanding of the
need for gender equality and women's empowerment
as a prerequisite for international peace and security is
taking hold. In that context, I should like to commend
the efforts by various United Nations entities and those
of non-governmental organizations and women's
organizations that are working selflessly to achieve the
goals of resolution 1325 (2000).

However, despite the progress achieved so far, we
cannot fail to note that much remains to be done,
particularly in the area of implementation. As today's
debate and the report of the Secretary-General have
shown us, many structural and institutional
impediments remain, which we should overcome in
order to meet the challenges before us.

We believe that urgent action is needed to protect
and empower women. Likewise, equally strong
measures are needed to increase the participation of
women in the work of peace, including post-conflict
recovery efforts, as that will increase the effectiveness
of such efforts. Indeed, we should not forget that
women in post-conflict countries are not merely
victims of war. As underlined by the Secretary-General
today, they are also agents of change towards
modernization and transformation.

We have to redouble our efforts in the fight
against impunity. Targeted and graduated measures

should be imposed against the perpetrators of sexual
and gender-based violence and rape. We believe that in
tackling the issue of women's security, we should
move from ad hoc approaches towards a systematic
one. To that end, the calls of resolutions 1325 (2000),
1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1889 (2009) should all
become a regular part of the work of the Council. The
comprehensive set of indicators set out in the annex to
the report of the Secretary-General is extremely useful
in helping the United Nations and Member States to
assess the status of implementation and determine the
actions needed to overcome implementation
challenges.

We are confident that the newly established UN
Women will further strengthen our work by helping the
United Nations pursue its efforts in a more systemized
and coordinated manner in areas related to women,
peace and security.

We believe that gender equality and the
empowerment of women should be at the core of our
efforts. The Millennium Development Goals (MDGs),
in particular Goal 3 - promoting gender equality and
the empowerment of women - will no doubt reinforce
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). The
international community should regularly review the
implementation of MDG3, including its commitments
in that regard.

In our opinion, the United Nations should
develop and adopt a comprehensive framework that
includes agreed goals and time-bound targets and
guidelines for the realization of gender equality and the
empowerment of women.

I wish to conclude by underlining my country's
commitment to the human rights of women all around
the world. We wish to see women take their rightful
place in the economic, social and political life of their
societies. In Turkey we are committed to that goal. We
will therefore continue our support for the
implementation of the resolutions on women and peace
and security.
