Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): On
behalf of my delegation, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for giving us the opportunity to discuss
an issue of such significant impact and importance in
today's world, namely, trafficking in persons in conflict
situations. We also wish the United Kingdom every
success during its presidency of the Security Council
for the remainder of the month.

As everyone will recall, just three months ago, we
met in this same Chamber and adopted resolution 2331
(2016). My delegation sponsored it because we believed
that it contributes to rendering more visible the horror
in which thousands of men, women and children live
as victims of forced labour, slavery and other similar
practices, committed by terrorist organizations that are
linked in networks of transnational organized crime.

As part of the priority given by the Government
of Peru to combating this scourge, on 6 January the
Peruvian Congress enacted a law incorporating in
our Criminal Code the crimes of sexual exploitation
and slavery and other forms of exploitation, with
sentences of 10 to 15 years imprisonment. The crime
of forced labour will be subject to a sentence of 6
to 12 years in prison. That is a major effort that has
been complemented by the establishment of a national
policy against trafficking in persons and other forms
of exploitation.

Peru, which respects human rights and fundamental
freedoms, believes it is essential that we combat
trafficking in persons with an integrated, comprehensive
and coordinated crime strategy. By integrated, we mean
that there should be a holistic approach to prevention,
to the prosecution ofthose responsible and to assistance
to their victims, particularly the most vulnerable, such
as children, adolescents and women.

By comprehensive, we mean that we should consider
trafficking in persons as a crime related to others
such as drug trafficking and trafficking in migrants,
which also require effective action in line with the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and the Protocols Thereto, to which
we encourage adherence.

By coordinated, we mean coordination among
the national agencies concerned, which also involves
strengthening bilateral, regional and global cooperation
at the international level. In that regard, I would
like to highlight Peru's initiative of legal protective
zones, which seeks to establish a bloc of bilateral
agreements that the Peruvian Foreign Ministry is
already implementing with neighbouring countries. So
far we have already signed agreements with Colombia,
Bolivia and Ecuador, and negotiations are under way
with Argentina, Brazil, Chile and Paraguay.

We welcome the work of the Inter-Agency
Coordination Group against Trafficking in Persons, and
we trust that we can continue to rely on the assistance
and steady support of the United Nations, especially the
Office on Drugs and Crime. I would like to reaffirm
Peru's energetic condemnation of human trafficking
in conflict or any other circumstances, as well as of
forced labour, especially for children, and to assure the
Council of my country's strong support in dealing with
this serious problem.

