Mr. Shcherbak (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian delegation is grateful to the
delegation of the United Kingdom for the timely
initiative of convening this Security Council meeting
on such an important issue. Our thanks go to the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2009/362) on the
implementation of resolution 1820 (2008) and for his
briefing on the matter.

Like previous speakers, we believe that sexual
violence, both during conflict and in peacetime, is a
heinous crime that must be strenuously condemned and
severely punished. Of particular concern are situations
in which the phenomenon is widespread and
systematic, which could be a matter of concern for the
Security Council pursuant to paragraph 1 of resolution
1820 (2008). But it should not be forgotten that women
and children continue to be victims of premeditated
attacks, including acts of terrorism, the indiscriminate
or excessive use of force and other acts.

In that connection, we support the Secretary-
General's appeal to parties to conflict to comply
strictly with international criminal law, humanitarian
law and international human rights and refugee law.
Violence takes many different forms, and we believe
that due attention must be paid to all categories of
violence. That conforms to the spirit of resolution 1325
(2000), which remains the primary point of reference
for protecting women and guaranteeing their rights
during conflict.

Such a balanced approach was reflected in
resolution 1882 (2009), on children and armed conflict,
which the Security Council adopted three days ago. In
that resolution, the killing and maiming of children and
sexual violence committed against them are
highlighted as crimes requiring priority attention.

Against that background, a number of the
Secretary-General's practical proposals on
strengthening the efforts of the United Nations system
to combat sexual violence are of interest. However, the
question arises of whether, for example, it would be
fair to establish a commission of inquiry or special
Security Council mechanisms on the single issue of
sexual violence. Is that not an excessively narrow way
of looking at this issue? Should there not be a
comprehensive and all-encompassing approach to the
issue of violence and violations of the rights of
civilians during armed conflict? Should we really turn
a blind eye to other grievous crimes against civilians,
including women and children? In that connection, the
proposals of the Secretary-General merit careful study,
perhaps in a broader context.

On the whole, such issues should be considered
without isolating them from the entire range of
problems of conflict settlement and gender equality. It
should be recalled that an important precondition for
overcoming violence against women is full
participation by women themselves in peace processes
and in post-conflict reconstruction. In such processes
there must be more consistent implementation of the
provisions of the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women, the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, the
International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination and other specialized
human rights instruments.

The Russian Federation is confident that through
joint efforts we cannot only reduce the incidence of

sexual violence during conflict but also make
significant progress towards gender equality and the
advancement of women, in the spirit of the decisions
taken at the fourth World Conference on Women and
the twenty-third special session of the General
Assembly.

