Ms. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Let me
begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for your
initiative in organizing this debate on the subject of
women and peace and security. We particularly
appreciate the presence of the Secretary of State of the
United States of America, Ms. Condoleezza Rice, who
presided over our work this morning.

We would also like to thank the Secretary-
General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon; the Deputy Secretary-
General, Ms. Asha-Rose Migiro; the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Liberia, Mrs. Olubanke King-
Akerele; and Major-General Patrick Cammaert, former
Commander of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) for their briefings.

Colombia rejects all forms of sexual violence,
including rape and other forms of sexual abuse. On that
basis, my country has been reporting on the progress it
has achieved in implementing resolution 61/143 on the
intensification of efforts to eliminate all forms of
violence against women.

Colombia has also been fulfilling the
commitments set out in resolution 1325 (2000) and has
submitted the corresponding reports pursuant to that
resolution, which has allowed us to raise awareness of
the important role of women in the prevention and
settlement of conflicts.

In Colombia, the Presidential Office for Women's
Equality has strengthened the incorporation of the
gender dimension in all Government bodies,
particularly through the policy on "Women Building
Peace and Development". That policy reflects the
Government's determination to include gender
mainstreaming, in a cross-cutting manner, in the
design, implementation and evaluation of public
policies.

In addition, the military relies on a
comprehensive human rights and international
humanitarian law policy and have launched a
programme aimed at strengthening reproductive and
sexual rights and gender equity within that institution.

Also noteworthy is the role of the National
Commission for Redress and Reconciliation, which
was established for the purpose of facilitating peace
processes and the individual or group reintegration of
members of illegal armed groups. The Commission
seeks to guarantee the rights of victims to truth, justice
and redress. It has incorporated a gender perspective in
its work as well as the recommendations contained in
resolution 1325 (2000).

On the basis of the efforts of the Commission,
among other factors, and its work with the Office of
the Attorney General and with women victims, crimes
associated with sexual violence are being addressed in
a more effective manner. As an example, trials are
being held that, in addition to their purpose of
prosecuting the perpetrators of such crimes, also
contribute to preventing them and to protecting the
victims. Many of those victims, in particular women,
have come forward to denounce criminal actions such
as sexual violence.

In addition, the Office of the High Adviser for
Social and Economic Reintegration has provided
humanitarian assistance to more than 2,600 women
who had been partners of members of illegal armed
groups and who have received benefits such as
physical security, shelter, food and psychosocial
support. Special emphasis has been placed on the
provision of support for the settlement of disputes
arising from domestic violence and for the holding of
workshops on the issue of respect for and the integrity
of women.
Colombia will continue to follow this course of
action, with particular emphasis on the areas of
participation, prevention, protection and the combat
against impunity, in the quest to eliminate all forms of
sexual violence.

The Secretary-General's most recent report on
women and peace and security highlights the role of
regional organizations in the implementation of the
plan of action 2008-2009 relating to resolution 1325
(2000).

My delegation would like to draw attention, in
this perspective, to the high-level dialogue that took
place in Chile in November 2007, at which the Latin
American and Caribbean authorities charged with
dealing with this subject carried out an assessment of
the developments relating to the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) at the national level and shared
experiences on best practices. This type of activity is
particularly useful in developing management and
information systems that take into account each
region's individual characteristics and priorities.

We would like also to underline the role of the
Inter-American Commission on Women, as the relevant
body of the Organization of American States in this
field, as well as its important efforts in the quest to
eliminate all forms of violence against women.

My delegation notes with interest the increasing
participation of women in tasks related to
peacekeeping. The example of the all-female police
contingent from India in the United Nations Mission in
Liberia constitutes a point of reference on progress in
this area and makes a positive contribution to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We echo the
support expressed for initiatives aimed at ensuring a
higher percentage of women in peacekeeping forces.

Lastly, my delegation would like to underscore
how important it is that the action of the Security
Council on issues related to sexual violence be focused
on situations where peacekeeping missions are
deployed and that are on the Council's agenda. This
includes due regard for the continuation of zero-
tolerance policies for sexual exploitation and abuse in
such operations.

