Mr. Riecken (Austria): Last year's debate, on the
tenth anniversary of the adoption of landmark Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000), under the presidency
of Uganda (see S/PV.6411), significantly contributed to
focusing Member States' commitment and gaining
momentum for enhanced implementation of the
resolution at national, regional and international levels.
However, as the President's concept note (S/2011/654)
rightly points out, many gaps and challenges remain on
the road to translating words into action and ensuring
the full participation of women in all stages of conflict
prevention, conflict resolution and peacebuilding.

Therefore, we would like to thank Nigeria for
providing the opportunity to consider concrete steps
and for its efforts that resulted in the Council's
presidential statement (S/PRST/2011/20). Let me also
thank the Secretary-General and Under-Secretary-
General Bachelet both for their briefings today and
their commitment to the women, peace and security
agenda. We also thank the President of the Economic
and Social Council and the civil society representative
for their very interesting statements.

Austria aligns herself with the statement to be
made on behalf of the European Union.

The topic of our debate is a very timely one.
Today we should acknowledge the important
contribution made by women in the Arab world to
bring about political transformation, and the decisive
role they have played and continue to play in the quest
for democracy, transparent political systems, the rule
of law and the promotion and protection of human
rights. It is difficult to imagine the achievements of the
Arab Spring in Tunisia, Egypt and Libya without the
active participation of women and young people, and it
is difficult to imagine a successful and inclusive
democratic transformation process without their active
participation.

The effective representation and full involvement
of women in peace processes, in transitional
governments and in political life is a prerequisite for
addressing their specific needs and concerns and for
ensuring that their rights are adequately reflected in
State structures, peace agreements, law enforcement
processes, et cetera. One half of the population cannot
claim to represent the other half. Women need to
represent themselves.

Of course, efforts at the national level must go
hand in hand with efforts at the international level. The
United Nations and its Member States need to further
increase the number of women in peacekeeping
operations and political missions in order to ensure
gender expertise in the planning of missions and in all
mediation efforts, and to enhance the appointment of
women to senior leadership positions. The Secretary-
General's seven-point action plan on women's
participation in peacebuilding (see S/2010/466)
contains important commitments in that regard, and we
encourage the United Nations system to take them
forward.

In order to be able to guide and track the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) by the
United Nations system over the next 10 years, Austria
very much welcomes the strategic framework
contained in the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2011/598*). The formulation of concrete medium
and long-term targets is an important step. Austria is
convinced that the comprehensive set of indicators that
received the Council's support at the open debate one
year ago is not only essential for monitoring the
strategic framework, but should also be used to track
efforts at the national level.

We fully support the recommendations in the
Secretary-General's report, including the call for more
frequent briefings of the Council by Executive Director
Bachelet, as well as by relevant Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General. Of course,
the inclusion of women, peace and security aspects in
country-specific reports to the Council, including
reporting on attacks on women journalists, women
human rights defenders and women in public office, is
equally important to providing the Council with the
necessary information to act upon.

The presidential statement (S/PRST/2010/22)
adopted at last year's debate (see S/PV.6411) explicitly
invited Member States to report to the Security Council
on progress made in their efforts to implement
resolution 1325 (2000). In that regard, I would briefly
like to update the Council on some of the commitments
made by Austrian Foreign Minister Michael
Spindelegger last October.

Austria has almost finished the revision of its
national action plan on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), which will be approved by the
Council of Ministers by the end of this year. As for the
first national action plan of 2007, civil society has been
closely involved in these efforts. The revised national
action plan will be guided by the set of indicators that
were presented by the Secretary-General and supported
by the Security Council last year.

Mission gender advisors have been trained and
deployment to the Balkans has begun. Austria has also
followed up on its commitment to provide more
adequate training for our peace workers in the field.
Standard training elements on gender have been
finalized and their implementation in education and
pre-deployment training for our soldiers and civilian
personnel will be completed in 2012.

Austria has also made significant progress on its
commitment to incorporate the provisions of the statute
of the International Criminal Court that classifies
crimes against women as crimes against humanity, war
crimes or genocide, as part of our national criminal
code.

Austria has continued its support to UN-Women
and is currently exploring opportunities for cooperation
with partner countries to support the development of a
national action plan.

