Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
welcome Foreign Secretary Hague and I am grateful for
his coming to New York to preside over today's meeting.
I would also like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab
Bangura, and the Special Envoy of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees for their briefings. I
have listened carefully to the statement by Ms. Anywar.

Women are a major force for peace, stability and
development in society. The promotion of gender
equality and women's rights represents a true reflection
of human civilization and progress, and is also closely
related to peace and world development. In situations
of armed conflict, however, sexual violence against
women is employed by parties to conflict as a means
of war more often than not. Vulnerable groups,
including women, bear the brunt of conflict in many
situations. Sexual violence against women and their
sexual enslavement in armed conflict are not only
grave violations of women's rights but also a flagrant
challenge to the human conscience and social justice.

It is no surprise that such acts have been
unanimously condemned and opposed by the
international community. China strongly condemns
all Violence against civilians in armed conflict, and is
resolutely opposed to using sexual violence as a means
of war, as well as to any acts of sexual Violence or
sexual enslavement against women. We call for the full
implementation of the Council's relevant resolutions
and urge all parties to conflict to abide by international
law and international humanitarian law, and to cease all
acts of violence against women immediately. I would
like to emphasize the following three points.

First, combating sexual Violence in conflict must
be done with full respect for national sovereignty, and
should rely primarily on national efforts. National
Governments bear the primary responsibility for
protecting women's rights in their country; it is they,
first and foremost, that should carry out the task of
implementing the Council's resolutions and fighting
sexual violence in conflict. In assisting the countries
concerned, the international community, including the
United Nations, must fully respect their sovereignty; it
is important to respect their will and the programmes
drawn up by national Governments based on their own
conditions. It is important to strengthen coordination
with the Governments concerned, provide constructive
help and avoid imposing from outside.

Secondly, the Security Council has an active role
to play in fighting sexual violence in armed conflict,
in the light of its own mandate and strengths. However,
it is different from the Human Rights Council and it is
also different from the Commission on the Status of
Women. When addressing sexual violence, the Council
must not encroach upon the responsibilities of other
United Nations bodies. It must effectively implement its
primary responsibility, that of maintaining international
peace and security, and its efforts must focus on
conflict prevention, peacekeeping and post-conflict
reconstruction, thereby creating a legal, political and
security environment conducive to addressing sexual
violence in armed conflict and to protecting women's
rights. The various organs of the United Nations must
follow their own mandates and respect the division of
labour, making every attempt to avoid any overlap of
efforts.

Thirdly, attention must be paid to the issues
underlying the protection of women's security and
curbing sexual violence in armed conflict. It is important
to address issues of women's rights at a deeper level,
in order to promote women's full development and
eliminate the root causes of conflict. Attention should
also be given to improving the economic and social
development of the countries concerned, in order to
enhance women's status and fully empower them. The
international community must increase its attention
to the development of women in those countries and
scale up its aid in that area. It should support capacity-
building for the Governments concerned and ensure
that assistance to women's development is increased
in their countries so as to effectively enhance women's
status and protect their rights.

China took an active part in the consultations on
drafting today's resolution on sexual violence in armed
conflict (resolution 2106 (2013)), and has just voted in
favour of it. We believe that the Special Representatives
and United Nations missions should implement it in
strict observance of the Council's mandate.

China is ready to continue to play, with the
international community, an active role in fighting
sexual violence in armed conflict.

