Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): Ukraine appreciates
Uruguay's initiative in holding this very important
open debate. We also appreciate the fact that you, Sir,
are presiding over the debate, and we welcome you
back to the United Nations. We would also like to thank
Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed for her
introduction. We are equally grateful to the other two
briefers for their valuable insights, especially the civil-

society perspective. I am also pleased to recognize the
participation of the Minister for Defence of Sweden.

I take this opportunity to congratulate Pramila
Patten on her appointment as Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
We wish her every success. Ukraine also reiterates its
full support for that important mandate and the work of
the United Nations Team of Experts on the Rule of Law
and Sexual Violence in Conflict. Ukraine also reaffirms
its firm backing of the zero-tolerance policy regarding
all forms of sexual violence and stands in solidarity
with the victims and survivors of such crimes.

While my delegation aligns itself with the
statement of the European Union to be delivered later
today, I would like to make a number of points in my
national capacity.

In conflicts around the world women and girls, as
well as men and boys, are subjected to horrendous acts
of sexual violence. Those acts - rape, sexual slavery,
forced marriage and sexual torture - constitute
abhorrent violations of human rights and human
dignity. Yet, as the Secretary-General's recent thematic
report (S/2017/249) states, their scope remains at an
alarming level.

The pervasive nature of this horrible phenomenon
makes it imperative for us, the international
community, to double down on fighting the scourge.
Designing prevention policies, ensuring accountability
for perpetrators and providing adequate support and
rehabilitation for victims must be part and parcel of any
conflict-resolution endeavour.

In that light Ukraine, as the country that pioneered
the issue of prevention and initiated the relevant
process in the Human Rights Council, fully supports
the Secretary-General's approach that "[t]he prevention
of sexual violence is an integral part of wider conflict
prevention" (S/2017/249, para. 4).

We also strongly believe that accountability for
sexual violence in conflict is needed not only in order
to meet the demand forjustice, but also to help societies
in breaking the cycles of conflict. Perpetrators of sexual
violence must, without any regard for their affiliation
or rank, be brought to account.

In situations where the justice sector is ill-
functioning, survivors who have gone through the
trauma of sexual assault too often face additional risks,
such as rejection by their families and communities,
double victimization by State authorities, limited access
to health services and so on. The list, unfortunately, is
too long. We must not let them experience all of that.

What is also badly needed is a fully integrated
approach aimed at addressing deeply rooted gender
inequalities, as sexual violence in conflict and post-
conflict situations is reflective of broader, unequal
gender relations in the societies concerned.

In violent conflict, rape is frequently used to harm,
humiliate and shame. As already noted, sexual violence
is unique in that it often stigmatizes the victim, rather
than the perpetrator of the outrage. Owing to that
and other factors, such crimes remain significantly
underreported. It is known, thanks to the United Nations,
that for each rape reported in connection with conflict,
10 to 20 cases will likely remain undocumented. We
should work to break that shameful trend.

Social- and economic-reintegration support for
the victims is imperative. Children born of rape need
particular attention. We must also support men and
boys who have suffered sexual violence and live with
life-long traumas. The needs of survivors should
therefore be addressed across legal, psychological,
social, medical and other vital spheres.

Unfortunately, Ukraine is also affected by conflict
as a result of the ongoing Russian aggression. Among
other serious consequences, we have seen an increase
in cases of sexual violence. That has been reported in
particular in the 37-page thematic report by the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights (OHCHR) on conflict-related sexual violence in
Ukraine, which I have here.

According to the report, in the territory controlled
by armed groups supported by Russia, sexual violence
is used to compel people in detention to hand over
property. Performing sex acts is also often an explicit
condition for being set free. The report includes specific
recommendations to the Government of Ukraine, illegal
armed groups and the Russian Federation, as well as the
international community, aimed at preventing sexual
violence, improving response and ensuring justice for
survivors. Ukrainian authorities are committed to act
upon those recommendations. For one, we are ready to
enhance cooperation in that area with the appropriate
international organizations and mechanisms, first of all
with the United Nations. We will also make full use of
our national human rights strategy and its action plan,
as well as of the national plan on women and peace and
security. The adoption of all of those documents was
highly praised by the OHCHR.

I would also like to inform the Council that we have
invited, and look forward to the visit to Ukraine next
month of, a UN-Women delegation headed by Executive
Director Mlambo-Ngcuka. Moreover, we reiterate our
call to the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict to monitor the
situation in Ukraine's conflict-affected areas within
her mandated activities.

But what about Russia and the terrorists it controls
and sponsors in my country? The recent case of the
sexual harassment of a female patrol member of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine in the
non-Government-controlled area of the Donetsk region,
as reported by the Mission on 6 May, is unfortunately
illustrative of the problem. I wish to briefly quote an
excerpt from the relevant OSCE report.

"The [Mission] continued monitoring the
disengagement areas near Stanytsia Luhanska,
Zolote and Petrivske. Its access remained restricted
there and elsewhere, including in an incident in
which an armed man sexually harassed a female
patrol member A man armed with an assault rifle
(AK-47) sexually harassed a female patrol member
and threatened to stop the patrol from moving
east until his demands were met."

We are appalled by the fact that there has been
no reaction whatsoever to that disgusting incident on
the part of the militants' leaders and sponsors. That
reflects their general approach to abuses. No reaction
to the shooting down of OSCE unmanned vehicles;
no reaction to restrictions on the OSCE's freedom of
movement; and now - sexual harassment of OSCE
personnel. The prevailing environment of impunity
abets the violators, allowing them to feel free to do
whatever they want.

We join the States participating in the OSCE
and its Special Monitoring Mission in resolutely
condemning that incident, and we demand a swift
and unequivocal response. If such things happen to
international observers, one can only imagine the
extent of lawlessness and abuse committed against
ordinary residents of the territories under the control
of the illegal armed groups and their Russian sponsors.

The road to eliminating sexual violence is long and
thorny. Still, we believe that the world can change - and
has changed - the way in which that crime is perceived
and understood, the manner in which we respond to
it, as well as how we treat and support survivors. The
United Nations, and the Council in particular, have to
spearhead this endeavour.

