Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): First of all, let me
thank you, Mr. President, for having organized this
important open meeting marking the third anniversary
of the historic resolution on women, peace and
security, adopted during the Namibian presidency of
the Council, with the participation of Ukraine, which
was then a Council member. As has been mentioned,
that document strengthened specifically the political
legitimacy of women's struggle for a seat at the
negotiating table, and provided a framework within
which women's protection and their role in peace-
building can be addressed.

I would like to express our appreciation to the
Assistant Secretary-General and Special Adviser on
Gender Issues and Advancement of Women, Ms.
Angela King, and all members of the Inter-Agency
Task Force on Women, Peace and Security, as well as
to the Under-Secretary-General, Mr. Jean-Marie
Guehenno, for their activities in promoting the
coordination of efforts to implement resolution 1325
(2000).

Despite the progress made, however, issues of
gender representation and gender perspectives have
still not been systematically incorporated into all
United Nations activities on peace and security.

During the past three years, the Security Council
has increasingly focused its attention on the situation
of women and girls in armed conflict. However, these
issues have often been discussed as a separate item,
rather than integrated into wider deliberations by the
Council. In order to effectively respond to the needs
and priorities of women and girls during armed
conflict, in our View gender perspectives must be
systematically integrated into all peace-building,
peacekeeping and peacemaking efforts, as well as
humanitarian operations and reconstruction processes.

Unfortunately, in today's conflicts, women and
girls are increasingly targeted directly, and are
threatened by rape, domestic violence, sexual
exploitation, trafficking, sexual humiliation and
mutilation. They are at heightened risk in all settings,
whether at home, in flight or in camps for displaced
persons. That is why we think that all humanitarian
responses in conflict situations must include systematic
reporting on sexual violence, emphasize the special
reproductive health needs of women and girls and
reflect a strengthened policy guidance on responses to
gender-based violence and sexual exploitation.

It is important that the Rome Statute reflect
ground-breaking developments in the criminalization
of sexual and gender violence and the establishment of
structures to ensure the effective investigation and
prosecution of such crimes by the International
Criminal Court. As such, the Rome Statute is the first
treaty to recognize certain acts of sexual and gender
violence as being among the most serious crimes under
international law.

With regard to sexual violence, we should not
forget one of its worst possible consequences - the
risk of the transmission of HIV/AIDS and other
sexually transmitted diseases. In our opinion, measures
regarding an HIV/AIDS response should be better
reflected in United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Ukraine has already incorporated HIV/AIDS awareness
training into the national training programmes for
military personnel in preparation for deployment.

Although they are often victims of armed
conflict, women cannot be considered merely as
passive recipients who are incapable of taking charge
of their own destiny. The international community
should use the potential of women as agents of
preventive diplomacy, peacekeeping and peace-
building.

Recent years have witnessed the flowering and
growth of a vibrant women's peace movement. From
grass-roots activism to international networks and
campaigns, women's organizations have brought new
energy and focus to peace-building. Despite the
obstacles and difficulties they face, many have had a
positive impact on local and national peace processes.
This can be noted in Liberia, Burundi and South
Africa, as well as in the Middle East, the Balkans and
South-East Asia, where, in their struggle for peace,
women's networks bridge the dividing lanes of
conflict, despite threats and abuse. The contributions
made by the informal peace initiatives of local
women's groups and networks should be recognized
and supported by the world community.

Regional organizations also play an important
role in protecting women and supporting their role in
peace-building. In this context, I would like to draw
attention to the initiatives of the Cooperation Forum of
the Women of the GUAAM. countries- Azerbaijan,
Georgia, Moldova, Ukraine and Uzbekistan. The
resolution adopted at the second meeting of that body,
which took place in Kiev last year, contained a
provision aimed at the creation of an international
peace movement, entitled "Women against violence,
conflicts and wars". The Forum also called upon the
Secretary-General to use all of his power and authority
to intensify efforts aimed at resolving existing armed
conflicts and preventing the emergence of new ones.

In spite of the increasing information and
knowledge surrounding women's experience of
conflict, relatively little systematic documentation on
their peace-building efforts is available. The work they
do is still largely invisible to the eyes of the world's
media and policy makers. Scepticism about women's
contributions continue to hamper policy and
programmatic developments aimed at supporting and
enhancing women's participation. Perhaps as a result of
this scepticism, today only one woman leads a United
Nations peace mission. Our delegation supports the
appeals of the Secretary-General and the Special
Adviser on Gender Issues to Member States to act in
proactive manner by identifying women to serve in
senior decision-making positions and to increase their
recruitment to military observer teams, peacekeeping
contingents and civilian police units. A broad database
of experienced women in peacekeeping and other
relevant disciplines should be created. Eight female
officers from my country already number among
civilian police and military personnel, and we want that
figure to increase.

We believe the Security Council has a special
responsibility to support women's participation in
peace processes by ensuring respective gender balance
in United Nations peacekeeping missions.
Finally, let me remind members of one of the
greatest time-honoured customs of the peoples of the
Caucasus. A woman could stop bloodshed just by
throwing her scarf between the combatants. It is a
centuries-old practice, but should we not sometimes
heed the wisdom of our ancestors?

