Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I commend the United
States presidency on the initiative of convening this
open thematic debate on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), and express appreciation to
Ms. Rice for her participation and leadership.

This debate is rather timely, as we are witnessing
an increase in the reporting of cases of violence against
women around the globe. In the case of armed
conflicts, the shocking images broadcast by the media
are deeply disturbing and attest to the gravity of the
problem. It is simply despicable. Rape and all other
forms of sexual abuse must be vehemently condemned,
no matter their purpose, and perpetrators punished.

Our collective consternation and indignation must
lead to action. If we are to successfully face this most
daunting challenge, we need to design and implement
practical, concrete measures to adequately address the
issue, with the involvement of the international
community as a whole.

Current international instruments provide an
adequate framework and the necessary basis for such
work. The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women, the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action, the Convention
on the Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocols
are all important references in the effort we need to
undertake. Also relevant are the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court and pertinent instruments
of international humanitarian law, in particular the
Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War.
Implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) must
play a central role in such a strategy. It should be
carried out in conjunction with that of all General
Assembly resolutions on violence against women, the
Agreed Conclusions of the Commission on the Status
of Women, as well as the 1974 General Assembly
Declaration on the Protection of Women and Children
in Emergency and Armed Conflict, in accordance with
which all forms of repression and cruel and inhuman
treatment of women and children committed by
belligerents in the course of military operations or in
occupied territories shall be considered criminal.

Our common efforts on the ground can also
benefit from the accumulated knowledge, experience
and expertise of the United Nations system, in
particular the relevant agencies, programmes and funds
of the Organization. They are invaluable partners in a
strategy to combat violence against women in armed
conflicts.

Ending impunity must also be part of our
collective efforts. No woman or girl Victim of sexual
violence can reconstruct her life unless the cycle of
recurrence is broken. Beyond a lack of respect for the
human being, impunity signals the continuation of a
horrendous crime, which has multiplying negative
effects on family members and the community as a
whole.

For that reason, we must strengthen the crucial
role played by the International Criminal Court in
ensuring accountability and punishing perpetrators of
rape and other forms of gender-related crimes and
crimes of sexual violence, all considered crimes
against humanity, as defined in the Rome Statute.

An effective response to violence against women
requires a comprehensive approach in which peace and
security concerns are integrated into a human-rights-
based perspective. In that regard, empowering women
and girls must be at the centre of any effort to address
gender-based violence. The overall situation of women
and girls will improve only if equal participation in
decision-making at all levels is ensured.

In the specific case of armed conflicts, the full-
fledged participation of women in peacebuilding
efforts is critical. In this respect, more interaction is
necessary between the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council, under Article 65 of the
Charter. We should also make full use of the
possibilities of cooperation within the Peacebuilding
Commission, which can contribute to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). As we see
in the country-specific case of Guinea-Bissau,
peacebuilding can greatly benefit from women's
perspectives and actions.

In the Americas, Brazil is involved in an initiative
of South-South cooperation carried out within the
scope of the Brazilian contribution to the consolidation
of peace in Haiti. This initiative, based on our domestic
experience, supports the implementation of the Haitian
national plan to prevent violence against women and to
address the needs of women victims of sexual violence.
It is developed through the exchange of experts and
good practices, with the support of the United Nations
Population Fund and OXFAM.

In concluding, I reiterate Brazil's political and
practical commitment to international efforts designed
to end all forms of violence against women. My
delegation hopes that the Council's adoption of the
draft resolution, "Women and peace and security:
sexual violence in situations of armed conflict", will
help us to attain that goal.

