The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives Algeria,
Argentina, Australia, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh,
Belgium, Botswana, Brazil, Cambodia, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, the Czech Republic,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Guatemala,
Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iraq, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Ireland, Italy, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Mexico, Morocco, the
Netherlands, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, the
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea,
Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Sudan,
Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Trinidad
and Tobago, Turkey, Uganda, the United Arab Emirates
and Viet Nam to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of the United
NationsEntityforGenderEqualityandtheEmpowerment
of Women; and Ms. Rita Lopidia, Executive Director
and co-founder of the EVE Organization for Women
Development, South Sudan, on behalf of the NGO
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following to participate in this meeting: Ms. Mara
Marinaki, Principal Adviser on Gender of the European
External Action Service of the European Union;
Ms. Marriet Schuurman, NATO Secretary General's
Special Representative for Women, Peace and
Security; Mr. Paul Bekkers, Director of the Office of
the Secretary General of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe; and Mrs. Louise Sharene
Bailey, Charge' d'Affaires of the Permanent Observer
Mission of the African Union to the United Nations.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document 8/2016/822, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on women and peace and security.

I wish to also draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2016/87l, which contains
the text of a letter dated 14 October 2016 from the
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-
General, transmitting a concept paper on the item
under consideration.

I wish to warmly welcome His Excellency
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, to whom I now give
the floor.

