Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Chile thanks the presidency of Jordan for convening
this debate. We welcome the briefings, in particular
by Hamsatu Allamin, which drive us to act more
decisively to prevent, eradicate and punish conflict-
related sexual violence and the stigma attached thereto
and ensure reparation and reintegration for survivors.
We appreciate the work of the Special Representative,
Zainab Hawa Bangura, and her team, and we welcome
her seventh annual briefing, which identifies new parties
involved in such violence, including non-State and
terrorist armed groups. We welcome the commitments
made by some parties in support of the system.

Chile strongly condemns conflict-related sexual
violence in its various forms, which, depending on the
circumstances, might constitute war crimes, crimes
against humanity, genocide, torture or other serious
violations of human rights. We note with amazement
how sexual Violence is used not only as a tactic of war
but also by non-State and terrorist armed groups to
sow terror, thus threatening international peace and
security. No religion or ideology could justify such
actions, and we call for cooperation on developing
strategies to prevent and eradicate Violent extremism
that promotes sexual violence.

Despite the progress achieved by resolution 1820
(2008) and related resolutions, we regret to note that
we have not yet achieved their full implementation.
We therefore support the urgent implementation of
the recommendations of the most recent report of the
Secretary-General on the subject (S/2015/203).

We urge States and the international community to
enhance its work to prevent, punish and eradicate such
Violence, while fighting against impunity and using to
that end national tribunals, international tribunals such
as the International Criminal Court, mixed tribunals,
truth and reconciliation commissions and community
justice mechanisms.

The responses to this scourge must guarantee
reintegration and fair and adequate compensation for all
victims. The Guidance Note of the Secretary-General
on Reparations for Conflict-Related Sexual Violence
of June 2014 provides guidelines and best practices to
consider in this respect. The trust funds established to
that end, such as the Multi-Partner Trust Fund and the
International Criminal Court's Trust Fund for Victims,
can contribute to efforts undertaken in that direction
and require sustainable financial support.

In 2014, we focused on prevention; today, we
would like to emphasize participation and protection.
Protection cannot exist without women's participation,
which in turn requires a secure, enabling environment.
We must guarantee, even in the most fragile contexts,
the participation of women in the prevention and
elimination of all forms of physical, sexual and
psychological violence. The participation of women
should be guaranteed in peacekeeping operations;
peace processes; disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration processes; and in mediation,
reconstruction and electoral reform efforts and security,
justice and administration sector reforms. It is important
to provide women with the necessary training to ensure
their equal access in all of those areas.

Our experience as a non-permanent member
indicates that the Council should make more and
better use of available mechanisms in addressing this
Violence, which affects not only women and girls, but
men and boys as well, worldwide. Such Violence must
be an integral item on the Council's agenda. It should be
addressed in its consultations, relevant resolutions and
mission mandates, as well as in the terms ofreference of
the field Visits and missions of the Council's subsidiary
bodies. We support greater interaction between those
bodies, especially the sanctions committees and their
respective teams of experts, and the Office of the
Special Representative.

The Council should bring greater pressure to bear
on the perpetrators of such violence, including the
parties named in the reports of the Secretary-General,
and consider the adoption of selective, phased measures
by the relevant sanctions committees, while ensuring
respect for due process. The various missions, including
electoral missions, commissions of inquiry and related
mechanisms, should consider appointing women
protection and gender advisers, and guarantee the
protection of civilians in order to focus on combating
the scourge with a view to affecting a greater proportion
of the internally displaced persons and refugees. The
training of peacekeeping contingents should include
a gender perspective, including measures to prevent
sexual Violence and to ensure respect by security
forces of the due diligence policy on human rights
and accountability in the conduct of cases involving
personnel.

We reiterate the importance of promoting,
protecting and ensuring access for survivors of sexual
Violence to timely and non-discriminatory multifaceted
assistance, including access to adequate health
services to enable their rehabilitation. In that respect,
we value the role of civil society, including women's
organizations, community and religious leaders,
the media and human rights defenders. We support
the efforts of the United Nations system to build the
capacities of such groups. As one example, we note the
Colombian authorities' successful efforts in fighting
this scourge. We especially highlight the policies of the
peace process in Victim support.

Last March, Chile launched its second national
action plan on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and related resolutions, which includes, among
its strategic objectives, the prevention of Violence,
especially sexual and gender-based violence, against
women and girls.

To conclude, Chile reiterates its decisive commitment
to the implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820
(2008) and others. We will continue collaborating
to ensure that the Council pays due attention to this
agenda item, the development of which will contribute
to the global review of the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). In that regard, we firmly support the
ministerial meeting to be convened by Spain during its
Council presidency in October.

