Mr. Mayr-Harting: I am speaking on behalf of
the European Union and its member States. The
candidate countries Croatia, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia and Montenegro; the countries
of the Stabilisation and Association Process and
potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina
and Serbia; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova, Armenia and Georgia align themselves with
this declaration.

In recent years, women have played a visible and
decisive role in movements aimed at rebuilding and
reshaping societies. Therefore, we also find the theme
of today's debate more than pertinent and welcome the
opportunity to discuss concrete means to ensure
women's full participation in peace processes, which is
a core element of resolution 1325 (2000). We thank the
Secretary-General, the Under-Secretary General, the
President of the Economic and Social Council and
Ms. Orzala Ashraf Nemat for their statements.

Last year, the Security Council noted with
concern that women's participation in conflict
resolution remains too low. Of the nine peace
agreements signed in 2010, only two had provisions
ensuring women's rights. Today's theme points to
another important issue - the need to ensure women's
participation in all stages of peace processes, and from
early on. Women, peace and security issues need to be
systematically integrated into preventive diplomacy,
early warning, human rights and security monitoring.
This has a direct impact on the inclusion of women's
rights and perspectives in the later stages of the peace
process.

Women's absence from formal peace negotiations
is in turn often followed by their absence from bodies
laying the foundations for a new, post-conflict society.
These include political decision-making bodies,
ceasefire and disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration commissions, constitutional and
legislative reform commissions, as well as truth and
reconciliation bodies. This needs to be accompanied by
sufficient gender expertise among the actors involved
in peace processes. We therefore welcome the recent
Department of Political Affairs and UN-Women joint
gender and mediation strategy to equip mediators and
their teams with expertise to address gender issues. We
welcome the Secretary-General's intention to continue
to increase the number of gender experts in the United
Nations rosters for surge capacity for crises, standby
experts for humanitarian response and mediation, and
specialists on conflict prevention and post-conflict
planning. In this regard, we emphasize the seven-point
action plan of the Secretary-General presented in 2010.

We are encouraged by the increased participation
of women in United Nations field missions and
welcome further efforts to increase the number of
women in senior leadership positions both at
Headquarters and in the field. Civil society, including
women's organizations, plays an important role in
sustaining the momentum for recovery and
transformation, and enhancing women's participation.
This is also reflected in the findings of the World
Bank's annual World Development Report of 2011,
focused on conflict, security and development.

Our meeting a year ago (see S/PV.6411) was
aimed at providing a strong impulse for the continued
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). It also
provided a space for concrete commitments to close
what you, Madam President, have called a "troubling
gap" between global and regional commitments and
actual practice. During the past year, we have also
gained useful mechanisms to monitor, measure and
evaluate our progress. We would also like to commend
the work of UN-Women, which plays a crucial role in
mobilizing the support of the United Nations system
for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

We welcome the strategic framework - which
includes concrete targets to guide the implementation
by the United Nations of resolution 1325 (2000) -
developed by the Secretary-General in response to the
Council's request, and the use of the set ofindicators to
monitor progress in implementing the framework. It
provides an important means of ensuring the
coherence, coordination and accountability of United
Nations action.

In this regard, we also appreciate the useful
briefings provided to the Council by Under-Secretary-
General Bachelet, as well as the Special Representative
on Sexual Violence in Conflict and the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict. We
support the call to accommodate more frequent
briefings to the Council on women, peace and security,
including upon the request of the Under-Secretary-
General and the Special Representatives. We also
encourage UN-Women's efforts to continue its
cooperation with the Special Representatives. We note
positively the call to consider means of enhancing
women's prevention role in the Council's deliberations
on preventive diplomacy and mediation.

Last year, the EU presented its commitments for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). I would
like to give a brief overview of our activities to follow
these up.

In 2008, the European Union adopted a
Comprehensive Approach for the implementation of
Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008). Further to this, we established 17 indicators to
evaluate gaps in our action and to improve
accountability in this regard. The first report based on
the indicators was published in May 2011, and the
results are encouraging. The EU is active on this issue
in more than 70 countries. Its support amounts to about
€200 million a year for the development and
implementation of national action plans, support for
non-governmental organizations, and training for
governmental agencies.

We are strongly committed to enhancing the
consideration of gender aspects in the early planning of
our missions and operations, during their conduct and
in the lessons-learned processes. In November 2010,
the European Union adopted its first report on the
lessons learned and best practices in connection with
mainstreaming human rights and gender into the
military and civilian missions under the Common
Security and Defence Policy (CSDP). All these
missions and operations now include human rights or
gender expertise. For instance, the two CSDP missions
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo include
experts on the prevention of sexual violence, while the
EU Integrated Rule of Law Mission for Iraq offers
courses for female police, judicial and penitentiary
officers and has trained more than 340 women since
2005.

The EU has also established a mediation support
team to ensure the representation of women in
mediation processes and the availability of gender
expertise in mediation teams which the Union supports.
The support provided by the European Union to the
United Nations Mediation Support Unit will
specifically target the participation of women in peace
processes.

To adequately train those deployed, we developed
standard training elements on human rights, gender and
child protection in the context of Common Security
and Defence Policy missions in 2010 and are now
finalizing the first gender-training module. The EU
remains committed to supporting and sharing the
outcomes of its ongoing work with the relevant United
Nations agencies and bodies, as well as States
Members of the United Nations, in order to enhance
women's participation in peace processes.

