Ms. Anderson (Ireland): This is an urgent and
necessary debate. Amid the glow of the holiday season,
it is all the more difficult for our imaginations to
comprehend the horror and brutality of sexual violence
on the scale to which the Secretary-General's report
(S/2010/604) attests. The contrast could not be more
shocking between the civility of our lives here and the
depravity of sexual violence so widely associated with
conflict. The report and resolution 1960 (2010) connect
the two worlds. They signal the determination of the
international community to stand with the victims and
to deal with the perpetrators.

Conflict and sexual violence feed off one another.
The poisonous interrelationship is fully demonstrated
in the Secretary-General's report. This is an excellent
report, clear and dispassionate in its analysis and
incisive in its recommendations. Ireland strongly
supports the full range of recommendations and
welcomes the extent to which they have been reflected
in the resolution. Each of the operative paragraphs of
the resolution must be followed up with vigour. In her
compelling opening address today, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Wallstrom
spelled out the standards to which we must hold
ourselves. I wish to make a few comments that draw on
Ireland's experience in United Nations peacekeeping
and on our involvement in cross-learning processes.

Our extensive engagement in United Nations
peacekeeping has taught us that the triggers for sexual
violence and the entry points for influence are different

from one case to another. But there are some common
points. In all situations, active monitoring and timely
reporting are critical. Without them, early warnings
will be missed, policymaking will not be properly
founded, and perpetrators will slip through the cracks.
Almost always, too, there are groups that are
particularly vulnerable and need specific and special
protection. Again and again, one sees the pattern of
preying on refugees and internally displaced persons,
especially those - mostly women - who have to
venture outside villages and camps in search of water
and firewood.

The recent deployment of Irish defence forces
with the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad has left us with some reflections.
Our experience of that deployment was that, by raising
awareness of human rights, of the unacceptability of
sexual and gender-based violence and of the
responsibilities of Government and other parties, the
Mission helped to foster a climate in which
communities were less likely to tolerate and more
likely to report acts of sexual violence. That was
certainly a positive lesson that a peacekeeping mission,
operating as intended, can raise consciousness and
change tolerance standards in communities.

But helping to change attitudes and standards
brings a follow-up responsibility. It cannot be right that
communities are left with new ways of looking at
things but - with the international presence gone -
no means to ensure that new standards are
implemented. This is where the continuum between
peacekeeping and peacebuilding really matters. In
many peacekeeping contexts, an effectively
functioning domestic judicial or penal system is
lacking. Although international peacekeepers can
temporarily fulfil a very important role, tackling sexual
violence ultimately necessitates support for a wide
range of capacity-building, training and infrastructural
development activities. This may not be quick or easy,
but only such an integrated approach will ensure that
the scourge of sexual violence in conflict is dealt with
in a sustainable and lasting way.

A further source of insight for us has been the
cross-learning process on women, peace and security
that Ireland conducted in partnership with Liberia and
Timor-Leste. This innovative initiative drew on the
experiences of those directly affected by conflict in
Ireland, Northern Ireland, Liberia and Timor-Leste to
discuss the most critical issues facing women and girls
in conflict and post-conflict settings. The report on the
process, which we presented to Under-Secretary-
General Bachelet on 25 October, highlights a number
of important points.

Among the particular priorities stressed
throughout this initiative were the need to fight against
the culture of impunity in relation to sexual violence,
to exclude sex crimes from amnesties, to improve
women's access to formal, traditional and transitional
justice, to increase awareness among family members
and community leaders of issues surrounding sexual
and gender-based violence, to enhance capacity to
prosecute sex crimes, and to incorporate reporting on
sexual and gender-based violence into early warning
systems.

Ireland is already seeking to take these
recommendations forward. For example, sexual and
gender-based violence has been incorporated as an
indicator into an Irish Government-funded early
warning/early response system in Timor-Leste.
10-69655

Let me conclude by reiterating our unequivocal
support for Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Wallstrom and her Office, as well as our
appreciation for the incremental steps that are being
taken by the Security Council on this issue. The
perpetrators of crimes of sexual violence now know
that they are caught in the headlamps of Security
Council attention. Slowly but surely, the darkness in
which they took refuge is being dissipated.

In this season that reminds us all of our common
humanity, I can think of no more appropriate message
from the Security Council than today's expression of
support for and solidarity with victims of sexual
violence in conflict.

