Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): We would like to express our thanks to you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting on women
and peace and security, an issue of great importance on
the agenda of the international community. We listened
with great interest to the statements made earlier by
Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, Ms. Thoraya Obaid and
Ms. Louise Arbour, each of whom addressed a
different aspect of the issue under consideration. The
Security Council's interest in the issue of women and
armed conflict contributes to the activities of the entire
United Nations system in this area. It has furthered the
strengthening, promotion and integration of existing
General Assembly and Economic and Social Council
mechanisms relating to the protection of women in
armed conflict, to strengthening measures to empower
women and to promoting their equal participation in
peacekeeping operations and important decision-
making in the post-conflict reconstruction of States and
societies. In this context, we hail the important
accomplishments that have been achieved in
implementing the provisions of resolution 1325 (2000),
as noted in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2004/814), which my delegation has read very
carefully.

The shameful and terrible situation of the
millions of victims of sexual violence makes it
important to give immediate attention to this matter,
which presents a long-term challenge to us all. Action
is required at all levels: within societies that suffer
from such practices by all United Nations bodies and
by the international donor community. With regret, we
must point out that no concrete progress has been made
in protecting women and girls in armed conflict from
all forms of violence, including human trafficking,
rape, murder and other violations of women's rights.

In our View, strong international pressure should
be applied to those parties to armed conflict which do
not respect the relevant provisions of international law
and international humanitarian law, particularly the
Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949. In this connection,
we believe that the Secretary-General's
recommendations constitute an encouraging starting
point for preventing violence against women in armed
conflict and for facing up to that phenomenon.

Here we must also recall that the provisions of
resolution 1325 (2000) include addressing not only the
situation of women in armed conflict, but also, clearly,
that of women under occupation. There is no doubt that
the international community is aware of the tragic
situation of Syrian and Palestinian women and girls
under Israeli occupation.

In Syria, women play a role in all decision-
making processes in the political, economic, social,
cultural, health, education, labour and development
spheres. Syrian women occupy high positions and
participate in the electoral process both by voting and
by running for office in all legislative municipal, local,
labour union and occupational councils. The scope of
this involvement prevents any violations of women's
rights.

Because of the importance of the issue of women
in armed conflict, a symposium was held in Beirut,
Lebanon, a few months ago, on Arab women in armed
conflict, with the participation of women's delegations,
experts on women's issues, civil society organizations
from all Arab countries and high-level delegations
from Syria and other Arab countries. The symposium
made recommendations that should be taken into
consideration.

Resolution 1325 (2000) provides a solid political
framework for dealing with gender-based Violence in
armed conflict and in peace-building situations. The
challenge that we face, however, is that of transforming
that political framework into political will and concrete
action.

