Ms. Furman (Israel): As a member of the Group
of Friends of Women, Peace and Security, Israel aligns
itself with the statement delivered by the representative
of Canada on behalf of the Group and would like to add
the following remarks.

First, I would like to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Patten and her team for their
dedicated work and for the Secretary-General's recent
report (S/2018/250), which focuses on current trends
and provides us with concrete recommendations. The

report highlights that the past year was marked by
the liberation of territories and the release or escape
of numerous women and girls formerly held by armed
or terrorist groups. It is our collective duty to support
those women and girls as they try to piece their lives
back together.

Despite the encouraging news on women and girls
who have been released, it is important to remember that
they will carry the burden of their horrific experiences
for the rest of their lives. Take, for example, Zahra, a
Yazidi woman from Kojo, Iraq, who recalls trembling
at the sight of buses of Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham (ISIS) fighters with long hair and beards who had
come to kidnap hundreds of women and girls, blindfold
them and sell them as sex slaves. Ekhlas, another
Yazidi woman, whom members may have heard speak
at the United Nations last year, was raped every day for
six months by ISIS terrorists. She was only 14 years
old. Ekhlas remembers the screams of a 10-year-old
girl who had been taken away by a man four times her
age. She is haunted by the memory of her own abuser,
a man she rightly described as a beast, who made her
want to die. We cannot be silent in the face of such
barbaric acts, which should have been relegated to the
Dark Ages.

Groups like ISIS, Al-Shabaab, Boko Haram and
Al-Qaida use sexual violence as a terror tactic, but it is
notjust they who are guilty. According to a recent report
by Special Representative Patten and other accounts,
the Syrian armed forces, the Syrian intelligence
services and Syrian pro-Government forces are guilty
of employing those savage practices as well. We must
make sure that those who commit these horrific crimes
are brought to justice. Impunity for such crimes must
not be tolerated. Our approach must include a variety
of measures, including the adoption of stronger laws,
more stringent enforcement mechanisms, tougher
penalties for offenders and the provision of safe havens
for victims to seek help, support, medical treatment,
psychological care and legal assistance.

In some instances over recent years, victims of
sexual violence were violated not only by extremist
armed groups and repressive regimes, but also by
United Nations peacekeepers. Among those sent to
protect local populations from harm, there have been
individuals who have abused their positions and
violated the most basic human rights. Such acts of
sexual exploitation and abuse must not be tolerated. We
firmly support the Secretary-General's zero-tolerance
policy, as well as his compact with Member States
committing to the elimination of sexual exploitation
and abuse, which Israel was among the first to sign.
In that context, we should incorporate more women
in peacekeeping operations. We also wish to reiterate
our support for the victim-centred approach, promoted
through the work of the Victims' Rights Advocate
and the Special Coordinator on improving the United
Nations response to sexual exploitation and abuse.

As stated earlier, victims of sexual violence
and abuse must be afforded the tools to safely report
these violations, regardless of the identities of
the perpetrators. In that regard, we were glad to hear
of the recent initiative to start a system of community-
based reporting to encourage victims to come forward,
especially if they are assaulted by United Nations
peacekeepers or personnel.

Facing the risk of rejection by their families and
communities, it is no surprise that the majority of
cases of sexual violence go unreported and that victims
face an increased risk of suicide. That is a reality we
cannot tolerate. Sexual violence must be treated as
the crime and as the act of terror that it is. It is the
collective responsibility of the entire international
community - of our Governments, civil societies and
United Nations agencies - to remove the stigma, erase
the shame and come to the aid of victims of sexual
violence. Victims of sexual violence are more than
statistics. Every victim has a name, every name reflects
a life and every life represents an entire world.

