Mrs. Rugwabiza (Rwanda): I thank you very much,
Mr. President, and your delegation for organizing this
important open debate. I also thank Deputy Secretary-
General Amina Mohammed and Mr. Adama Dieng
for their briefings. We hope that today's debate will
contribute to enhancing collective action against this
war crime, given the alarmingly growing number of
conflicts where sexual violence is used as a weapon of
war and terrorism against civilian populations.

Sexual and gender-based violence is not inevitable.
Preventing and protecting against mass atrocities,
including sexual violence, is a fundamental State
responsibility. As Member States, it is indeed our
responsibility to put in place the necessary normative
and legal framework, as well as enforcement measures,
to ensure zero tolerance for sexual violence in both
times of peace and war. However, as we all know, the
first rule to be broken during times of conflict is the
rule of law. It is therefore our collective responsibility
to ensure the protection of those targeted by sexual
violence and most in need ofprotection during conflicts.

As situations of conflict continue to worsen in many
places and women and children continue to be the main
target of sexual violence, we believe that all United
Nations peacekeeping missions should have a robust
mandate to protect civilians. The Kigali Principles on
the Protection of Civilians, to which many members in
the Chamber are signatory, are an effective guide to that
end. Protecting those in need should be given priority
by ensuring that we take all measures to provide more
effective protection to the civilian populations, that we
facilitate humanitarian assistance and that we allow
investigation in cases of violation and abuse. Rwanda
is happy to meet the minimum target of 15 per cent of
all deployed peacekeeping contingents being female.
We mention that specifically because we think that
increasing the numbers of women in peacekeeping
will go a long way in helping us to ensure the fight
against violence.

Rwanda believes that Member States should
systematically train all peacekeepers to address gender
issues, prevent sexual violence and protect individuals,
including women and girls. Rwanda has operationalized
a curriculum for all of our troops and police in
predeployment training that includes lessons on sexual
exploitation and abuse. In the same vein, we call upon
all Member States to boost women's participation in
all contingents and units. More specifically, we call
upon Member States to include gender advisers and
female officers and an increased presence for female
peacekeeping personnel in general.

Sexual violence in conflict is a crime that we can
eradicate. We strongly believe that our joint efforts can
yieldtangibleresultsthroughacombinationofpreventive
and responsive measures, including targeted sanctions
against all categories of perpetrators, monitoring
and systematic reporting, assistance for victims, the
empowerment of women and girls, increased numbers
of female peacekeepers and advisers and training for
all forces. That will go a long way in contributing to
creating an environment of zero tolerance for sexual
violence as a weapon of war.

We will continue to extend our support to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict in implementing her mandate.

