Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): Kazakhstan thanks
the Uruguayan presidency for convening today's
important meeting. We also thank the Deputy
Secretary-General, Ms. Mohammed, the Under-
Secretary-General, Mr. Dieng, and the representative
of the non-governmental organizations, Ms. Jaf, for
their briefings.

Today sexual violence in conflict must be fully
addressed in all its dimensions, as it is linked, directly
or indirectly, to the nature of conflict, the profile of the
perpetrators and the nature of violence in its horrific
forms. The escalation of sexual violence in conflict
has reached alarming and unprecedented proportions.
Sexual violence is aggravated by transnational crimes
and human trafficking and has become a tactic of war,
a core element of the ideology of terrorist groups and a
source of their income.

This scourge therefore requires cross-national
interventions. All efforts of UN Action against
Sexual Violence in Conflict, with UN-Women as the
lead agency, require coordination with regional and
subregional structures. These must be coordinated
with international organizations, especially the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime as well as Interpol,
and parliamentary religious leaders, non-governmental
organizations and civil society. The object is not only
to identify and monitor such abuse, but to take action
against perpetrators, change extremist narratives,
promote education at all levels, and create awareness
around the empowerment of women.

The State has the primary responsibility of
enhancing legislation to respond to sexual violence and
other atrocity crimes, and of strengthening their law
enforcement and criminal justice system. In addition,
national legislative responses around the world should
also be harmonized with United Nations standards to
be made compatible for cross-regional action. In that
regard, we commend the Team of Experts on the Rule
of Law and Sexual Violence in conflict for its continued
technical assistance to Member States.

States should also be helped to implement resolution
1325 (2000) and other subsequent resolutions, including
1820 (2008), 1888 (2009), 1960 (2010) and 2106 (2013),
to counter violence at all levels and across all segments
of society. We need to ensure accountability for all
cases of sexual violence in conflict and bring an end
to impunity. States need to work with Security Council
sanctions committees, which should include sexual
violence as a designated criterion for sanctions and the
freezing of assets and finances of organized networks.
Information sharing should take place not only across
committees, but also across countries.

Kazakhstan calls on all to abide by the
international principles of the rule of law and human
rights and to fully implement the relevant Security
Council resolutions. We also fully support the United
Nations zero-tolerance policy on all forms of sexual
exploitation and strongly believe that preventing sexual
abuse by peacekeepers should be an absolute priority.
All peacekeeping missions need to have protection as a
fundamental element in their mandates, with a greater
employment of women military and police officers with
full training prior to deployment.

Kazakhstan is presently contributing by fielding
its highly qualified military observers with gender
competence to the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara, and we are working on
expanding this deployment in the future.

Sexual violence affects every aspect ofa survivor's
life, child and adult. The victims of human trafficking
and sexual violence should receive full, competent and
speedy attention and support, with increased access
to health care, social support, legal assistance and
social economic reintegration. Kazakhstan shares the
conviction in the dignity and empowerment of women
with other Member States and will join the international
community in every multilateral action to promote these
essential elements for the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the new agenda for peace.

