Mr. MacKay (New Zealand): New Zealand is
pleased that the issue of women, peace and security is
once again on the agenda of the Security Council. The
debate in the Council two years ago that led to
resolution 1325 (2000) was a milestone, and we now
welcome the Secretary-General's comprehensive study
mandated by that resolution and look forward to
working towards the full implementation of the
constructive recommendations contained in the study.
In recognition of the study's importance, New Zealand
has contributed to assisting with its development.

This study highlights the particular impact of
armed conflict and its aftermath on women and girls as
victims of violence, including sexual violence; as
refugees and internally displaced persons; as care-
givers trying to provide for their families; and as the
victims of an often intensified discrimination and
marginalization during times of conflict. The study has
rightly acknowledged the need for on-the-ground
information about the particular situation of women
during armed conflicts in order for the relevant
agencies involved to be able to effectively deliver
assistance.

Importantly, this study promotes the need to
eliminate impunity for crimes committed during
periods of armed conflict. We welcome the study's
acknowledgement of the significant advances in the
international legal framework - in which gender-
based crimes such as rape, enforced prostitution,
trafficking and enslavement have now been recognized
as war crimes, crimes against humanity and, indeed,
components of the crime of genocide. New Zealand is a
strong supporter of the establishment of the
International Criminal Court and urges States to ensure
that gender balance, as well as appropriate expertise on
the human rights of women and on violence against
women, is reflected in the appointment of
investigators, prosecutors and judges to the
International Criminal Court.

New Zealand also fully endorses the need to
involve women in the negotiation of peace agreements
at all levels. We are already aware of the constructive
role that women have frequently played in the
development of informal peace processes, often
creating a groundswell towards peace. In the Pacific
region we have commended the helpful role that
women played, at the grass roots level, in the
resolution of the secessionist crisis in Bougainville.
The role of the Leitana Women's Group, for example,
received recognition from the Secretary-General for its
part in the promotion of peace in Bougainville.
Similarly, women's groups were actively involved in
promoting peace in the Solomon Islands. Obviously, in
the interests of sustainable peace, there is much to be
gained from involving women in such a key decision-
making process, including in the formal negotiations.
We encourage the Security Council and States to take
this into account.

The need for gender sensitivity and the inclusion
of women are critical elements of successful
peacekeeping operations. New Zealand has long
recognized the importance of involving women in our
defence forces. This year, New Zealand celebrated 25
years of the integration of women into the New
Zealand Defence Forces, following the disbandment of
separate women's services. This has ensured that New
Zealand women have participated actively in
international peacekeeping operations - for example,
in the Sinai, Cambodia, Bosnia, Timor-Leste and
Bougainville. In both Bosnia and Timor-Leste, women
served as troop commanders. Women have comprised
between 8 and 10 per cent of each New Zealand
battalion group deployed in Timor-Leste, and make up
a significant proportion of the air force personnel
deployed there. These women are deployed in diverse
roles, including crews, logistics and administration. All
members of the New Zealand Defence Forces are
expected to adhere to a strict code of conduct that
recognizes the importance of gender equality and
sensitivity to gender perspectives.

New Zealand has also focused on the role of
women in the United Nations system, particularly in
the area of peacekeeping, and in our Third Committee
draft resolution on the status of women in the United
Nations system, submitted jointly with Canada and
Australia. In that draft resolution we have called for the
Secretary-General to appoint more women as special
representatives, especially in matters relating to
peacekeeping, peace-building and preventive
diplomacy. We are pleased that the Secretary-General's
study also emphasized this point.

The study also highlights the importance of
humanitarian operations, including refugee agencies,
attending to the specific needs and priorities of women
and girls affected by armed conflicts and displacement.
We also welcome this development.

In rebuilding societies it is imperative that
women are involved at every level and that the
interests of women are taken into account at this
critical stage of development. We have welcomed, for
example, the growing participation of women in
Afghanistan's political, economic and social life,
particularly the inclusion of women in the Afghan
Interim Administration and the establishment of the
Afghanistan Ministry for Women's Affairs. We hope
that Afghanistan will continue to promote and protect
the human rights of women in the ongoing process of
reconstruction.

Similarly, in Timor-Leste, the inclusion of women
in the new Constituent Assembly and the recognition of
the economic contribution of women are very positive
developments. As clearly identified in the Secretary-
General's report, we urge States and United Nations
agencies to ensure that gender perspectives are
incorporated into rehabilitation and reconstruction
programmes.

I would like to thank you very much indeed,
Mr. President, for scheduling this debate and for the
opportunity to comment on this important study.

