Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I should
like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for
organizing this debate. I welcome the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Wallstrom;
the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Ladsous; and Ms. Megheirbi of the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security
for their statements.

France associates itself with the statement to be
made on behalf of the European Union.

I should like to reiterate our full support for the
work of the Special Representative and to commend
the quality of her annual report. We also welcome the
work done by the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law
and Sexual Violence in Conflict.

The effective implementation of Security Council
resolutions on women, peace and security is a priority
for France, which worked actively for their adoption. It
also worked to strengthen attention to this issue within
the European Union. At the national level, at the end of
2010 France adopted an action plan for the
implementation of the resolutions on women, peace
and security.

We welcome the progress described in the report
of the Special Representative regarding the
establishment of institutional mechanisms to implement
resolutions adopted by the Security Council. I point

12-2393]
particularly to the progressive implementation of
monitoring, analysis and communication arrangements,
which will make it possible to gather information on
sexual violence. This is essential for the Council to be
properly informed.

However, as Ms. Wallstrom emphasized, the
important issue is that of the gap between our
initiatives - the mechanisms we establish - and the
reality on the ground. Here, the account given by the
Secretariat is alarming. Sexual violence remains
intolerably high.

In many conflicts today, sexual violence is a
weapon used to crush individuals and communities.
Therefore, these acts of violence are a destabilizing
factor and a threat to peace and security with, as
Ms. Wallstrom emphasized, lasting consequences. By
way of example, hundreds of Somali women refugees
have been raped, sometimes in front of their husbands.
Conflicts, droughts and massive displacements increase
the risk of sexual violence against women and girls. In
Darfur, the Government of the Sudan has shut down all
clinics for the victims of rape. During the past year,
more than 625 cases of sexual violence were registered
by the United Nations in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

Sexual violence does not occur only when there is
an armed conflict, as the Special Representative
pointed out in her report. Situations in which there is
political instability, including a climate of violence
before and after elections, are particularly favourable
for the commission of those crimes. Thus in Syria, the
Syrian armed forces and security forces have resorted
to sexual torture of prisoners, including children and
adolescents.

Sexual violence is not inevitable.

Given the magnitude of the challenges facing the
United Nations, France fully supports the mandate of
the Special Representative. Resolution 1960 (2010),
adopted in December 2010, marked a political
commitment to use all the means available to the
Security Council to ensure that sexual violence is
prevented. It is up to us today to do our utmost to
ensure that that resolution is implemented. The Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations
mentioned that what is important today here is the
swift deployment of women's protection officers in
United Nations missions.

12-2393]

We also welcome the establishment of a list of
parties, annexed to the report of the Special
Representative, pursuant to resolution 1960 (2010).
This list should make it possible to improve
communication of information on troubling situations.

It is indeed a decisive step forward in combating
impunity for the perpetrators of sexual violence,
another imperative in our combat against this scourge.
The perpetrators of such violence must be brought to
justice and sentenced with all due severity. The
Council has a crucial role to play in that regard, both
by adopting targeted measures against perpetrators of
gender-based violence in the context of the relevant
sanctions committees and through its ability to refer
situations to the International Criminal Court.

Lastly, it is essential to pursue our efforts to
implement a zero-tolerance policy in peacekeeping
operations. The United Nations system and Member
States must bear their responsibilities in that regard.
We should set an example.

