Archbishop Auza: Almost 20 years ago, the
landmark resolution 1325 (2000) called for women to be
increasingly represented at decision-making levels in
peace processes and in the prevention, management and
resolution of conflict, to be protected from violence in
situations of armed conflict and - because they often
bear the brunt of violent conflict - and to participate
actively as agents of change for durable peace. As
Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix has
emphasized, peacekeeping works effectively when
women play meaningful roles and when women in
host communities are directly engaged. Our discussion
today should consider the role of women in two
particular contexts.

The first context is that of the women who take
part in United Nations peacekeeping operations
around the world, whose numbers, in line with the
Secretary-General's key priority, are increasing. They
are daughters, sisters, wives and mothers, who bring to
their work not only their courage, professionalism and
sense of duty but also a special sensitivity that enables
them to engage more effectively with local populations;
better assess the real needs on the ground by offering
women, boys and girls the opportunity to share their
grievances and concerns; and galvanize local efforts
to say no to violence and misery and yes to peace
and development.

That brings us to the second context - that of
the women who live in conflict zones or who have
experienced the trauma of war. They play an essential
role in rebuilding trust, offering insight and facilitating
reconciliation. Some of them have political
responsibilities and have been key players in
negotiating peace deals. It is encouraging to see that
more women are involved in emerging democratic
processes, strengthening the rule of law, giving voice
to the voiceless and so on. Yet the vast majority of
women who make a contribution do so through their
commitment at the local level. Women who have seen
their families and communities torn apart, their villages
and homes savagely destroyed, their dignity violated
and their loved ones taken are often, by their inner
strength, courage and resilience, the most inspiring
witnesses with the capacity to sow hope, open up new
prospects and bring people together. Their presence at
the negotiating table and during each and every stage of
peace processes is a necessity and an invaluable benefit.
They ensure inclusivity, credibility and durability. It is
of the utmost importance to guarantee that their voices
are heard.

In crisis situations, female leadership is often found
in faith-based communities, where women excel on the
path to dialogue, collaboration and non-violence. They
actively engage in peacebuilding and the prevention
of relapse into conflict. Their involvement normally
brings about large and lasting dividends. It is important,
therefore, not to overlook such a valid contribution but
to seek ways to further harness these efforts, especially
in regions where religion has been manipulated to incite
division or prevent peace processes from effectively
taking root.

My delegation wishes to commend and express
gratitude to all women peacekeepers and peacebuilders
in the world, in particular those who work to promote
the greater involvement of women at all levels within
United Nations peacekeeping missions, which remain
the most recognizable presence of the United Nations
across the world.

