Major General Lund: I thank you, Madam
President, for inviting me to speak here today. My
special thanks go to Germany for initiating this meeting
on women in peacekeeping.

The momentum on pushing for gender equality
must be maintained. I am very impressed and happy
that the Secretary-General has placed gender high up
our agenda. He is a role model for us Heads of Mission
and Force Commanders.

I will approach my five minutes from a practical
angle, with examples on how I tried to increase the
numbers, facilitate women in missions, promote
mindfulness of gender issues and reach out to the
local community.

When I was appointed Force Commander of
the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus
(UNFICYP), in 2014, I was surprised to see how
much power one had as a Force Commander. My first
goal was to team up with the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General at that time, Ms. Lisa
Buttenheim. We matched, and for once I did not need
to convince my boss that gender was important. Both
of us had gender equality in our spine. She had full
trust in me and empowered me. When I arrived, the
percentage of military females stood at 4 per cent.
Ms. Buttenheim brought me into all political and troop-
and police-contributing country (TCC/PCC) Visits,
during which we put gender at the top of the agenda.
Just that focus on gender resulted in increasing female
participation to 8 per cent and 25 per cent for military
and police components, respectively. I can never forget
that I wondered why other Force Commanders did not
use their influence and power when it comes to gender
equality within the mission and in the local society.

We had 26 positions in UNFICYP, operating
24/7/365. Many of them were not organized to support
both genders. We established a project to change
that, and, by the time I left, all 26 positions could
accommodate both. Generally, armed forces have a
hard time retaining women for a life-long commitment.
There are many reasons that women do not stay, but one
is the male culture within the military organization.
To take just an example - the gym - all camps and
positions have a gym, and in most of them there are
posters showing half-naked women. How many women
go to the gym in a bikini? Instead, the walls should
have posters on how to do exercise, with normal
outfits for gym. Posters demeaning to women vanished
in UNFICYP.

I also noticed that our military skills competitions
included only males on the teams. I changed that. All
teams had to have females. Yes, it was a challenge for
the countries that had sent infantry units. But very
often the support component had females, and so they
had to include them. All of our competitions and games
had to have female representation. That led to a more
inclusive environment in all units.

I held weekly sector commander meetings. When
Headquarters sent directives to the mission on sexual
exploitation and abuse and gender, I used them to
underline my responsibilities as well as theirs. I also
had to do research to find out in which countries among
my TCCs and PCCs prostitution was legal, so that I
could focus more on those commanders. When we had
staff training on the code of conduct, HIV, gender and
sexual exploitation and abuse, I was always present,
both to underline the importance of those issues and
to be a good role model for both women and men. I
also initiated a female military network. Those types of
networks can be useful to address different issues. We
have had a female military network in place in Norway
since 1989. That has been important to me.

As a female Force Commander and Head ofMission,
I do everything that men do, but there are many other
doors that open in society because you are a woman. I
went in those doors. That resulted in public speaking
nearly every week and the possibility to engage with
all of society. Lisa Buttenheim and I engaged with the
first ladies to become more visible to the women on
the island.

In my present capacity, I try to do a lot of the same. I
am up to 12 per cent female observers and gender is at
the top of my agenda.

My final message is that troop- and
police-contributing countries must do more. The
Secretary-General has given the Security Council a
good example of how it is possible to change within
a short time. Every chief of defence has the power to
change. We out in the field need to be able to reach
out to all of society. The Security Council can make
that happen.

