Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): Allow me to begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for having organized this
open debate of the Security Council. I also wish to
thank the speakers for their important and passionate
statements, as well as to reiterate Italy's full support for
the work of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.

Italy welcomes the Security Council's adoption of
resolution 2106 (2013), regarding sexual violence in
conflict, which signals the commitment of the Council
to address an issue that is key to international peace
and security.

While Italy aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union, I wish to
make the following additional remarks in my national
capacity.

We appreciate the focus of this debate on impunity
for crimes of sexual violence. Impunity makes those
responsible for crimes confident enough to use sexual
Violence as a tactic of war. Impunity takes away any
hope for justice from victims and survivors. Impunity
is a stumbling block in rebuilding peaceful societies
after conflicts. In order to make a full contribution to
our discussion, I will focus on six specific points.

First, it is important that the Council be provided
with timely and accurate information. Regular briefings
to the Security Council by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and by UN-Women; enhancing
the United Nations monitoring, analysis and reporting
mechanism; and the systematic inclusion of women's
protection advisers on peacekeeping and political
missions could strengthen the capacity of the Council
to effectively respond to impunity.

Secondly, there must be strict implementation of
zero-tolerance policies towards sexual misconduct by
peacekeeping, political and peacebuilding personnel.
Those actors are the face of the United Nations for the
people who are plagued by conflict. They must ensure
the highest standards of respect for human rights and
humanitarian law and be accountable for their violation.

Thirdly, sexual violence should be addressed in
peace agreements. Sexual violence should be included
in the definition of acts prohibited by ceasefires. The
principle of no amnesty for the perpetrators for crimes
of sexual violence should always be respected. The
participation of women in peace negotiations and
ceasefires are the best way to ensure that these issues
are not traded off for other agendas.

Fourthly, national authorities should be supported
in their efforts to fight against impunity. Governments
have the primary responsibility to protect their
populations from sexual violence and to ensure that
justice is done. The international community must stand
ready to provide technical assistance and capacity-
building, and to help strengthen the rule of law. The
United Nations has a key role to play, as proven by the
work done by the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law
and Sexual Violence in Conflict. Peacekeepers shouldd
be trained and tasked with investigating crimes ofsexual
violence. Cooperation with civil society organizations,
particularly those led by women, is also essential.

Fifthly, cooperation should be enhanced between
the Security Council and the International Criminal
Court (ICC), in particular when dealing with cases
of sexual violence. The perpetrators of large-scale
sexual violence should never benefit from differences
of opinion within the Council on a specific situation.
Well-documented crimes should act as a clear basis for
fast-track referrals by the Council to the ICC.

Sixthly, and lastly, comprehensive strategies are
needed. While we are thoroughly committed to bringing
to justice the perpetrators of sexual Violence, we must
give equal priority to the health, safety and the dignity
of survivors. National and international programmes
for post-conflict reconstruction must ensure that the
needs of victims are met and their voices heard. All
forms of reparation and redress must follow a victim-
centred approach.

Italy has placed a high priority on the protection
of women against sexual violence in its human rights
policy. Last week, the Italian Parliament ratified the
Council of Europe convention on preventing and
combating violence against women and domestic
violence. We strongly encourage States to ratify this
important instrument. Moreover, the Italian national
action plan on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) includes specific provisions addressing sexual
violence in conflict.

Finally, Italy will enhance its support for the United
Nations Trust Fund in Support of Actions to Eliminate
Violence against Women, which is the global grant-
making mechanism dedicated to addressing violence
against women and girls in all of its forms, including
sexual violence.

To conclude, today we must all send a strong
message to the perpetrators of sexual violence. They
must know that sexual violence is not cost-free. The
more seriously we endeavour to make this message a
reality, the closer we will come to finally relegating
rape in war to history books.

