The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Secretary-General, Ministers and other distinguished
representatives present in the Security Council
Chamber. Their presence today underscores the
importance of the subject matter under discussion.

In accordance with rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Albania, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, the
Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Georgia, Greece,
Guatemala, Hungary, India, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Montenegro,
Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, the Netherlands,
Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Pakistan, Panama,
the Philippines, Portugal, Qatar, the Republic of Korea,
Romania, Rwanda, San Marino, Sierra Leone, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, the Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland,
Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, the United Arab Emirates,
Uruguay and Viet Nam to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of
the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women; Ms. Bineta Diop, African
Union Special Envoy on Women, Peace and Security;
Ms. Lina Ekomo, on behalf of the Network of African
Women in Conflict Prevention and Mediation and the
African Women Leaders Network; and Ms. Alaa Salah,
civil society activist and community leader.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules ofprocedure, I also invite the following
to participate in this meeting: Ms. Clare Hutchinson,
Special Representative of the NATO Secretary-General
for Women, Peace and Security; Her Excellency
Ms. Mara Marinaki, Principal Adviser on Gender
and the Implementation of United Nations Security
Council Resolution 1325 (2000) on Women and Peace
and Security of the European External Action Service;
His Excellency Mr. Maged Abdelfattah Abdelaziz,
Permanent Observer of the League of Arab States to
the United Nations; and Ms. Amarsanaa Darisuren,
Senior Adviser on Gender Issues of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in that regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document 8/2019/800, which contains the report
of the Secretary-General on women and peace and
security, and document S/2019/801, which contains
a letter dated 8 October 2019 from the Permanent
Representative of South Africa addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/2019/84l, which contains the text ofa draft
resolution submitted by Armenia, Australia, Canada,
Denmark, Georgia, Indonesia, Ireland, Jordan, Liberia,
Morocco, North Macedonia, Norway, the Philippines,
Portugal, the Republic of Korea, San Marino, South
Africa, Switzerland, Tunisia, Turkey, the United Arab
Emirates and Uruguay.

The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by Show ofhands.

In favour:
Belgium, China, Cote d'Ivoire, Dominican
Republic, Equatorial Guinea, France, Germany,
Indonesia, Kuwait, Peru, Poland, Russian
Federation, South Africa, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America

The President: The draft resolution received 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 2493 (2019).

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements on the resolution
just adopted.


