Mr. Wali (Nigeria): Nigeria welcomes this open
debate on the important issue of women, peace and
security. We recall that the item was first discussed
shortly before the adoption of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) of October 2000. We note that
the debate is taking place on the fourth anniversary of
the unanimous adoption of the resolution. We also
recall with interest that the landmark resolution
reaffirmed the important role of women in the
prevention and resolution of conflicts, peace
negotiations, peace-building and peacekeeping. It also
reaffirmed the role of women in humanitarian response
and in post-conflict reconstruction and stressed the
importance of their equal participation and full
involvement in all efforts for the maintenance and
promotion of peace and security.

In situations of conflict, women and children
constitute the vast majority of civilian casualties, as
they are the most vulnerable. Many women and
children suffer forcible displacement, injury and death.
They also suffer greater difficulties in making a living
during and after conflict, in addition to other
indignities, such as torture and rape. Consequently,
Nigeria believes that all efforts aimed at conflict
resolution and peace-building should include the
strengthening of the safety of women through the
maintenance of the rule of law and the protection of
women's rights.

The Government of Nigeria has long recognized
the importance and significant contribution of women
to national development and, in particular, their role in
the prevention and resolution of conflicts and in peace-
building efforts. In that regard, the Nigerian
Constitution guarantees the participation and
representation of women at all levels of Government.
That includes women's participation in the prevention,
management and resolution of conflicts and in politics.

Resolution 1325 (2000) recognizes the negative
impact of armed conflict on women and the need for
effective institutional arrangements to guarantee their
protection. It also recognizes that the full participation
of women in the peace process would contribute
significantly to the maintenance and promotion of
international peace and security. The resolution further
encourages the incorporation of a gender perspective
into United Nations peacekeeping operations and calls
for measures that would ensure the protection of and
respect for the rights of women and children.

Nigeria reiterates its support for the resolution. In
particular, we commend the mainstreaming of the
gender perspective into peacekeeping operations. In
that regard, it is gratifying to recall that, over the last
decade, the international legal framework has
recognized the need to address some of the particular
crimes and indignities suffered by women and girls in
armed conflict. Such crimes include rape, enforced
prostitution, and the trafficking and enslavement of
women. We welcome the fact that such crimes are
included in the definitions of war crimes and crimes
against humanity, and as components of the crimes of
genocide and torture. In addition, there has been an
increasing awareness and recognition of the peculiar
circumstances and plight of women and girls during
armed conflict and its aftermath, particularly in
relation to sexual violence.

The international community cannot afford to
continue to ignore the exposure of women and children
to the dangers of communicable diseases, such as HIV/
AIDS, and other sexually transmitted diseases to which
women are vulnerable. We note that the plight of
women is particularly exacerbated in situations where
conflicts have destroyed the health care infrastructure
necessary for prevention and cure. There is therefore a
need to rebuild health and social services, develop
appropriate legal institutions, create administrative
structures, establish mine action programmes,
repatriate refugees and deliver humanitarian aid to
women and girls who suffer abuse.

We recognize that no lasting peace can be
established without the participation of women and
girls and the inclusion of gender perspectives in both
formal and informal peace processes. That is clearly in
conformity with the Windhoek Declaration and the
Namibia Plan of Action on Mainstreaming a Gender
Perspective in Multidimensional Peace Support
Operations. The United Nations and the international
community should therefore ensure that all peace
accords address the consequences of the impact of
armed conflict on women and girls, their contribution
to the peace process and their needs and priorities in
the aftermath of conflict.

In line with the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), Nigeria, as a major troop-contributing
country, includes women as members of its
peacekeeping troops. That is in recognition of women
as able partners in all spheres of development,
particularly in peace initiatives and post-conflict
resolution.

We are concerned that, although resolution 1325
(2000) called for the establishment of the Office of the
Special Adviser on Gender Issues, regrettably, that
Office is not adequately staffed and funded. The fact
that the Office is funded through voluntary
contributions has limited its financial capacity and thus
its ability to perform. Accordingly, we call for better
funding from the United Nations regular budget to
enable the Office to implement fully the humanitarian
and human rights laws that protect the rights of women
and girls during and after conflicts.

We are also concerned that the requirement for
the gender training of peacekeeping personnel, as
contained in paragraphs 5, 6 and 7 of the resolution
under consideration, is not being implemented. We
therefore urge that the gender training module -
which, indeed, is compulsory for peacekeepers during
their induction programme - be implemented. In that
regard, we welcome DPKO's effort to develop a gender
and peacekeeping training package. To further improve
the situation, we call on DPKO to set up a mechanism
for the sharing of best practices with troop-contributing
countries on strategies aimed at the recruitment of
women.

In conclusion, we reaffirm our support for
resolution 1325 (2000) and call for improved
implementation of gender mainstreaming in
peacekeeping operations. In particular, we call for an
increase in the number of female experts as members
of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as well as
the active involvement of women in every peace
process. In our View, that would facilitate the
deployment of such female experts to counsel and deal
with the peculiar needs of women who are victims of
abuse.

