Ms. Kaya (Turkey): We thank the United Kingdom
for organizing today's debate and the Secretary-General
and the distinguished briefers for their statements. We
find this open debate timely and relevant, following
the adoption of the first Security Council resolution
on this topic (resolution 2331 (2016)), which Turkey
co-sponsored in December 2016.

Human trafficking constitutes a Violation of human
rights and an offence to the dignity and integrity of
human beings. It is rightly described as modern-day
slavery. It is also a serious transnational organized crime,
which has immense costs on the social and economic
fabric of our societies. Due to its geographical location,
Turkey has been adversely affected by the rising trends
in human trafficking and related criminal practices. In
the crises in our region, criminal and terrorist networks
resort to different forms of exploitation of human
beings and commit gender-based sexual violence and
the forced recruitment of adults and children to fund
and sustain their operations.

Speakers before me have recalled how terrorist
organizations such as Da'esh, Boko Haram and
Al-Shabaab resort to human trafficking for forced labour
and enslavement. It is also important to emphasize that
the terrorist organization of the Kurdistan Workers'
Party and the Democratic Union Party (PKK/PYD)
also widely employs methods that exploit human
beings, particularly through the forced recruitment
of children and young women. Turkey is actively
combating terrorist organizations such as Da'esh and
the PKK/PYD, and we support our partners in similar
efforts. In doing so, we recognize that we must address
the vulnerabilities of victims trapped in conflicts and
ensure accountability for the perpetrators.

Turkey remains strongly committed to eradicating
human trafficking through a progressive approach. In
that regard, we have introduced administrative and
legal measures that aim to combat the problem through
prevention, protection, prosecution, and cooperation.
At the international level, Turkey is a party to the
United Nations Convention on Transnational Organized
Crime and its relevant supplementary protocols. At the
regional level, since February 2016 Turkey has been
party to the Council of Europe Convention on Action
against Trafficking in Human Beings. We participate
in the related activities of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and engage bilaterally with
States in Eurasia.

At the domestic level, our efforts are focused
on strengthening our legislation and improving the
implementation of our obligations. In 2002, we formed a
national task force for combating human trafficking and
since then have developed and implemented two national
action plans, designed to implement international
standards in the fight against human trafficking,
eradicate that scourge in Turkey and strengthen our
institutions. More recently, in March 2016, we issued
a regulation on combating human trafficking and
protecting its victims, for which we have established
a Department for the Protection of Victims of Human
Trafficking, tasked with its effective implementation.
The Department is responsible for conducting projects
with a diverse group of stakeholders. In that regard,
we have put in place initiatives such as a multilingual
157 helpline and programmes for victim support and
voluntary safe return.

Human trafficking cannot be prevented by
Governments acting individually. We should
recalibrate and coordinate our ongoing efforts in line
with the commitments that we agreed to under the New
York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants (General Assembly resolution 71/1). As the country hosting the
largest number of refugees in the world, including
more than 3.2 million Syrians and Iraqis, Turkey will
continue to take measures necessary to prevent the
human trafficking, forced labour and enslavement of
those who have already fled the horrors of conflict.

