Mr. Mendoza-Garcia (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): Costa Rica wishes to thank the Uruguayan
presidency and Vice-Chancellor Cancela for convening
today's open debate on this relevant topic. We also
thank Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed
and the other speakers for their briefings.

It is important to reiterate that sexual violence is
always unacceptable. However, its widespread use as
a terrorist tactic and a weapon of war and terrorism
remains of particular concern because it is one of the
most cruel and terrifying forms of social coercion,
especially when used as a strategy to control and
intimidate entire communities and undermine the
dignity and autonomy of people at their deepest levels.
Equally alarming are the growing restrictions on the
rights of women and girls being promoted by extremist
groups, the control and restriction of these rights
having become a fundamental element of conflict and
the pretext for terrorist acts being specifically directed
against women and girls.

Furthermore, sexual violence perpetuates conflict
and weakens security and stability, hampering the
ability of people to participate in the political, social
and economic life of their societies. The United
Nations, as an organization, and we, as the international
community, have a great debt to pay on this issue,
having failed to address the causes of violence and
sexual abuse through preventive measures, on the one
hand, and to eliminate impunity in these cases, on the
other. As States, we have the primary responsibility of
protecting our populations. As States, we must establish
robust legal and institutional frameworks that lay firm
foundations for preventing and addressing existing
gaps in the protection of victims, especially women and
girls. It is also extremely important to expand the scope
of measures to protect the most vulnerable populations,
such as ethnic and religious minorities, women in
rural areas, women and girls associated with armed
groups, the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and
intersex population, and boys and men, who are also
vulnerable to sexual violence - and whose prevalence
is increasing.

We must use all measures at our disposal to get
parties to conflicts, whether they be State or non-State
actors, to comply with international law, urging States
to punish all acts of sexual violence with the utmost
vigour, including the referral of cases to the International
Criminal Court, thereby eliminating impunity in such
cases. We consider these acts of violence to be crimes
against humanity and we will continue to advocate for
zero tolerance for those who commit, order or condone
sexual violence in conflict. We firmly believe that
accountability and the use of existing international
legal mechanisms to the greatest possible extent are
vital tools for ensuring justice for victims. They also
deter the future commission of crimes.

It is also crucial to implement Security Council
resolutions, which outline commitments and strategies
for preventing sexual violence in conflicts and provide
for the monitoring of their implementation. Likewise,
it is essential to work closely with the relevant
sanctions committees to make sexual violence in the
context of armed conflict and terrorism a criterion for
being subject to sanctions. All those involved in the
financing, planning, or supporting of armed groups
with links to acts of sexual violence should qualify
for inclusion within existing sanctions regimes. If this
approach is to be effective, key actors must collaborate
in the monitoring of these cases. The Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General also
plays an important role in this regard, ensuring smooth
communication and information exchange.

Prevention is key. Proper training on gender issues
with a special focus on prevention and the systematic
inclusion of women's protection advisers in the
strategic planning processes of political missions and
peace operations are necessary. Adequate training on
gender issues is also required to help prevent or, in
the worst-case scenario, adequately respond to sexual
exploitation, abuse and the trafficking in persons in
conflict areas. If all this to work, programmes aimed at
achieving these ends must be adequately funded.

It is extremely important to ensure that all these
efforts are victim-centred. Sexual and reproductive
health services should be made available to all. Similarly,
support programmes must be set up to adequately
reintegrate victims into their social structures, which
will help restore the social fabric of populations affected
by armed conflict and its consequences.

Legal frameworks must be established at the
national level in order to protect victims - for example,
through legislation that provides legal status to children
born of rape and to combat the stigma associated
with sexual abuse and violence - and to offer them
reparations and compensation, keeping in mind that
different forms of sexual violence call for different
responses and solutions.

Finally, it is extremely important to involve
women and girls in decision-making processes and
in leadership positions, as it is to promote a gender
perspective at all levels of participation. It is also key to
ensure equal opportunity, access to education and the
economic, political and social empowerment ofwomen,
with a view to enabling women and girls to assume a
major, transformative role within their communities
both during and post-conflict.

