Mrs. Intelmann (Estonia): The Security Council
debate today and the numerous initiatives related to
resolution 1325 (2000) all over the world confirm that
women are no longer an invisible or irrelevant aspect
of armed conflicts. Women have the right to be
protected in conflicts and can and should be able to
contribute to peace processes. However, despite the
progress made since 2000, these principles still need to
be better translated into reality at the global, regional
and national levels.

Estonia is committed to the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and its follow-up resolutions,
and my delegation would like to align itself with the
comments and commitments to be made on behalf of
the European Union and with the statement made
earlier by the Minister of International Cooperation of
Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends.

I have the pleasure to note that last week Estonia
adopted its national plan for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). Over the next four years, the
plan will help systematize and enhance our activities
both at the national level and in regional and
international organizations.

Estonia, as a Member of the United Nations and a
number of regional organizations, continues to expand
its contribution to international peace and security. We
continue to participate in international civilian and
military operations and to contribute to development
cooperation and humanitarian assistance. The action
plan that I just mentioned contains commitments with
regard to the inclusion of the gender perspective in
these activities.

First, it includes steps to increase gender-related
expertise, as well as general awareness and support for
the inclusion of a gender perspective in crisis
management at all levels through enhanced training.

Secondly, the plan includes measures to expand
the possibilities for women's participation in
international civilian and military missions and for
increasing the share of women occupying posts related

to peace and security. These include analysis of the
variables influencing women's participation in military,
police and international missions and targeted
information and recruitment campaigns, to name but
two.

Thirdly, gender equality and the promotion of the
situation of women and girls continue to be among the
priorities of Estonia's development cooperation and
humanitarian activities. In Afghanistan, for instance,
our projects have been aimed at supporting women's
access to health care and education.

Finally, Estonia continues to actively support the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in the
European Union, NATO and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).

Estonia's action plan is a common commitment
taken by a broad range of stakeholders, including
governmental institutions and civil society
organizations. Its implementation will be monitored
jointly on the basis ofa set of indicators.

Estonia welcomes the steps to increase coherence
and accountability in implementing resolution 1325
(2000), including taking forward the set of indicators
to track its implementation, and calls for their swift
operationalization. We further welcome the call for the
development of a strategic framework to guide United
Nations implementation of the resolution in the next
decade, which would include concrete targets and
indicators to ensure the consistency and systematic
evaluation of this process. The establishment of a
working group to review the progress made would,
alongside a set of global indicators, also contribute to
more thorough analysis and the definition of further
goals with regard to women and peace and security.

Estonia strongly condemns grave violations of the
rights of women and girls, including targeted sexual
violence, and supports measures to combat impunity
for these crimes. We support the call to include sexual
violence as a priority element in resolutions mandating
Security Council sanctions committees, which should
include sexual violence as a criterion for the
designation of individuals for targeted measures.

Finally, let me note our appreciation of the work
of Ms. Margot Wallstrom, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
and offer my congratulations to the new Under-
Secretary-General in charge of UN Women,
Ms. Michelle Bachelet, whose leadership in this role
will be of crucial importance to the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).

I would also like to refer to the vital role of the
Civil Society Advisory Group in facilitating the
discussions on the further implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), as well as the work of the Group of
Friends led by Canada.

