Mr. Elisaia (Samoa): I am honoured to address
the Security Council on the question of women, peace
and security. In doing so, I speak on behalf of the
Pacific Islands Forum member States with Permanent
Missions in New York - namely, Australia, Federated
States of Micronesia, Fiji, Nauru, New Zealand, Palau,
Papua New Guinea, Republic of the Marshall Islands,
Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu, and my own
country, Samoa.

This year marks the fifth anniversary of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace
and security. It is now a matter of international
consensus that the role of women is fundamental to the
maintenance of international peace and security. At the
2005 world summit, our leaders reaffirmed this
understanding. Today, we would like to express our full
and continuing support for the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), which
remains the most important and comprehensive
framework for action at the international level.

We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
on women and peace and security. We urge the
Security Council to continue to intensify its efforts to
mainstream issues on women, peace and security into
its work. We wish briefly to highlight the most
important steps that now need to be taken on the basis
of the Secretary-General's report.

First, there is a clear need for increased
representation of women at all levels of decision-
making in conflict prevention, management and
resolution. We hope to see more women appointed to
senior positions in peace operations in the future, and
to see Security Council support for such progress.

Secondly, the Security Council must act to
protect the most vulnerable. Special attention must be
paid to the specific protection needs of women and
girls to prevent gender-based violence, particularly
rape and other forms of sexual abuse, in situations of
armed conflict.

Thirdly, the Security Council must call for the
prosecution of those who commit crimes against
humanity, genocide and war crimes, including crimes
involving sexual and other violence against women and
girls. There can be no impunity for such crimes.

Lastly, United Nations peace operations must
lead by example. We wish to see greater participation
by women in peacekeeping missions and increased
accountability for the implementation of gender
mainstreaming in the United Nations as a whole.

The Pacific Islands Forum leaders welcomed the
agreement reached at the world summit to establish a
Peacebuilding Commission. It is a matter of highest
priority to us that this new body should support and
promote the protection and promotion of the rights of
women and build on international work relating to
women, peace and security. We urge Security Council
members to ensure that a gender perspective is
mainstreamed throughout the operations of the
Commission.

The experience of Pacific Islands Forum
countries in peacebuilding efforts in our own region
makes this an issue of particular resonance for us. The
return of peace, following recent conflicts in
Bougainville and the Solomon Islands, owes much to
the role of women in the affected areas. We
acknowledge the efforts of those incredible women
today, and we urge the Security Council to respect
them by taking further action on this issue in the
United Nations.

