Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): I wish to respond to the
remarks by the representative of India.

One of the dimensions of today's debate is the
plight of women as victims of conflict. It was from that
perspective that my delegation highlighted the travails
and tribulations of Kashmiri women facing brutal
repression by the Indian security forces.

The tales of torture and rape of Kashmiri women
have not been concocted by Pakistan; they have been
systematically catalogued by Indian and international
human rights organizations over the past 13 years. The
horrific gang rape of over 20 women in the Kashmiri
village of Konan Poshpura by Indian soldiers remains a
scar on the conscience of humanity. In that so-called
largest democracy there is still no accountability for
the perpetrators.
I would like to quote just one report. Asia Watch
states:

"Rape is used as a means of targeting women. In
raping them, the security forces are trying to
punish and humiliate the entire community."

The international media has reported similar
tactics employed by the Hindu mobs during the recent
killing of over 2,000 Muslims in Gujarat. Just recently,
a key witness of the killing of many innocent Muslims
in what is known as the Best Bakery case, a woman of
young age, was harassed to the point where she had to
go back on her earlier accounts in order to save her life
and the lives of the remainder of her family. That
incident has been extensively reported by the Indian
media.

I would also like briefly to draw the attention of
the Council to a report in The New York Times on
2 February 2003 on the Gujarat killing. It states:

"The scale of the violence was matched only by
its brutality. Women were gang-raped before
being killed. Children were burned alive.
Gravediggers at mass burial sites told
investigators that 'most bodies that had
arrived were burned and butchered beyond
recognition. Many were missing body parts -
arms, legs and even heads."'

That report was contributed by Mr. Pankaj Mishra, an
Indian who is the author of a novel entitled The
Romantics.

Despite these reports, impunity continues for the
perpetrators, while the victims live in fear, shame and
ignominy.

The Indian representative referred to the case of a
Pakistani woman, Mukhtaran Bibi. In that unfortunate
incident, the law took its course, and all the
perpetrators have been brought to justice. Such isolated
incidents are indeed not comparable to State-sponsored
terrorism unleashed on innocent people.

Our discussion today will not be complete if we
fail to speak for those and other such victims around
the world. It would be morally wrong to pretend that
everything is fine just because India says so. We
believe that the international community has a
responsibility to stand up for the helpless Kashmiris as
well, who cannot match India's military might but
legitimately hope for justice and fairness.

It is high time for India to give up its policy of
deceit and chicanery and instead engage in a serious
and purposeful dialogue with Pakistan to resolve the
Kashmir dispute, which has brought untold suffering to
12 million Kashmiri people.

