Mr. Suan (Myanmar): Myanmar is striving to build
a peaceful, prosperous and democratic nation after
decades of military rule, isolation and internal armed
conflict. In our efforts to achieve a people-oriented,
democratic society, we are working hard to put gender
equality and women's empowerment at the heart of our
national development strategies. Our 10-year national
strategic plan for the advancement of women covers
key areas of the United Nations agenda, including
women's empowerment and the prevention of violence
against women and girls. In 2014 Myanmar also signed
the Declaration of Commitment to End Sexual Violence
in Conflict and became the one hundred and fiftieth
State to endorse it. We are currently drafting a law on
the protection of women and the prevention of violence
against them that will cover all forms ofviolence against
women and girls. We have also set up one-stop women's
support centres throughout the country to support
women and girls who have experienced violence. The
centres provide physical, legal, psychological and
social support. Starting in 2016, we established national
gender-based hotlines to help victims of violence to
report such incidents and get counselling. We are
also revising our child laws to include a provision on
conflict-related sexual violence against children.

Myanmar took a further step towards demonstrating
its firm position on preventing and addressing
conflict-related sexual violence by inviting Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Patten to
Myanmar in December 2017. With regard to the joint
communique proposed by the Special Representative,
I would like to say that the Government has already
implemented various measures, such as steps to raise
awareness on preventing sexual violence. Reports on
actions taken by the Government to ensure that the
rights of women are protected and sexual violence
against women and girls is prevented have also been
regularly submitted to the Committee on the Elimination
of Discrimination against Women and included in
the Universal Periodic Review process of the Human
Rights Council. We have also updated this information
for the various United Nations special mandate holders.
We intend to work with Myanmar-based United Nations
agencies on implementing the five priority areas of
cooperation identified by the Special Representative.

This year's annual report (S/2018/250) of the
Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual violence
acknowledges the important steps that Myanmar has
taken to protect the rights of women and children.
However, it is most regrettable that the Tatmadaw,
the Myanmar Armed Forces, has been listed in
the report, despite Myanmar's genuine efforts to
engage constructively with the Office of the Special
Representative. Moreover, the decision to list it was
made based on unverified allegations, despite our
attempts to interview the alleged victims in camps
in Cox's Bazar to investigate the cases. We are
disappointed that our request for a proper investigation
to be carried out was denied.

With regard to the alleged sexual violence mentioned
in the Secretary-General's report, the Government of
Myanmar has once again made its position very clear
that it will not condone any human rights abuse. Ifthere
is concrete evidence, we will be ready to take action
against any perpetrator in accordance with the law
and without impunity. The recent sentencing of seven
military personnel who were involved in the Inn Din
incident to 10 years in prison with hard labour is clear
testimony to the Government's strong commitment to
the rule of law. My delegation categorically rejects the
groundless accusations that sexual violence was used as
a strategy to force Muslim people to flee their homes. In
Myanmar, sexual violence is a crime that is abhorrent
to our traditional values and strictly forbidden by our
law and culture.

My delegation stresses that members of our armed
forces are subject not only to our 1959 military act and
military by-Iaws, but also to existing civilian laws and
traditions. As such, severe legal action is taken against
perpetrators whether they are civilians or members
of the security forces, as has been demonstrated by
a number of prosecutions of military personnel for
sexual violence. Members of the armed forces have
been clearly instructed to strictly follow the military
code of conduct and to refrain from committing crimes,
including any involving sexual violence. A series of
capacity-building workshops have been held to educate
military personnel on human rights, and the curriculum
of our military training schools includes instruction on
laws related to the prevention of sexual violence.

Myanmar strongly objects to the use of expressions
such as "ethnic cleansing" and "genocide" in reference
to the situation in Rakhine state. Such irresponsible
accusations, based on unsubstantiated and one-sided
allegations, fake news and reports tailored for political
purposes, will only exacerbate the current situation and
further polarize the various communities in the region.
We are seriously concerned that such incessant rhetoric
directed against Myanmar can have only a negative
impact on the existing cooperation between Myanmar
and the United Nations, as well as on our ongoing
bilateral cooperation with Bangladesh in our efforts
to find a lasting solution to the current humanitarian
problems and to the complex situation in Rakhine.

As much as we all condemn conflict-related sexual
violence, we should also deplore the exploitation of this
sensitive issue by certain groups as a tool to achieve
their own political goals. The problem of sexual
violence cannot be resolved by naming and blaming.
The international community must take a constructive
approach by sharing information on violations and
assisting Member States in their efforts to address
the issue.
