Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I am grateful for
this opportunity to discuss the critical issue of women
and peace and security. My purpose today is to provide
an update on security, protection and equal
participation of women in countries where our
peacekeepers are operating.

For more than 10 years, resolution 1325 (2000)
has guided us in supporting women in post-conflict
societies. Peacekeeping operations are well positioned
to help advance all the goals of resolution 1325 (2000).
The political engagement and eloquent advocacy of
special representatives of the Secretary-General at the
highest levels are clearly critical factors that increase
the impact the United Nations can have on the ground.
Under their leadership, missions can provide an
extremely powerful platform for support to women in
post-conflict situations.

Last year, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Field Support
completed an impact study on the implementation of
12-31060
resolution 1325 (2000) in peacekeeping. It was a wake-
up call. It showed that peacekeeping missions have
supported important progress in some areas, including
in the area of women's participation in elections and
political institutions. It also showed that in other areas,
including protection, not enough has been achieved.

Today, I shall focus my remarks on these two
critical areas: political participation and protection.
They are especially critical because they represent both
the opportunity for women to make their voices heard
and to shape the peace, but also the risk that women
face from insecurity, sexual violence and targeting of
civilians. Peacekeepers must do their utmost to
maximize the former and minimize the latter.

During my recent visits to peacekeeping
operations, I have seen women participating in greater
numbers as candidates and voters where basic security
is assured. In other contexts, where electoral processes
were marred by violence and intimidation, we must
note that women's participation remained low. Lack of
freedom of movement, intimidation and all such factors
contribute to lowered participation by women in
electoral processes not only as voters but also as
candidates.

Elections offer the opportunity to advance the
goals of resolution 1325 (2000) in a number of ways,
including temporary special measures to increase
women's opportunities to win elected office, outreach
to women's groups, training for female candidates,
better national police protection for women and
encouraging political parties to elicit women's
participation. As for electoral assistance, we work in
close coordination with the Department of Political
Affairs, which has the General Assembly-mandated
system-wide leading role in United Nations electoral
assistance activities and policies.

With regard to temporary special measures, as we
head towards the June parliamentary elections in
Timor-Leste, the United Nations Electoral Support
Team helped Timorese authorities to draft an
amendment to the electoral law. That amendment
instated proactive policies specifically aimed at
temporary special measures for women, setting
allocations for women in political parties' slates and in
Parliament. The United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste and UN-Women co-chair a women's
political participation action group, which coordinates
the work of the Mission and the country team.
5
In preparation for the 2011 elections, the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
provided financial and technical support for a review
of the Haitian Constitution and for a constitutional
amendment to specify temporary special measures for
women. However, while such measures won
acceptance in principle, the amendment itself was
stalled over alleged discrepancies between the
published text and the text voted on in Parliament. No
new women were elected to the Senate - whereas four
took office in 2006 - and in the lower house only five
women were elected out of 99 seats.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, no
temporary special measures were adopted. According
to preliminary results of the November elections, 47 of
the 483 members of Parliament are women - 9.7 per
cent. That represents a slight increase of 1.3 per cent
over the 2006 elections. Despite that increase, however,
the Congo still has the lowest female representation in
the parliaments of the Great Lakes region.

Clearly, instituting special measures to increase
women's representation in legislative bodies is up to
national authorities alone. But such measures deserve
consideration because of the real opportunities they
offer for advancing women's rights, in keeping with
Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination
against Women general recommendation No. 25.

Through outreach to women's groups, United
Nations actors on the ground can help provide space
for women to increase their participation in political
processes. Thanks to a generous contribution from the
Government of Luxembourg, MINUSTAH organized
360 election-related workshops for 6,500 people, of
which 70 per cent were women. The workshops sought
to augment the number of women in leadership
positions and to foster awareness of the importance of
women's participation in decision-making at all levels.

Training for female candidates is also an
important activity for some missions. The United
Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) promoted
awareness of gender perspectives in the elections of
2011. It provided training for female candidates and
other women engaged in voter registration. The
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) also
developed tools for United Nations personnel,
non-governmental organizations and political party
representatives responsible for facilitating the
6
process- for example through checklists for
monitoring gender mainstreaming.

(spoke in English)

Security is a major determining factor for
women's participation in elections. The case of Liberia
highlights the need to help national police provide
security for women to participate in elections. Even
though no major security incidents were recorded
during the parliamentary and presidential elections in
Liberia, early reports of possible political violence
resulted in intensified prevention efforts by national
and United Nations actors. United Nations police
supported the Liberian National Police in its planning
to prevent violence during the electoral cycle. The
number of female candidates, however, declined from
nearly 15 per cent to 11 per cent, and the percentage of
women elected to the House of Representatives
decreased from 16.6 per cent in 2005 to 11 per cent.

The United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) trained more than 500 police officers on
the prevention of sexual and gender-based violence for
the 2011 elections. The United Nations Operation in
Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI) has developed sensitization
campaigns in working with political parties, some of
which have in fact pledged to enrol more women in
their parties. Female representation in the National
Assembly grew slightly from 8 per cent in 2001 to
10.5 per cent this year.

More support should be provided to women's
legislative caucuses at both the regional and the State
levels in countries where elections have recently been
held, in order to ensure that newly elected women
parliamentarians are empowered to enact gender-
responsive laws. Our missions remain engaged in that
process, and we welcome our partnership with
UN-Women and other United Nations country team
actors.

I turn now to the broader issue of sexual violence
and the protection of civilians. It is important to
reiterate that national Governments are ultimately
responsible for the protection of their civilian
populations. Our peacekeeping missions cannot act as a
surrogate for State authority. We must do our best to
strengthen frail State institutions and to improve their
ability to protect civilians, but we must also be
prepared to protect civilians directly. Our missions
have received guidelines on developing comprehensive
12-31060
strategies for civilian protection, which bring together
all mission elements. We can contribute to the
protection of civilians by helping in vetting and
training national security personnel and by ensuring
that women become an integral part of security
institutions in high-ranking, decision-making functions.
We can also do so by strengthening awareness of the
link between stronger national security institutions and
lower instances of sexual violence in areas where
conflict still occurs.

In Haiti, United Nations police have a Gender
Adviser who helps implement protection measures in
the camps for internally displaced persons (IDPs), and
a sexual and gender-based violence team that also
supports the Haitian National Police. Gender training
in the curriculum for national police cadets and
training on sexual and gender-based violence for police
investigators have also been developed. We also help
the Government of Haiti to provide shelter to victims
of sexual and domestic violence. Safe houses for taking
in victims of sexual and gender-based violence are
available in three IDP camps and seven police stations
in the West Department, where the largest number of
rape allegations have been reported. The representation
of women in the national police has grown from 8 per
cent in 2010 to 12 per cent this year. That is also partly
due to the example provided by our international police
units, and I would like to highlight the fact that the
Bangladeshi formed police unit has the highest
percentage of female police officers in the mission.

In Liberia, it is clear that recruiting women into
the security sector remains high on UNMIL's agenda.
UNMIL works to enhance the capacity of the national
security institutions to respond to the increasing
number of reports of gender-based violence, including
rape. The weakness of the legal and judicial institutions
in Liberia has highlighted the need to develop a
Liberian national police gender policy, as well as to
establish a gender unit and a women's protection
section at the Liberian national police headquarters.
Again, our mission provides a strong example to
national institutions, and I wish to commend the Indian
Government, which has deployed a female formed
police unit to Liberia.

Similar efforts are being made by UNOCI in Cote
d'Ivoire, where the gender focal point in UNPOL has
helped coordinate gender mainstreaming in all areas of
national police activity. UNOCI also continues to
develop and deliver training on the prevention of
gender-based violence to the national police. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, MONUSCO has
conducted sensitization campaigns targeting local
women with regard to their role in mitigating conflict-
related sexual violence. I again wish to thank
Bangladesh for having loaned a female formed police
unit, which acts as a role model for the Congolese.

Let me now provide the Council with a brief
update on identifying women protection advisers in our
missions. The strong and close working relationship
that has been established between DPKO, the
Department of Field Support, the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights is enabling
progress to be made regarding women protection advisers.
A small number of women protection focal points have
been designated from existing resources in MONUSCO,
UNOCI and the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur. The United Nations Action
Against Sexual Violence in Conflict Multi-Donor Trust
Fund will also fund a total of three dedicated women
protection advisers between MONUSCO and UNOCI.
And I am pleased to inform the Council that nine
women protection adviser posts have been approved in
the budget of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan, and their recruitment is under way.

DPKO remains committed to implementing the
sexual violence mandate, of which the time-bound
commitments are an important component. Those
commitments are part of security sector reform and are
a strong tool for preventing sexual violence in the first
place and for ensuring accountability when it does
occur. DPKO is also rolling out new protection-related
training materials for troop-contributing countries.

Our missions are ready to support host
Governments in addressing those commitments. We are
ready to work with national security sectors to ensure
that appropriate procedures are followed when armed
groups are integrated into national security forces. We
are ready to work in close support of national military
and civilian justice systems to ensure accountability for
incidents of sexual violence.

While I have highlighted many activities and new
initiatives, I must say that in too many cases we remain
dissatisfied with the protection offered to women in
many places where we are deployed. Host countries
must do more, and peacekeepers must also do more to
redress the threats faced by women in our mission
areas. In States where both the civilian and military
justice systems remain weak, renewed efforts must be
made to strengthen judicial and military institutions.
That is definitely the long-term solution to the problem
of providing protection for civilians. The aim is to
support the growing number of military trials of
security personnel found guilty of serious crimes,
including rape and other gender-based violence. We
welcome the support of Member States in ensuring that
such efforts can be sustained and multiplied.

Finally, in order to prevent violence it is essential
to establish security institutions with clear modalities
of operation and with elements that are regularly
trained and that act in compliance with international
law and standards. With regard to implementing more
effective policing on the ground, the formed police
units provided by the Governments of India and
Bangladesh serve as an inspiration to Haitian and
Liberian women and girls and are examples that could
be followed by other police-contributing countries.
I have touched on a few issues that I consider to
be of mutual interest to our two partner agencies,
DPKO and UN-Women. I believe that the synergy
created by our coordinated and coherent actions and
policies will support women's roles in their societies
and increase their security and freedom from sexual
violence. The political participation and protection of
women are cornerstones of our efforts in supporting the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). I have
sought to outline a range of priorities, to provide the
Council with some examples of how peacekeeping
operations can assist national actors in taking
advantage of the opportunities that can arise in a post-
conflict environment.

