Mr. Salgueiro (Portugal): Let me start by joining
others in thanking the President of the Security Council
for the holding of this open debate on this very
important matter. I would also like to thank Ms. Rachel
Mayanja, Special Adviser to the Secretary-General;
Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations; Ms. Ines Alberdi, Executive
Director of the United Nations Development Fund for
Women; and Ms. Sarah Taylor, Coordinator of the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security,
for their fruitful and comprehensive interventions on
the current situation of women with respect to peace
and security.

Portugal aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of France on behalf of the
European Union.

The adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) was a
milestone in the promotion and protection of human
rights. It brought to the attention of the Council the
pressing issue of gender equality and the empowerment
of women, but it also made clear that women have a
role to play in conflict situations, besides that of
victim: the role of peacemakers and peacekeepers.

We must ensure that women's voices are heard at
all stages, from conflict prevention to conflict
resolution and, of course, during post-conflict
processes. It is our belief that the equal participation of
women and men in decision-making processes has a
positive impact on the international security system,
thus favouring the implementation of the objectives of
the Security Council: peace and security.

In addition to the need to overcome the
marginalization of women at all decision-making
stages related to peacebuilding and conflict resolution,
it is fundamental to develop policies that envisage the
promotion of women's political, economic and social
roles in post-conflict situations. In fact, situations of
conflict have a great impact on women. They are most
often the victims of violence, including sexual violence
and its use as a weapon of war. At the same time, they
also become the main providers of economic security
and the source of survival for their families, often as
heads of households. There is thus a need to ensure
that, in post-conflict situations, we build on their
experiences and create opportunities to empower
women in their societies.

Portugal reaffirms its commitment to the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). In that
regard, I would like to inform the Security Council that
we are currently drafting our national plan of action to
contribute to the implementation of that milestone
document at the national, regional and international
policy levels. The drafting is being carried out by a
multidisciplinary team involving members of various
governmental entities and ministries, namely, the
Ministries for Foreign Affairs, Justice, Internal Affairs
and Defence, as well as the presidency of the Council
of Ministers responsible for gender equality policies.
At an early stage, several members of civil society
were invited to provide contributions. That
participation will continue throughout the process,
including during the implementation phase.

With regard to the content of the plan, our main
focus is on the need to promote the participation of
women at all stages of peace processes, namely, in
peacekeeping missions and including in decision-
making positions. It is also extremely relevant to
ensure that all actors involved in peacekeeping
missions, especially those at high-ranking levels,
receive adequate gender sensitivity training. Finally,
the need to prevent and combat violence against
women and girls and to provide assistance to victims in
conflict and post-conflict situations will also be at the
core of the plan.
In order to put in place adequate policies to deal
with perpetrators of sexual violence and to provide
victims with the support they require - health and

psychological support, access to the labour market and
access to education for victims' children - it is
fundamental that all parties to a conflict acknowledge
that sexual abuses have been committed and that
women's voices be heard during peace negotiation
talks. As recent history has taught us, disregarding
those matters will only serve to perpetuate impunity
and impede the development of integral and efficient
policies to address women's needs.

In that regard, let me also welcome the adoption
of resolution 1820 (2008). As the Security Council has
now recognized, sexual violence is indeed a security
problem, including when used as a weapon of war. We
should all strive to end that plight.

We would also like to take this opportunity to
welcome the Secretary-General's campaign "Unite to
End Violence against Women". Portugal, too,
continuously strives to combat that scourge, in
particular in the domestic sphere.

We welcome every opportunity to address
resolution 1325 (2000). However, we believe that the
implementation of the resolution should be a daily task.
The gender perspective should be mainstreamed into
the work of the Security Council.

We hope that this situation can be reviewed in the
light of the new United Nations gender architecture. In
that regard, let me express Portugal's hope that an
agreement on the new strengthened and consolidated
United Nations entity for women is reached during the
current session of the General Assembly.

