Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, the Under-Secretary-General and
head of UN-Women, Ms. Bachelet, the President of the
Economic and Social Council, Ambassador Kapambwe,
and the representative of civil society, Ms. Nemat, for
their work on the issue of women, peace and security
and for the information they have provided on the state
of affairs in this area.

The history of resolution 1325 (2000), more than
ten years of it, has clearly confirmed in practice the
key role and significance of this instrument for
advancing the role of women in conflict prevention and
resolution and in post-conflict reconstruction and also
in protecting women during conflicts. In that regard we
express how pleased we are that this year the issue of
women's participation in preventive diplomacy is given
priority attention in the Council's presidential
statement.

As we have said on many occasions, in various
forums and events, women must not be seen just as
victims in armed conflicts. That in itself would be a
form of discrimination. An important precondition for
eliminating discrimination against women in such
situations is their full participation in all related
aspects of preventive diplomacy. Women can and must
make a more significant contribution to conflict
prevention and resolution.

In terms of the Security Council's Charter-based
functions, its attention should be given only to those
situations that represent a threat to international peace
and security. Issues of violence against women should
be considered in the Council only as they relate to
themes of maintaining peace and security and in strict
relation to those situations that are on the Council's
agenda. We are convinced that that will guarantee the
effective work of the Council to implement resolution
1325 (2000).

We also suggest that artificially linking gender
issues in all their ramifications exclusively to the
Security Council contradicts its mandate and leads to
imbalances in terms of system-wide coordination. Let
us not forget also that this issue is dealt with not only
by the Security Council but also by the General
Assembly, the Peacebuilding Commission, the Human
Rights Council and the Committee on the Status of
Women. It is important that they not duplicate each
other's mandates.

Nor are we convinced that it would be proper to
establish a specialized mechanism under the Security
Council to oversee the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). Clearly, what is needed is increasing the
effectiveness of existing mechanisms within the system
by improving their coordination and accountability
under the leadership of UN-Women. We welcome the
efforts, led by Ms. Bachelet, of that body to
consolidate the work of various structures, offices and
special procedures that are dealing with women's
issues and peace and security. But it is still too early to
assess the work of UN-Women, which began its work
only ten months ago.

We have carefully studied the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2011/598*) prepared for this
meeting. We suggest that it would be proper to ensure
that future reports reflect the multifaceted nature of
violence against women, as is required by resolution
1325 (2000) itself. In particular, we call on the
Secretary-General to give more attention to such
important problems as killing and wounding of women
and children, particularly as a result of indiscriminate
or excessive use of force. Often such crimes go
unpunished or are justified as being unavoidable or
being so-called collateral damage. This contradicts
provisions of the Geneva Convention, inter alia. The
recent events in Libya are an example of this.

If required, we are ready to come back to this
theme and provide details on what we actually mean by
this. In this context, with regard to the first part of the
report, with the indicators of the effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), we wish to
stress that there are still open questions about the
suitability and relevance of individual indicators and
their scope and use. We also suggest that work on those
indicators should be done in a more transparent and
open way, with the involvement of all Member States,
since, ultimately, they are of interest not just to the 15
States on the Council.

This applies also to the annex to the report. The
Council requested a strategic framework on the work
of United Nations offices in implementing the
resolution over the next ten years. We also suggest that
the guarantee of effective work on the ground lies in
taking into account the State-specific natures and
needs.
In conclusion, I should like once again to
reiterate our conviction that guaranteeing women's
protection and rights during armed conflict can be
ensured only through the joint efforts of all interested
parties. For us, resolution 1325 (2000) continues to
serve as the frame of reference in that regard.

