Ms. Mayanja: I have the honour to introduce the
report of the Secretary-General on women and peace
and security (S/2007/567). May I begin by expressing
gratitude to you, Sir, for convening this crucially
important meeting on a coherent and effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). Your
presiding over this Council today is testimony to the
deep commitment of Ghana to peace, gender equality
and the empowerment of women worldwide.

The report before the Council contains the results
of a second implementation review of the 2005-2007
United Nation System-wide Action Plan on resolution
1325 (2000) and an update of the Action Plan for 2008-
2009.

The second implementation review conducted by
my Office in consultation with United Nations entities
noted new progress by the United Nations system in
implementing resolution 1325 (2000), through an

increased political commitment to gender equality,
leadership and support by senior officials, strengthened
or new policies and programmes, enhanced capacity-
building on gender mainstreaming, improved advocacy
and better engagement with Member States and civil
society.

It also reaffirmed the findings of the first review
of the implementation of the System-wide Action Plan,
which was conducted in 2006 and was reported to the
Council in document S/2006/770. The lack of such key
elements as baseline data, performance indicators and
timelines, which constitute an effective tool for
measuring performance, negatively affected the
monitoring, reporting and accountability processes.
The updated Action Plan for 2008-2009 has been
reconceptualized and transformed into a results-based
programming, reporting and monitoring tool.

The proposed framework is rooted in
intergovernmental mandates contained in resolution
1325 (2000) and subsequent presidential statements on
women and peace and security. It has three new main
features: a sharpened focus through the consolidation

of 12 areas into five thematic areas - prevention,
participation, protection, relief and recovery, and
normative - to enable the United Nations system to

promote inter-agency synergies within the thematic
areas; a results-based management framework,
including indicators to measure progress in achieving
goals under each of the aforementioned thematic areas;
and expected accomplishments and baseline data.

The development of a common set of indicators
provides the basis for enhanced reporting, monitoring
and accountability with respect to the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) by United Nations entities.
The establishment of accountability procedures
through the utilization of common standards is central
to a coherent and efficient implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) by the United Nations. Where
there is accountability, we will make progress; where
there is none, we will underperform.

It is imperative for international organizations,
national Governments and civil society to work
together to identify priorities and to develop a practical
approach to implementation strategies on women and
peace and security at the national level. The challenges
are many and continue to defeat the best efforts of
Member States, United Nations entities and civil
society in the full implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).

Member States play a critical role in
implementing resolution 1325 (2000) at the national
and local levels. As national Governments shape and
contribute to peacemaking, peacekeeping and
rebuilding efforts and to conflict prevention, their
commitment to women and peace and security
enhances women's empowerment in survival and
reconstruction efforts - or their inaction leaves
existing structures of discrimination, poverty and
violence unchanged.

In that connection, I wish to pay a special tribute
to the Government of India for sending an all-women
police contingent to the United Nations Mission in
Liberia, as we heard this morning from Mr. Guehenno.
As role models for the women of Liberia, they have
contributed in no small measure to the substantial
enrolment of Liberian women in the Liberian police.
National action plans and strategies provide a catalyst
for ensuring that these commitments to gender equality
and women's empowerment are effectively translated
into domestic and foreign policies.

The United Nations system, other multilateral
institutions and international partners should, in turn,
be held accountable for supporting nationally owned
plans and strategies and for making sure that they meet
international standards and norms. Once these are in
place, the support provided by the United Nations and
the partners should align with national plans, priorities
and approaches.

Resolution 1325 (2000) is primarily about how to
make this world safe for women's and girls' equal
participation in matters of peace and security.
Determined action to eradicate gender-based violence
will be required to enable the achievement of those
goals. Impunity for perpetrators and insufficient
response to the needs of survivors are morally
reprehensible and unacceptable. Sexual violence in
conflict, particularly rape, should be named for what it
is: not a private act or the unfortunate misbehaviour of
a renegade soldier, but aggression, torture, war crime
and genocide.

The Security Council has done much to place the
issue of sexual violence in conflict on the global policy
agenda, and has strongly condemned it. However,
despite the Council's repeated condemnation of all acts
of gender-based violence and its demands to all parties

to conflict for the immediate cessation of such acts,
sexual violence remains pervasive. If the situation is
not addressed now, and with urgency, thousands of
women and girls will continue to die, and tens of
millions more will be sexually brutalized, traumatized,
tormented, stigmatized and ostracized.

I firmly believe that we are at a moment in
history when the world should finally be ready to alter
the course of human development and renounce all
forms of violence by decisively accepting the
responsibility to stamp them out. Today, the Council
can help accelerate that shift by establishing a
dedicated mechanism to monitor the situation of
women and girls in conflict situations and hold parties
to conflicts accountable for sexual and gender-based
violence.

I urge all Governments, parliaments, international
organizations and civil society to join the worldwide
campaign on violence against women and girls to be
launched by the Secretary-General later this year, to
build and sustain global political commitment and
action to prevent and respond to gender-based
violence. Only by acting together can we create more
equal relationships and more peaceful societies.

