Mr. Bishnoi (India): We thank you for organizing
this debate on a matter of considerable importance,
Madam President. We would also like to thank
the Executive Director of UN-Women, the Special
Rapporteur on the human rights of internally displaced
persons, and the representatives of civil society for
their briefings.

It is a fact that women bear a disproportionately
higher share of the burden of conflict, but have a
marginal say on matters of war and peace. That is a
function of the gender imbalance in our societies
reflected in positions of power and influence. It
is therefore important to underline that the equal
participation of women in power structures and their
full involvement in all efforts to prevent and resolve
conflicts are essential to the maintenance and promotion
of peace and security. To put it simply, women should
occupy positions of influence. Looking at you, Madam
President, we are pleased to see that there has been
some progress in that direction.

In its resolution 1325 (2000), the Security Council
set out a visionary agenda for achieving gender equality
as aprerequisite forpeaceful, inclusive andjust societies.
As the Secretary-General has noted, considerable
progress has been made at the normative level. The
challenge lies in implementation and in sustaining
progress. Of particular concern are extremism and the
targeted violence and human-rights violations linked to
terrorist acts against women and girls. It is important
that the situation of displaced women and girls be
directly addressed. As the concept note (S/2014/731, annex) circulated by the presidency indicates, on every
single day in 2013, violent conflicts displaced some
32,000 people from their homes. Three quarters of the
refugees and internally displaced persons (IDPs) were
women and children. We support the recommendation
that a gender perspective be integrated into policies
concerning refugees and IDPS.

We do not subscribe to the view that women should
form part of the military component of peacekeeping
missions. No useful purpose would be served by women
becoming a part of military culture and glorifying it.
That said, we do feel that women can play an important
role in policing functions. Research has repeatedly
shown that women perform certain specific police
duties better than men. We are therefore happy to be
contributing an all-female formed police unit to the
United Nations Mission in Liberia. I should also take
this opportunity to mention an Indian police inspector,
Shakti Devi, who was deployed to the United Nations
Assistamce Mission in Afghanistan and recently
received the International Female Police Peacekeepers
Award for exceptional achievements in establishing
women police councils in several parts of Afghanistan.
Her consistent engagement in improving services for
victims of sexual and gender-based violence has led
to the successful investigation and prosecution of a
number of cases. We are proud that the work ofa female
Indian police officer in a United Nations peacekeeping
mission is inspiring others to follow her example in
the quest to redress the disproportionate burden that
women bear in times of war and conflict.

I turn now to a point that we have made previously
before the Council: by definition, it is States that are
parties to the treaty-based system of international law.
By and large they respect it, and when they do not,
penalties arise through the provisions in the treaties.
When their actions gravely threaten peace and security,
sanctions can be imposed against them through the
action of the Council. The most egregious crimes
against women, however, have been and are committed
by irregular forces, often warring against Governments.
They obey no laws and are, as experience has shown,
much more immune to sanctions than Governments
are. The Council needs to focus its attention on such
forces, which are responsible for the bulk of the crimes
committed against women.

Conflict situations vary; each has its own causes
and consequences. There can be no off-the-shelfremedy
or panacea. We need to take practical and effective
steps to mitigate the impact of conflict on women and
to enhance their ability to restore and preserve peace.

This will be our last statement before the Security
Council under your presidency, Madam. We would
therefore like to place on record our very warm
appreciation for the work of your delegation in the
Council and for the maturity and understanding that
your country has brought to issues relating to the
maintenance of international peace and security.

