Mr. Onn (Malaysia): We wish to express our
appreciation to the Uruguayan presidency for convening
this timely meeting. It is reflective of the commitment
of the delegation of Uruguay to this important issue.
We also wish to thank the Deputy Secretary-General,
Ms. Amina Mohammed, Acting Special Representative
ofthe Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
and Ms. Mina Jaf, representing the non-governmental
organization Working Group on Women, Peace and
Security, for their respective briefings. My delegation
greatly appreciates their unflagging commitment to
women's rights and empowerment in the pursuit of
peace and security, and we pay tribute to their continued
efforts in that regard.

We believe that tackling the question of sexual
violence in armed conflict cannot be done in isolation.
It requires the collective and concerted commitment
and political will of all Members of the United Nations
and the international community. Such commitment
and will have been made all the more important in
recent years as we have borne witness to sexual violence
becoming a core element of the ideology and operations
of extremist groups, such as Boko Haram in Nigeria.

The recent release of the 82 Chibok girls abducted
by Boko Haram has provided some relief to their
families. We believe that supporting those girls and
their families must be at the forefront of any response.
Equally important is ensuring that mechanisms and
programmes are in place to facilitate the reintegration
and rehabilitation of the abducted girls, victimized by
such heinous acts, into their communities. Malaysia
supports the intention to address conflict-related sexual
violence in a broader, more systematic manner. While
responses and reactions to the situation may provide
short-term solutions, it is imperative that we look into
preventive and corrective measures as a more sustained
solution to the issue. Key to that would be to ride on the
successfully renewed international momentum moving
towards fully actualizing the involvement of women
and leveraging their influence on matters of peace and
security, following the high-level review of October
2015 (see S/PV.7533) and its accompanying global
study of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
issued by UN-Women. Having said that, we agree with
our briefers that ensuring women's participation in all
peacebuilding efforts and increasing their participation
in peacebuilding operations deserve the full support of
all Member States.

We fully support efforts to increase and prioritize
the participation of women at all levels in peace
processes and mediation efforts. The peace process in
Colombia showed us how significant the involvement
of women, both at the main peace talks in Havana
and in regional and national consultations, can be in
supporting the successful conclusion ofthe initial peace
agreement between the Government and the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia - Ejercito
del Pueblo. Increased access to gender expertise by
international mediators and negotiating parties in the
drafting of peace agreements, which has resulted in
the inclusion of gender-specific provisions in a number
of agreements, is another positive development that
should be sustained.

We also share the assessment that the presence of
women peacekeepers in conflict zones can facilitate
interaction and confidence-building with local
communities and affected populations, particularly
women and children. In addition to endorsing the
three Ps - planning, pledges and performance - the
London communique, adopted by the United Nations
Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial meeting last year,
also affirmed the commitment to increase women's
participation in uniformed roles. In that regard, I am
pleased to share that, as oftoday, Malaysia has increased
the number of women military personnel deployed
within our contingent under the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon from 26 to 40. The Government of
Malaysia is also currently taking steps to ensure that
our contingent reaches the 15 per cent target of women
military personnel deployed in Lebanon.

Additionally, my delegation would like to take the
opportunity to advocate for mandatory predeployment
training on child protection, in addition to training on
sexual exploitation and abuse prevention, for all United
Nations peacekeepers in support of the Secretary-
General's initiative for troop- and police-contributing
countries to issue certificates of compliance.
Knowledge is the best defence and the importance of
the provision of training for peacekeeping personnel
cannot be overstated as a means of prevention.

Resolution 1325 (2000) recognized the need
for a gender perspective to be taken into account in
political, security and humanitarian action. While
there has been some progress in mainstreaming gender
considerations in the work of the United Nations,
notably in the recent adoption of the Peacebuilding
Commission's Gender Strategy, there is still a long
way to go in fully implementing such policies. In that
regard, Malaysia believes that increasing the number
of women in decision-making positions contributes to
the development and implementation of holistic and
gender-inclusive policies that benefit the community,
the State and the Organization as a whole.

The call made in resolution 1325 (2000) for
the increased representation of women at all
decision-making levels, remains as acute and relevant
now as it was then, including within the United Nations.
We continue to support the Secretary-General's efforts
to achieve gender parity within the United Nations,
especially at senior decision-making levels.

In conclusion, the women and peace and security
agenda aspires to restore the role of women and girls,
one half of humankind, as effective actors with an
equal stake in peace and security efforts. Our task
will be complete only when women's representation
and participation in conflict prevention, management
and resolution becomes axiomatic. Until then, my
delegation offers its steadfast commitment and support
to the furthering of this agenda.

