Mrs. Mladineo (Croatia): At the outset, allow
me, on behalf of my delegation, to commend the
Japanese presidency for having organized this debate
to mark the sixth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace and security.

Croatia aligns itself with the statement made by
Finland on behalf of the European Union. I would like
to elaborate on a few of my Governments' views on the
matter.

Why is resolution 1325 (2000) so important for
us? Because it calls for the protection of women and
girls in conflicts worldwide and gives women an active
role in peacebuilding as well as in post-conflict
situations. Croatia believes that it is of the utmost
importance for the Security Council to discuss this
issue, but that it is even more important that resolution
1325 (2000) be implemented.
The international community must not remain
passive in the face of gross violations of human rights.
In the twenty-first century, it is unacceptable that
women in conflict worldwide are still being used,

raped and tortured, even as an instrument of war. It is
even more humiliating for the international community
that women too often become victims in post conflict
situations. Perpetrators must be punished without
exception. If we send protection, we must guarantee
protection. All of this is exactly why it is crucial to
give women a more prominent role in peacebuilding
processes.

Croatia firmly supports the statement of the
European Union that gender should be incorporated
into every aspect of the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Peacebuilding Support Office, and
that gender equality is a prerequisite for peace and
security.

Croatia believes that it is an international, yet
also a national responsibility to stop the
marginalization of women in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. We are putting a lot of effort into
increasing the involvement of women in peacekeeping
operations, especially among military and police
observers. Through national mechanisms, like the
recently adopted national policy for the promotion of
gender equality for the period of 2006 to 2010, special
measures for achieving the integration of a gender
perspective in national security policy, as well as the
promotion of application of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000), are being incorporated.
Although figures show some progress in this issue,
there is still a great challenge in front of us and higher
goals still to be achieved.

Today, we are calling for the greater
representation of women in the process of negotiating
peace, post-war reconstruction and reconciliation. We
must continue to encourage the main bodies of the
United Nations, particularly the funds and
programmes, to strengthen the participation of women
in their work and to streamline gender issues.

In conclusion, only by enhancing the role of
women in peacebuilding processes, but especially in
decision-making processes, can we achieve the
fulfilment of the principles contained in resolution
1325 (2000) for the benefit of all.

