Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): Pakistanjoins other
Council members in thanking India for convening
today's important open debate on women and peace
and security. The presidential statement on the subject
(S/PRST/2012/23) is an expression of collective support
by all Council members for this common cause and
of their strong commitment to address challenges
to women's engagement at all levels. We would like
to place on record our appreciation for the excellent
work done by the United Kingdom and Guatemala in
developing the presidential statement.

Pakistan attaches highest importance to the
participation of women in all walks of life and has
taken concrete steps to that end. Our national vision
for women's empowerment is guided by the words of
our country's founding father, the Quaid-e-Azam,
Muhammad Ali Jinnah, who said:

"No nation could ever be worthy of its existence
that could not take its women along with the men
and no struggle could ever succeed without women
participating side by side with men. There are two
powers in the world; one is the sword and the other
is the pen. There is a great competition and rivalry
between the two. There is a third power stronger
than both, that of the women".

In the recent past, Pakistan's parliament has passed
a number of laws to eliminate discrimination against
women and to promote and protect their rights.

We are thankful to the Deputy Secretary-General
for his insights on the subject and for the efforts made
by the United Nations, under the Secretary-General's
leadership, to mainstream a gender perspective both
within and outside the Organization. We also thank
Under-Secretary-General Herve Ladsous for his useful
briefing on how the United Nations is carrying out the
women, peace and security agenda in peacekeeping
operations.

As one of the biggest troop contributors, Pakistan
supports efforts to mainstream a gender perspective in
peacekeeping operations. The appointment of gender
advisers in the field has served a useful purpose, and
the practice must be strengthened. Conscious of the
importance of gender sensitization of peacekeeping
troops, Pakistan has incorporated two United Nations
standard gender training modules. We are proud of our
women peacekeepers, who have served in a variety of
capacities such as police officers, doctors and nurses
in peacekeeping operations in Asia, Africa and the
Balkans. Shahzadi Gulfam, a Pakistani woman police
officer, received the 2011 International Female Police
Peacekeeper Award in recognition of her outstanding
performance in Timor-Leste. We are proud of her
meritorious services.

Pakistan is also grateful to Madam Bachelet for
her insightful presentation today. We commend the
valuable role UN-Women plays in promoting the wider
goal of gender equality in general and the women,
peace and security agenda in particular. Pakistan will
continue to play its part in strengthening UN-Women.

Human rights instruments, particularly the Geneva
Conventions, proscribe torture, violence, rape and other
forms of sexual violence and ill treatment of women
during conflicts. The Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court characterizes those acts in the context
of armed conflict as crimes against humanity. Despite
such progress in the normative framework, women's
suffering in conflict situations continues. There is
growing awareness of their plight and there is increased
focus on their protection. Still, women and girls
continue to be the primary victims in conflict situations
and to suffer disproportionately. To start with, they are
vulnerable to violence and exploitation. What is worse,
they are purposefully targeted and are largely excluded
from the peace and reconstruction processes.
Resolution 1325 (2000) made an important
contribution to the normative framework for the
protection of women and girls in armed conflict.
It elevates women from hapless victims of conflict
situations to equal stakeholders in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts and in post-conflict
reconstruction.

Women are true agents of change. Their involvement
in different stages of conflict resolution and in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities produces
positive results that are needed for peaceful and
democratic societies. To enable the Security Council
and the United Nations system to do more to advance
the protection of women in conflict situations and to
enhance their participation in post-conflict processes,
we propose the following measures.

First, the United Nations must develop a
comprehensive strategy for conflict prevention and
resolution, with special emphasis on the protection of
women and girls in situations of armed conflict.

Second, the Security Council should continue
to strengthen the provisions in its resolutions on full
compliance with international humanitarian law and
on ending impunity and ensuring accountability for
the perpetrators of crimes against women, including
in transitional justice mechanisms. The morally
unacceptable scourge of gender-based violence persists
because a culture of impunity pervades situations of
armed conflict.

Third, the Council must continue to include gender
perspectives in its resolutions relating to peacekeeping
operations and should support the appointment of well-
trained gender advisers and women protection advisers.

Fourth, the United Nations and its agencies should
develop ways to address the special needs of women
and girls affected by armed conflict, especially with
regard to health and psychological care.

Fifth, concerned States and the United Nations
system must work to ensure the fullest participation
of women, including all civil society actors, in peace
processes as well as in post-conflict peacebuilding
activities. Interaction with local women's groups to
get first-hand knowledge of their concerns in conflict
situations is always useful.

Sixth, the United Nations system and concerned
States must cooperate to build the resources of gender
justice in post-conflict situations, incorporating
gender perspectives across the broad spectrum of
reconstruction efforts.
Seventh, the necessary technical assistance must be
provided, on request, to concerned States for reforming
and rebuilding judicial, legislative and electoral
sectors as well as for the economic, social and political
empowerment of women within a culturally sensitive
framework.

Eighth, the Council must demand from all parties
to armed conflicts full respect for and compliance
with international humanitarian law and other relevant
instruments on the protection of women.

Today's debate underlines the important role of
women's civil society organizations in the prevention
and resolution of armed conflict and in follow-
up peacebuilding processes. Concerned States and
relevant United Nations entities should therefore make
use of the talent and experience of women leaders
from civil society to promote their active engagement
and participation in a variety of appropriate roles
to ensure the full and effective implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000).

