Mr. Elbahi (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
my delegation would like to express its gratitude to you,
Madam President, for convening this debate on women
and peace and security as we mark the fourteenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).
We also welcome the presence of the Executive Director
of UN-Women and the various other briefers at this
meeting.

My country's Government attaches particular
importance to the issue of women, as evidenced by
various steps it has taken that have led to the adoption
of several strategies and plans, including a strategy
on promoting women's participation covering the
period 2013 to 2027. Furthermore, my Government has
established a unit to combat violence against women and
an independent commission for human rights. We have
also appointed two women to head those two bodies
pursuant to the principle of parity. My Government
also attaches special importance to combating violence
against women, in particular in refugee camps in the
states of Darfur, the Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan,
in cooperation with the United Nations peacekeeping
mission and the country team in the Sudan.

The report submitted for this meeting notes the
participation of women in elections and decision-making
around the world, and that it is not satisfied with the low
level of that participation of women. On that point, it is
a pleasure and honour for me to declare that the right to
vote and to run for elections are rights that have been
guaranteed to Sudanese women since the 19505. The
current rate of participation of women in Parliament
is 28 per cent. Women fill the positions of Vice
Speaker and Chairs of a number of the most important
parliamentary comissions. As for participation in
politics, which is also mentioned in the report, women
in the Sudan have been able to run for the office of
President of the Republic and have filled key positions,
such as the Adviser to the President and ministers, as
well as at the local level. They have played key roles not
only in ministries in charge of women's issues but also
in other ministries.

The Sudan has enacted national legislation to
combat the threat of human trafficking, in particular
the trafficking of women and children, given that the
Sudan is a transit country owing to its immense stretch
of desert. Khartoum hosted a regional conference
only two weeks ago, on 13 October, on the topic of
combating human trafficking in the Horn of Africa.
That conference included the participation of high-
level representatives from various international
organizations and countries of the region and from
around the world. My country has signed agreements to
guarantee the security of borders with its neighbours.

With regard to economic measures, my country
is implementing a development project for women in
rural areas and in displaced persons camps. We are also
implementing projects for the economic rehabilitation
for women and to ensure microfinancing for women
and funds for the informal sector. Women's inheritance
rights are guaranteed. With regard to basic services
and schooling, there are more young girls and boys at
school and in higher education. The infant and maternal
mortality rates have dropped significantly.

Furthermore, my country provides significant
assistance to displaced persons in the states that I
mentioned: Darfur, Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan. I
will not go into details owing to the lack of time. Such
efforts have produced very positive results that are in
line with various humanitarian indicators. However,
rebels moving through the area hinder those efforts.
The Government has also undertaken efforts to ensure
the voluntary return of refugees to the neighbouring
country of Chad, assisting people in returning to their
villages through development projects once stability
and security are restored.

Given that this meeting is aimed at underscoring
challenges to implementing resolution 1325 (2000)
and in pursuant to your letter, Madam President, my
delegation would like to express its support for the
objectives set out in the concept note (see S/2014/731, annex). We call for a global approach in dealing with
those issues as an urgent step in order to resolve
conflicts, assist displaced persons to return to their
homes and help countries to overcome conflicts and
deal with such problems. We also call for the removal
of all obstacles that hinder national efforts, such as
the excessive debt burden and the unilateral sanctions
imposed on certain conflict affected countries.

Finally, I would like to inform this body that my
country is currently engaged in a significant national
dialogue process launched by the President of the
Republic, who has invited all sectors of Sudanese society
to discuss matters of great priority to the country in
order to achieve political stability in the entire country.
We hope that all the people, in particular women and
children, will benefit.

