Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I commend
you, Mr. President, for convening this debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, with a focus
on the specific needs of women and girls. Let me also
thank Ms. Kang Kyung-wha, Assistant Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs, for her important
briefing, and Ms. Helen Durham and Ms. Ilwad Elman
for their statements.

Civilians, particularly women and children, in
countries in conflict or post-conflict situations, suffer
unspeakable atrocities. Statistics published by United
Nations agencies on Syria, Iraq, the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Sudan and South Sudan, among others, are highly
informative. Given such atrocities, the international
community must forge a consensus on the need to
find urgent and appropriate solutions. That consensus
is reflected in resolution 1325 (2000), which is the
foundation of the architecture for the protection of
women and girls in armed conflict. On that basis, the
Secretary-General and various partners have established
a series of technical and institutional arrangements.

The aide-memoire of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, endorsed by the Security
Council, is a practical guide that could contribute
effectively to improving the protection of civilians. It
contains important measures that could be implemented
in conflict situations. In particular, it stresses the
responsibility of the parties to protect women and their
accountability for violations of law, taking into account
the specific needs of women and their involvement in
the prevention and settlement of conflict. In that vein,
resolution 2122 (2013) complements and strengthens
those initiatives by categorizing various violations and
abuse targeting women in conflict and post-conflict
situations. It also addresses forced displacement and
provides important technical elements to identify
violence against such persons.
For its part, the Security Council has demonstrated
a clear desire to end the violence against women and
civilians, particularly through its recent debates
and decisions. In 2014, the Council made a point of
recalling, in presidential statement S/PRST/2014/3, the
important role played by peacekeeping operations in
the protection of civilians, and reaffirming their need
of a protection mandate to implement. Furthermore, it
called for improved coordination between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations to
that end.

The Security Council also underscored in its
presidential statement S/PRST/2014/21, of 28 October
2014, the important role of the United Nations in
conflict prevention and the protection of women and girl
refugees and internally displaced persons, particularly
with regard to sexual and gender-based violence. It
underscored that the fight against impunity can be
strengthened through the work of the international
tribunals, and encouraged Member States to involve
women's organizations in the crafting of strategies to
counter violent extremism and to strengthen women's
role.

Fortheirpart, regional and subregional organizations
are working to protect civilians in conflict areas, as has
been the case in Somalia, Mali and the Central African
Republic. A code of conduct for missions on the ground
is being finalized by the African Union, with the
establishment of a zero-tolerance policy.

Despite all of these initiatives, the situation of
civilians in countries in conflict or post-conflict has
unfortunately not improved. Violence against women
and girls continues to increase and is therefore in
urgent need of solutions, particularly in Syria, Iraq,
Nigeria, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Central African Republic, South Sudan and Somalia.
In South Sudan, for instance, some sources indicate
that sexual violence in displaced persons camps and
local communities is pervasive and persistent. Such
practices are used as a weapon of war in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, where women and girls have
been publicly raped in the presence of their fathers,
brothers or husbands. Violence against women and
girls has recently increased, owing in particular to the
resurgence of many armed and terrorist groups, which
have targeted them directly in a number of cases, such
as the girls abducted by Boko Haram in Nigeria under
unacceptable conditions.

The various reasons for this continuing violence
against women in conflict or post-conflict situations
are mostly well known. They include, for example,
ignorance, fear of retaliation for denunciation, cultural
values and practices and discrimination. We also
believe that impunity, an absence of coordinated
action in implementing Council decisions, both at the
institutional level and in peacekeeping operations, and a
lack of technical and financial resources constitute real
reasons. Furthermore, the States that bear the primary
responsibility for protecting their citizens show no
genuine willingness to take steps to do that. In that
regard, it is vital that sanctions regimes be strengthened
and applied and, for instance, that countries harbouring
armed and terrorist groups be blacklisted, similar to the
list of countries where children are recruited into armed
conflict. The implementation of all such actions by the
international community and peacekeeping operations
designed to protect civilians must be carried out without
infringing on States' sovereignty and, of course, in the
interests of the women and children concerned.

In conclusion, we believe that we should stop
thinking about the issue in terms of the decisions to
be made and start thinking about how to implement
those decisions effectively. In that regard, the Council
should work to efficiently integrate a specific gender
perspective into every mandate renewal and resolution,
ensure women's full, effective participation in efforts
aimed at settling and preventing conflicts, investigate
and follow up attacks that target women, integrate
a gender perspective into all efforts against violent
extremism and terrorism and, lastly, ensure that
peacekeeping operations shoulder their responsibility
to protect civilians. The involvement of regional and
subregional organizations, as well as communities
and opinion makers, could certainly help to produce
convincing results in the protection of civilians,
particularly women and girls.

Finally, we hope that the events scheduled for
this year such as the review of resolution 1325 (2000),
the fifty-ninth session of the Commission on the
Status of Women and the establishment of the post-
2015 development agenda will provide opportunities
for achieving the effective implementation of the
protection of women and girls in conflict and post-
conflict situations.

