Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): I would like to
commend Germany's leadership in convening today's
open debate. I would also like to thank the briefers for
their insights on how the international community can
best support and strengthen efforts to increase women's
participation in peacekeeping.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group
of Friends of Women, Peace and Security.

Bangladesh, then as a member of the Security
Council and one of the core sponsors of resolution 1325
(2000), was closely associated with the adoption of that
historic document. This was our humble endeavour:
to ensure women's rights and roles in the maintenance
of international peace and security, which paved the
way towards many subsequent resolutions, namely,
resolutions 2242 (2015), 2378 (2017), 2382 (2017) and
2436 (2018).

In terms of maintaining international peace and
security, we take pride in our modest contribution
of troops and police to that noble objective. We are
gradually increasing our female peacekeepers in
keeping with our commitment to the United Nations.
We have sent 150 to 200 female peacekeepers every
year since 2010. So far, Bangladesh has deployed over
1,600 female peacekeepers and stands fifth among the
troop- and police-contributing countries in contributing
female peacekeepers.

We earlier deployed two full contingents of all-
female formed police units in the Democratic Republic
ofthe Congo and Haiti. Bangladesh has deployed female
officers as Contingent Commanders in the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire, the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic and the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Bangladesh has also deployed
two female helicopter pilots in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Currently, we have one platoon of female
troops in an infantry contingent in that country. We
are also planning to send an all-female platoon with all
future contingents. We have also kept one female police
contingent ready for the United Nations Peacekeeping
Capability Readiness System, which we hope will be
deployed soon.

To achieve the target of 15 per cent female staff
officer/military observers (SO/UNMOs) in United
Nations peacekeeping operations set by United
Nations, Bangladesh has taken all possible measures.
To that end, Bangladesh is required to deploy 22 female
officers as SO/UNMOs. We have already deployed 14
female officers and are in the process of deploying six
more. Our experience shows that women peacekeepers
can play a very effective role in winning the hearts and
minds of the host population, which is crucial for any
peacekeeping operation.

While we work towards ensuring participation
by more female peacekeepers, we must ensure that
women can participate fully and meaningfully in
peace operations at all levels - in civilian, police,
and military contexts - including at decision-making
levels. We also need to identify the country-specific
challenges to increasing the number of female
peacekeepers and work together to remove barriers for
their recruitment, retention and career progress. In that
regard, we strongly support the Secretary-General's
Action for Peacekeeping initiative, the Santos Cruz
action plan and the uniformed gender-parity strategy of
the Department of Peace Operations. We also laud the
Secretary-General's efforts aimed at ensuring gender
parity in senior appointments under the system-wide
strategy on gender parity.

The Honourable Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina has
ensured women's political and economic participation
through specific statutory provisions, affirmative
actions and appropriate incentives. We are continuously
working towards further empowerment of women
in all aspects of our social life by providing them
with necessary skills, education and training, and by
eliminating all sorts of discrimination and barriers
against them. We are in the final stages of drafting
our national plan of action on women and peace and
security, pursuant to resolution 1325 (2000) and its
successor resolutions.

To encourage and facilitate women's participation
in our uniformed forces, we have lifted all prohibitions
that prevent women from joining our combat forces. To
encourage more females to come and join uniformed
forces, we are offering their spouses, if they are working,
to be posted in the same area, and we are providing child
care and other female-friendly facilities to them. We
are also rewarding achievers with our highest national
awards. For example, one female brigadier general was
given Bangladesh's highest national civilian award for
her contribution to the army.

We are aware of the barriers to women, including
sexual exploitation and abuse. Bangladesh has always
stood strongly in support of the Secretary-General's
zero-tolerance policy against all forms of sexual
exploitation and abuse by peacekeepers. Prime Minister
Sheikh Hasina is a member of the Circle of Leadership
on the prevention of and response to sexual exploitation
and abuse in United Nations operations. We are also a
signatory of the voluntary compact with the Secretary-
General on the commitment to eliminate sexual
exploitation and abuse. In addition, we have made it an
important component of our predeployment training.

While the Secretariat, the Security Council and
Member States are doing their best to ensure effective
and meaningful participation by female peacekeepers,
we should not be complacent. Both the Organization
and the Security Council could bring forward new ideas
and proposals, provide greater incentives for female
peacekeepers to participate, assist them in adjusting
to local conditions and see to it that the specific needs
of mothers who are working as peacekeepers are
accommodated. We believe that adequate facilities
such as six-month rotations, child-care support back
home, appropriate incentives, assistance with logistical
issues, including accommodation and so forth, need
to be ensured if we are to increase the number of
women in the field. We are happy to note that Canada,
in partnership with the United Nations, has launched
the Elsie Initiative Fund to remove barriers for women
peacekeepers and encourage greater participation.

In conclusion, I reiterate that we in Bangladesh
have making our best efforts to increase women's
participation as uniformed and civilian peacekeepers.

