Mr. Dotta (Uruguay) (spoke in Arabic): Uruguay
would like to thank Jordan for having organized today's
debate.

(spoke in Spanish)

Uruguay welcomes today's meeting organized
by Jordan. The debate was initially presided over by
a woman, which is another source of pride for the
Kingdom of Jordan and for the Security Council.
Uruguay welcomes in particular the heightened
attention given to the subject and the valuable statements
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict and by Ms. Hamsatu
Allamin ofthe NGO Working Group on Women, Peace
and Security.

For my country, this is a human rights issue, and
human rights have priority over any national law. This
executive organ of the United Nations should therefore
address as effectively as possible an issue that is ofgreat
concern to us, given that it affects the fundamental
values on which the international community is based.
This debate reaffirms the commitment undertaken
by the Council to defending the rights of women and
children on the basis of the conviction that violence
poses a threat to the maintenance of international peace
and security towards which this Organization works.

Sexual violence against women and children is
a terror tactic and in 1992 was designated as a crime
against humanity by the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. This was reiterated
in the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court,
which entered into force in 2002.

This year marks 15 years since the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), which reaffirmed the important
role that women play in preventing and resolving
conflicts and in peacebuilding. As has been mentioned
today, that resolution will be reviewed in October, and
we are confident that the work of the Council will be
effective in making progress towards achieving the
goals of that resolution and subsequent resolutions on
the subject.

States must be held accountable to fulfil their
obligation to protect populations under their sovereign
power from massive crimes, as that type of crime,
namely mass rapes, forced pregnancies, sexual slavery
and other forms of sexual violence, are unfortunately
being used as a tactic of war in various conflicts, in
contravention of all legal and moral principles. As long
as these crimes have no effective punishment and while
there is no compulsory jurisdiction that perpetrators
are subject to, they will continue and even continue
to increase, to our great consternation and that of the
international community.

The situation described in the most recent report
of the Secretary-General (S/2015/203) is very serious.
The report states that sexual violence against girls and
adolescents in armed conflicts continued to increase
in 2014. It also notes an increase in this Violence by
non-State armed groups. Despite the existence of a
normative framework and global tools to combat such
Violence, as long as there is no effective implementation
of those tools at the various levels of countries' domestic
law and as long as the perpetrators of such crimes are
not brought to justice, there will be no solution. I would
like to cite an aspect of what is happening, for example,
in Colombia, which is is starting to see success in its
fight against this scourge, having adopted policies at
the national, departmental and local levels. As noted
in the report of the Secretary-General, they have seen
positive results, which we hope will continue and
further increase in the future.

It is important that countries be obliged to give
account to the international community for what occurs
within their borders. We cannot remain passive before
such crimes. In his report, the Secretary-General
expresses deep concern for what is happening in well-
known situations such as, to cite a few, the Syrian Arab
Republic, the Sudan, South Sudan and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, among others. We ask ourselves
how long we will continue to witness such crimes. How
long will we have to watch them on television, to the
point that we start to become accustomed to seeing all
those women and girls being killed, raped and sold into
sexual slavery? How long will we see it as just another
news item, not worth stopping for? How long until
the Organization and the Council provide an effective
response to it?

For my country, sexual violence in armed conflict
is of the highest priority. Uruguay participates in
amission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
with approximately 1,000 troops engaged in protection
of civilian tasks, and employing joint protection teams
to monitor and address human rights Violations in
remote areas. These peacekeepers collaborate with civil
society organizations, providing them with support in
various aspects, including water, food supplies and
medical attention. They also conduct patrols to prevent
the rape of women and girls in remote situations and
places, such as when they go to fetch water.

My delegation wishes to reiterate what has been
stated in previous debates regarding the positive
feedback loop that exists between participation and
protection, a concept that emerged and was highlighted
in resolution 1325 (2000). Through this instrument,
the Council reiterated the important role that women
play in the prevention and resolution of conflicts and in
peacebuilding.

Consistent with all this, my delegation shares
the view that if we are to improve the protection
environment for women and girls, we must increase
the number of women in the police and military. In
this regard, it is regrettable that the figures indicate
that, in 2014, approximately 97 per cent of military
personnel were men, as were 90 per cent of police
officers. We must implement measures to correct that
and undertake greater coordination in establishing an
effective protection strategy, first and foremost with
host countries, which have the primary responsibility
to provide protection. That would enable a greater
allocation of resources to this issue by the Organization
so that States can in turn offer greater protection.

Finally, it is of utmost importance that there be
strict enforcement of codes of conduct for United
Nations peacekeeping contingents and that there be zero
tolerance in cases of sexual violence that might occur in
peacekeeping missions. Only consistent commitment
on the part of the international community will protect
women and girls from sexual violence in armed conflict,
which is rooted in the objectives and founding ideology
of extremist groups, whose actions undermine the
foundations of our civilization and represent a return to
the most obscurantist and barbarous stages of history.
We cannot allow it.

