Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow
me at the outset to convey to you, Sir, on behalf of the
Moroccan delegation, our gratitude for the convening
of this debate. I thank for their briefings Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon; Ms. Navanethem Pillay, High
Commissioner for Human Rights; and Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of UN Women.
I welcome Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka's appointment and
assure her of our full cooperation and support as she
discharges her mission. We also thank Ms. Brigitte
Balipou, Chair of the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security, for her constructive contribution.

My delegation welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General on women, peace and security (S/2013/525)
and the adoption of resolution 2122 (2013) on the issue.
The report takes stock of the actions and initiatives of
Member States in the framework of implementation
of the resolution, especially in strengthening women's
participation in decision-making, integrating gender-
specific issues in peacekeeping operations and
training staff who participate in those operations.
The report confirms that much work remains, despite
the significant progress of women's participation in
peacekeeping operations and their representation in the
decision-making process.

The signing of peace agreements and ceasefire
agreements and the implementation of national action
plans and programmes for the protection of women in
conflict-affected countries have made it possible to
identify, in a more appropriate way, the ways and means
likely to promote women's rights and to strengthen their
participation in efforts to prevent and resolve conflicts
and in post-conflict reconstruction.

My delegation supports the initiatives of the Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict to assist States in strengthening the rule of
law, transitional justice and security sector reform. My
delegation also supports the elaboration by the Standing
Committee on Women, Peace and Security of the
strategic framework intended to assist Member States
in achieving their interim objectives, in preparation for
the meeting planned for 2015 on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) at national, regional and
international levels.

Effective and optimal empowerment of women
in the context of peacebuilding and post-conflict
reconstruction involves the collective and coordinated
action of the international community and the United
Nations system, through strengthening protection and
prevention measures adapted to specific contexts that
will facilitate the implementation of the resolution.

The establishment of genuine peace requires
the establishment of inclusive and durable political,
economic and social structures. Within that
framework, local women's entities are a driving
force in empowering women and strengthening good
governance. My delegation welcomes the work carried
out in the framework of the United Nations system
to strengthen women's capacities and involvement in
mediation and peacebuilding processes. Similarly, it
supports the implementation of the Secretary-General's
seven-point action plan (see S/2010/466), which enables
greater consideration of gender issues in peacebuilding
operations.

As for protection, my delegation notes with concern
that refugee or displaced women continue to suffer most
from generalized insecurity, difficult living conditions
and limited access to humanitarian assistance. The
same is true for refugee women who lack documents
and often face gender-based discrimination, especially
in accessing basic social services. In that connection,
it is essential that Member States - especially the
States parties to the 1951 Convention relating to the
Status of Refugees - comply with their obligations
and register refugees in their territory. Registration and
identification programmes can have a positive impact
in empowering women refugees.

My delegation welcomes the efforts undertaken
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO) in the protection of women in armed conflict
and the consideration of gender-specific issues in the
framework of the maintenance of peace. We stress that
it is important that DPKO strengthen its work on the
ground, in coordination with the relevant parties.

While the responsibility to put an end to the tragic
consequences of armed conflict for women and children
lies with States, coordinated and sustained action
among the various national and United Nations actors
involved in the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) is necessary to strengthen existing initiatives.

Firm political will and full commitment of Member
States to the measures in resolution 1325 (2000)
will guarantee the active participation of women in
national, regional and international institutions for
the prevention, protection and management of conflict
situations.

