Mr. Prosor (Israel): I want to thank you, Sir, for
hosting this important meeting and today's speakers
for their briefings to the Security Council and, more
importantly, for the work they do to protect civilians.

One of the founding fathers of this institution,
President Franklin Roosevelt, envisioned a world
committed to four freedoms: freedom of speech,
freedom of worship, freedom from want, and freedom
from fear. As the United Nations prepares to celebrate
its seventieth anniversary, this vision should guide our
efforts, particularly when it comes to women. Far too
many women, from Syria and the Sudan to the Central
African Republic, are living without freedoms and in
great danger. They are often intentionally targeted by
extremist groups, caught in the crossfire between rival
factions, and driven from their homes, where they face
new threats such as being sold into slavery, raped or
killed.

Extremist groups like the Taliban, Boko Haram,
Al-Qaida and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
(ISIS) deny women their most basic rights: the rights
to get an education, to earn a living, to choose a
marriage partner, and even to walk down the street
unaccompanied. It is not just extremist groups
subjugating women. In the most repressive nations,
there is no sympathetic police force to investigate
crimes against a woman, no honestjudiciary to hear her
case, no independent media to give voice to her plight,
and no free and fair elections to give her hope.

Growing up in Iran, Reyhaneh Jabbari faced every
one of these injustices. Reyhaneh was just 19 when she
was arrested for killing a man whom she said was trying
to drug and rape her. Reyhaneh was placed in solitary
confinement, denied access to a lawyer and tortured
mercilessly. There was no proper investigation, no due
process and no fair trial. Reyhaneh became another
victim of an unjust system. She was sentenced to death
and hanged in Tehran.

Reyhaneh's story is a familiar one in the Middle
East. Tyrants and extremists believe that by silencing
women they can silence modernization and civilization.
We must do everything in our power to oppose the
extremists who want to drag us back to the Dark Ages.
Every time they try to take away a woman's voice, we
must give that woman a voice. We must be the voice
of Arwa, a 15-year-old Yazidi girl who was captured
and raped by ISIS fighters and whose sisters are still
in the hands of the Islamic State. We must be the voice
of Laila, a woman from Myanmar who was dragged
through the streets and then beheaded in Saudi Arabia.
And we must be the voice of Noora from Yemen, who
was just 11 when she was forced to marry a much
older man, who raped and abused her. Those women
need our attention, and they need the attention of our
Governments and the United Nations - not tomorrow,
but today. We must send the message that we will no
longer tolerate such barbaric crimes, not now or ever.

As a father who raised his daughter, Oren, in Israel,
I can say that I cannot imagine raising my daughter in
any other Middle Eastern country. Israel understands
that, when women participate as equal partners in the
decision-making process, society benefits as a whole.
Gender equality is enshrined in our 1948 Declaration
of Independence. Golda Meir was elected Prime
Minister more than 40 years ago. Israel was the third
country in the world to elect a woman to its highest
office. Today, Israel is the only country in the Middle
East where women have presided over each of the
three branches of Government. The opportunities and
freedoms afforded to Israeli women transcend religion
and ethnicity. An Arab woman living in Israel enjoys
more rights and freedoms than a woman anywhere else
in the Middle East. They are elected to our Parliament;
they are leading physicians, respected academics,
renowned lawyers, successful chief executive officers
and esteemed scientists. They have not merely broken
the glass ceiling; they have shattered it.

The protection of women is an issue that is close
to my heart. I have a mother and a wife and a daughter
and a sister, and I am expecting my first granddaughter
to arrive in a few weeks. I want them all to live in a
world where every nation and every person respects
their intelligence and abilities. I want to live in a world
where there is zero tolerance for the oppression and
persecution of women. I want to live in a world where
the perpetrators of violence against women are brought
to justice. And I want to live in a world where women
are afforded the dignity and respect they deserve.
We are the ones who can create that world. President
Franklin Roosevelt said, "We have always held to the
hope, the belief, the conviction that there is a better life,
a better world, beyond the horizon." I know that there is
a better world beyond the horizon, and together we can
make it a reality.

