Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to thank the Prime Minister of Spain,
Mr. Mariano Raj oy Brey, for presiding over our meeting
this morning. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General and the Executive Director of UN-Women for
their briefings. We warmly welcome the adoption this
morning of resolution 2242 (2015), of which we were a
sponsor.

Over the past two years, there has been an increase
in violence against women in the context of conflicts.
Such massive violations of human rights are carried out
by terrorist organizations and authoritarian regimes.
There have been cases of forced marriage and sexual
slavery, which deprive women of their right to a life of
dignity. When addressing this issue, we must first and
foremost put in place mechanisms to protect women
and ensure that the existing international instruments
to protect women in times of conflict are in fact
implemented.
It is of great concern that the parties responsible
for such violations of human rights are not prosecuted
and brought to justice. It is therefore important that the
Security Council use all the means available to ensure
that they face international criminal justice. Such
crimes must not go unpunished. In that connection, we
would like to commend the efforts being made by Justice
Rapid Response with regard to sexual and gender-based
violence. That organization provides important support
to the international community. We have contributed to
its efforts by deploying experts in criminal law and by
hosting meetings of the group.

We have undertaken various initiatives to allow
women to play their full role in all areas of life. That
includes efforts to ensure that we prevent conflicts,
extremism, violence and terrorism. Along with Italy,
Thailand and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, we have also addressed this issue in the
context of the post-2015 development agenda, whose
adoption included the participation of many countries,
organizations and experts. We have also organized
a high-level group to take up the issue of combating
extremism, in cooperation with the Permanent
Missions of Saudi Arabia and Jordan and including
the participation of the United Nations and Columbia
University. Those are significant contributions
to ongoing discussions with regard to combating
extremism and radical thinking.

Finally, we reiterate our commitment to ensuring
gender equality and protecting human rights. We will
continue to support any initiative to that end, as well as
all initiatives that take into account the humanitarian
aspect and the rule of law.

