Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I thank you, Madam, welcome you to the
Security Council. Because this is the last meeting of the
September presidency of the United States, I should
like to express appreciation to the Permanent
Representative of the United States, Ambassador Susan
Rice, and the entire American delegation for their
effective leadership of the Council and for having
brought a number of important and relevant issues
before the Council. The Russian Federation has actively
worked to contribute to the success of this undertaking.

The Russian Federation welcomes the adoption of
resolution 1888 (2009) by the Security Council. This
document, we believe, completes and complements
previously adopted resolutions on the subject of
women and peace and security, resolutions 1325 (2000)
and 1820 (2008).

We see sexual violence as an appalling crime that
requires decisive condemnation and harsh punishment.
Of particular concern are situations in which this
phenomenon is widespread and systematic. We are
convinced that we must not lower our attention to other
forms of violations of the rights of women and
violence against them in situations of armed conflict.

In this connection, Russia is in favour of a
comprehensive approach to addressing these problems.
The diverse nature of violence requires due attention to
be given to all categories of violence. This is in the
spirit of resolution 1325 (2000), which remains the
foremost guideline for protecting women and ensuring
their rights in conflict. We are convinced that these
issues should be looked at in the context of all issues
related to gender equality.

We should recall that an important prerequisite
for overcoming violence against women is the full
participation of women themselves in peace
negotiations and post-conflict reconstruction. In this
context, the Russian Federation welcomes Viet Nam's
initiative to hold an open meeting of the Security
Council on 5 October on the subject of the
comprehensive implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), with a focus on the role of women in post-
conflict reconstruction.

In conclusion, we express our conviction that,
working together, we will be able not only to lower the
incidence of sexual violence in armed conflict, but also
to make significant progress in ensuring gender equality
and improving the situation for women in the spirit of
the Fourth World Conference on Women and the twenty-
third special session of the General Assembly.
