Mrs. Hambisa (Ethiopia): Allow me, first of all,
to express my appreciation to the presidency of the
United Kingdom for organizing this high-level debate
on trafficking in persons in conflict situations. I would
also like to thank Secretary-General Guterres and the
other briefers for their presentations on the theme of
our debate today.
Ethiopia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

It is only appropriate that we are discussing this
important issue at a time when the sixty-first session of
the Commission on the Status ofWomen is taking place
here at Headquarters. It is indeed women, children and
refugees who are the most vulnerable victims of human
trafficking in conflict situations. As the concept note
(S/2017/198, annex) rightly points out, this scourge is
imposed on women and children through early and
forced marriage, exploitative domestic work, sexual
violence and other similar practices.

Whether it is Boko Haram in Nigeria, Al-Qaida
in the Maghreb or Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant/Da'esh in Syria and Iraq, various criminal
networks and terrorist groups are, without any doubt,
involved in this transnational organized crime. Many
Africans, including women and children escaping
from persecution and/or searching for a better life in
Europe and the Middle East, are falling victims to
those terrorists and criminals. Kidnapping for ransom
has become a typical means of exploitation, and some
of these terrorists and criminals are becoming more
and more adept at using the latest information and
communication technologies, including mobile money-
transfer systems, in order to collect ransoms and
coordinate their criminal activities.

The gruesome stories of the victims and their
trauma, torture and death at the hands of these
terrorists and criminals are a stark reminder to us of
the need to address this challenge individually and
collectively. Putting in place the right policy, legislative
and institutional framework at the national level and
enhancing awareness of human trafficking and victim
protection and assistance is absolutely imperative. It is
in this context that we in Ethiopia have been trying to
take various measures to prevent and fight trafficking
in persons, including by ratifying relevant legal
frameworks, such as the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocol
to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children.

Aside from what each of us can and must do at the
national level, however, there is certainly a need to
enhance bilateral and multilateral cooperation among
countries of origin, transit and destination regarding
the identification of, assistanceto and the protection,
repatriation and reintegration of victims of human
trafficking. That is why, for instance, instruments such
as the Ouagadougou Action Plan to Combat Trafficking
in Human Beings, Especially Women and Children,
agreed between the African Union and the European
Union, are important. We also take note of the
cooperation at the subregional level, such as through the
Khartoum and Rabat, processes to address trafficking
in human beings and the smuggling of migrants.

In this regard, what we would like to highlight is the
need to provide increased humanitarian and development
support to refugee-hosting countries, transit countries
and countries of origin in the light of the enormous
challenges they face. Recent reports indicate that
refugees, including unaccompanied minors, continue to
engage in a dangerous secondary movement in search
ofa better life in Europe and elsewhere. That increases
the risk of these refugees falling into the hands of
terrorists, armed groups and trafficking networks. That
is why the support of the international community in
strengthening the protection and assistance capacities
of large refugee-hosting countries, particularly in the
area of the livelihoods and self-reliance of encamped
and urban refugees, is critical. The expanded use of
resettlement as a tool for international protection of the
most vulnerable refugees should also be encouraged.

Finally, the lack of durable solutions to internally
displaced persons and refugees, particularly women
and children, no doubt increases their vulnerability
to trafficking in persons. Therefore, what would
eventually make a big difference in the fight against
trafficking in persons is addressing the root causes of
conflict. It is in this context that the role of the Council
becomes much more relevant and significant.

