Mr. Mawe (Ireland): A complete version of my
statement this evening has been submitted in writing.

Ireland also aligns itself with the statement made
earlier by the observer of the European Union.

It has been 15 years since our predecessors in the
Security Council adopted resolution 1325 (2000). Since
then, the nature and locations of conflict have changed.
What has not changed, unfortunately, is that women
and their voices continue to be underrepresented in
mechanisms for the prevention, management and
resolution of conflict. Women's rights continue to be
violated. If we want to save future generations from the
scourge of war, that has to stop.

Ireland welcomes the evidence base for action
outlined in the global study on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). It is a substantial body of work,
which must be afforded substantial consideration. We
must consider the specific and transformative steps that
must be taken by all of us to implement this agenda.

One of the key messages of the study is that
women's participation is the central to sustainable
peace. We know that to be true from our own experience
of sustaining peace and reconciliation on the island of
Ireland. We will continue to share our own experience
and to learn from the experiences of others.

Grave crimes against women and gross violations
of women's human rights continue to horrify us. Ireland
has supported the United Nations Trust Fund in Support
of Actions to Eliminate Violence against Women since
2006 and continues to do so. Furthermore, Ireland
intends to partner with the Justice Rapid Response and
UN-Women sexual and gender-based violence justice

experts roster to support investigations, prosecutions
and victim recovery in situations of conflict-related
gender-based crimes.

We are also shocked and outraged by incidents
of sexual abuse involving United Nations and other
peacekeepers. Perpetrators must be brought to justice,
and the dignity and rights of survivors protected.

The empowerment of women must be at the centre
of all of our engagements in this year's reviews and
reflection. We welcome not just the review of resolution
1325 (2000), but also the related reviews of peace
operations and peacebuilding architecture. We look
forward to the World Humanitarian Summit next year
as an opportunity to align today's agenda with that
important process.

Again, looking beyond the immediate, the
implementation of the specific Sustainable
Development Goals on gender equality and on peaceful
and inclusive societies, which we have all committed
to under the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 70/1), will be crucial.
The challenge in 2015 is not a lack of a normative
framework, but a lacuna in implementation. Today's
resolution 2242 (2015), which Ireland co-sponsored,
is another positive step. To assist in taking action,
I can announce today that Ireland will support the
Global Acceleration Instrument for Women, Peace and
Security and Humanitarian Action with a minimum of
€200,000. Tools like that must be supported so we miss
no opportunities to really effect change.

Despite many challenges, there is much to be
hopeful about in the women and peace and security
agenda. It is up to all of us now to act on what we have
heard and said today.
