Ms. Mayanja: It is an honour for me to introduce
the report of the Secretary-General on women and
peace and security (S/2010/l73). May I begin by
expressing my deep gratitude to you, Mr. President, for
giving me this opportunity to address the Council on
the report before it, which presents for the Council's
consideration a set of indicators for use at the global
level to track the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). Your presidency of the Council this month has
been instrumental in allowing us to conclude, in a
timely manner, the preparations needed to convene this
meeting of the Council.

I would also like to express my gratitude to the
Permanent Mission of Austria for its relentless support
of the indicator development process and for working
closely with the Technical Working Group on Global
Indicators, including funding parts of the long process
of consultation that resulted in the report before the
Council today.

I also join in warmly welcoming Ms. Margot
Wallstrom, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Sexual Violence in Conflict. The
Inter-Agency Network on Women and Gender Equality,
which I chair, and I personally look forward to working
closely with her to advance the rights of women and
their contribution to peace and security.

The report before the Council responds to the
Security Council's request, in October 2009, that the
Secretary-General submit, within six months, for
consideration a set of indicators for use at the global
level to track implementation of its resolution 1325
(2000), which could serve as a common basis for
reporting by relevant United Nations entities, other
international and regional organizations and Member
States on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
in 2010 and beyond.

Before I introduce the indicators presented in the
report, allow me to talk about the process that led to its
preparation. That process is significant because it is an
indication of the commitment of a broad range of
stakeholders to finding a way to better monitor
progress in implementing resolution 1325 (2000).

The report is the culmination of a long and
comprehensive process involving a broad range of
stakeholders, including Member States, United Nations
entities, civil society and technical and substantive
specialists. In response to the Security Council's
request, the Inter-Agency Task Force on Women and
Peace and Security established the Technical Working
Group on Global Indicators to define and outline the
requested set of indicators. The Working Group, which
was made up of representatives of United Nations
entities and led and coordinated by the United Nations
Development Fund for Women, initiated a
comprehensive process of information-gathering on
indicators used across the United Nations system and
by national Governments and other organizations.

The results of the mapping exercise yielded more
than 2,500 indicators that were reported to be in use or
were referenced in various documents that the Working
Group examined. They constitute the raw material for
generating the indicators contained in the report before
the Council today. They were subjected to a
collaborative review process, including by
representatives of civil society, technical experts,
United Nations entities and Member States, with a
view to reducing them to the most specific,
measurable, achievable, relevant and time-bound
measures. The result was a shortlist that was reviewed
further through consultations with members of this
Council, civil society, the principal United Nations
entities and other stakeholders. The final list of
indicators included in the report reflects the outcome of
those extensive consultations.

Despite the breadth and scope of the
consultations, I am pleased that the Secretariat has
succeeded in meeting the short deadline for the
production of the report. That is itself a sign of the
commitment of the Secretary-General to moving ahead
with more effective monitoring of resolution 1325
(2000), especially as we approach the tenth anniversary
of its adoption in October.

Now, let me turn to the indicators presented in the
report. The selected indicators, 26 in all, are presented
in tables 1 to 4 of the report and are briefly explained
in the text. The indicators cover a broad range of
substantive issues relating to women and peace and
security. They are organized into four main groups,
coinciding with the areas covered in the System-Wide
Action Plan for measuring progress in implementing
resolution 1325 (2000). Those four areas are
prevention, participation, protection, and relief and
recovery. Within those groups, indicators range from
those aimed at assessing the situation of women and
girls and the degree to which gender considerations are
mainstreamed in peace processes to those that seek to
determine the resource availability and institutional
capacity for addressing peace and security issues.

The report acknowledges that the 26 indicators
that were selected are at different stages of availability
and technical development. That is recognized in the
report through the assignment of feasibility indicators
A to F, with indicator A requiring the shortest and least
effort to assemble and use and F requiring the greatest.
A testing and piloting phase will therefore be required
for most of the indicators before they can become fully
operational.

What is the purpose of the pilot and testing? Such
an approach would allow the proposed indicators to be
assessed for feasibility and effectiveness of data
collection and also permit the establishment of a
baseline for those indicators for which no data are
10-33085
currently available. The pilot phase would also be an
opportunity to work with Member States, United
Nations country teams, civil society organizations and
other stakeholders to cement ownership of the process
and the outcomes. It is expected that the length of the
pilot phase would vary for each group of indicators,
extending in some cases from two to five years.

In terms of applicability of the indicators, the
report before the Council notes that while most of the
indicators have been proposed for countries or areas
affected by conflict, it would be important in applying
the indicators to be guided by the specific nature of
each conflict situation. It is also important to note that
the issues addressed in resolution 1325 (2000) are also
relevant to contexts that have not experienced armed
conflict. Applicable indicators among those presented
in the report can be used in those contexts as well, to
serve as early warning indicators.

In its conclusions, the report recommends that the
Council urge the United Nations system to engage
relevant organizations and parties that have technical
expertise in data collection and analysis to populate
these indicators in the shortest possible time, so that
the data can be available for use by all stakeholders,
including Member States. United Nations country
teams, One United Nations pilot countries and
integrated missions would be instrumental in testing
and piloting indicators at the national level. In this
regard, the Council may wish to urge Member States,
in parallel with United Nations efforts, to volunteer to
pilot the indicators, in order to ensure that they are
relevant to specific country situations and to establish
best practices in data collection and analysis.

The report also recommends that the Council use
the indicators presented in this report as the basis for
establishing a system for assessing its own progress in
monitoring the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).

For his part, the Secretary-General reaffirms his
commitment to the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and to the related resolutions 1820 (2008), 1882
(2009), 1888 (2009), 1889 (2009) and 1894 (2009).
Through the appointment of his Special Representative
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, he has demonstrated
his determination to address the persistent scourge of
violence against women, including sexual violence, to
lead by example and to strive to empower women and
10-33085
girls to play a meaningful role in peace and security,
including in situations of armed conflict.

The Secretary-General remains committed to
strengthening the United Nations capacity to fully
implement resolution 1325 (2000). He himself has
been witness to and deeply troubled by the effects of
violence, abuse and other blatant violations of the
rights of women and girls in countries affected by
conflict, and he remains unflinchingly committed to
this cause.

We all look forward to accelerating the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in the hope
that, 10 years from now, we can talk about full
implementation with real, measurable changes on the
ground.

