The President: I thank Ms. Heyzer very much
for those final remarks and for her enthusiastic
participation with us today in an important event for
the whole gender issue.

Let me sum up briefly some points we will put in
writing as a consequence of this debate, on the
responsibility of the presidency.

I think it has been a rich and timely debate and I
hope it will assist the Secretariat in the preparation of
the Secretary-General's report, which we look forward
to in October. There is a great deal there, much of
which you already thought of. But in order to get the
Security Council on board, this is an important set of
guidance for you. I warmly thank all those who
participated, especially those who did not just come
today to make a national statement, but to interact with
other speakers, pick up ideas and move them forward.

The salient points I think we should bear as a
Security Council emerge as the following.

First, there is a need to ensure the integration of
gender perspective throughout the United Nations, both
in the field and at Headquarters. Second is a need to
ensure that all peacekeeping mandates, peace
agreements and informal understandings include a
relevant gender perspective. Third is the importance of
involving women at all stages and all levels in
peacekeeping operations, peace processes,
humanitarian operations and post-conflict
reconstruction. Liechtenstein brought out most clearly
the message that participation in itself is a very
important part of addressing gender.

Fourthly, there is the importance of gender
training for United Nations peacekeeping personnel.
The European Union statement pointed to the revision
of existing guidelines and standard operating
procedures, but there is a DPKO manual which
addresses these points which should be kept up to date,
implemented and therefore read and understood by all
those take part in peacekeeping operations. Fifth - I
think all those who mentioned it were unanimous - is
the importance of the appointment of a senior gender
adviser in DPKO. Norway, the Russian Federation and
many others pointed to this.

Sixthly, we must ensure that women are fully
included in disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) programmes. We have not yet
sufficiently sorted out DDR in the Council, and there is
a gender element to that which is very important.
Seventh, we need to ensure that all peacekeeping
operations include professional gender advisers and
that they consult with community leaders, local NGOs,
and wider sections of the community, including
experienced women peacemakers and women's groups.
In that context Canada made an important point. When
SRSGs and representatives of peacekeeping operations
come to the Council, they should be addressed and
questioned on the area of gender perspective in their
operations. As Canada said, specificity is credibility.
That is an important message.

Next, there is the desirability of drawing up codes
of conduct governing the behaviour of peacekeeping
personnel, including provisions to ensure the safety and
dignity of women and girls. Additionally, the
desirability, in itself, of more female SRSGs, and then
the potential usefulness of the establishment in the
Secretariat of a centralized database of gender
specialists and experienced women peacemakers. This
is not mentioned often, but I think we should pick up
on that. Perhaps the Secretariat could think about it
further. Nobody mentioned Security Council missions,
but we do meet with gender groups when we go on
missions, and I think that should be a natural part of a
mission, to ensure that gender issues are fully taken
into consideration.

Finally, do not forget that regional organizations
can play their own role in all of this. Nigeria mentioned
ECOWAS specifically in this respect, and ECOWAS
has thought about this. But I think all regional
organizations in the peacekeeping and peace and
security context should be aware of the need for a
gender perspective.

My final word is on men. If, in the Security
Council's perception, it were the case that men were
the victims of bad treatment because of their gender,
then we would take up their issue. This is not a
discriminatory exercise. It is because women are
Victims because of their gender that we are taking up
this issue in the context of conflict. If men deserve the
same treatment, they will get it from the Security
Council.

We will, as I mentioned, issue a note to sum up
where I think we got to in this debate.

I understand the representative of Syria would
like to make some final remarks.

