Mr. Khan (Indonesia): Let me join previous
speakers by first congratulating you, Madam President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council,
and by expressing my appreciation to you for
convening this open debate. I also thank the Secretary-
General for providing us with the report on women and
peace and security (S/2011/598*), as well as the other
speakers today for the important briefings on the issue
that we are debating.

The adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) was
hailed as a landmark and groundbreaking resolution.
For the first time, the importance of women's full
participation in conflict prevention, conflict resolution
and peacebuilding at all levels was recognized. Since
then, the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
its sister resolutions have paved the way for the
mainstreaming of the gender perspective in United
Nations peacekeeping operations and missions
worldwide. In a similar vein, the Beijing Declaration
and Platform for Action, which also addresses women
and armed conflict, should continue to be
implemented. Those various international frameworks
on women are complementary and mutually reinforce
our efforts to protect the rights of women in conflict
situations.

Our annual debate on women and peace and
security is built upon various premises, among them,
first, that women in conflict are often victims and
shoulder multiple consequences of conflict, and
secondly, that despite being vulnerable, in many
instances women in conflict have continued to
demonstrate their transformative role and their
potential for creating sustainable peace. Indonesia
shares the common view that through the promotion of
women's role as agents of peace, their plight as victims
of conflict can be overcome. Embedded in that
common view is the paramount importance of conflict
prevention.

In this context, our efforts in waging peace
should nurture an environment that accommodates the
contribution of women to conflict prevention. That
would mean, among other things, enhancing women's
participation in decision-making processes, building a
culture of peace that respects life, and promoting a way
of life that values non-violence and dialogue and is
characterized by cooperation and social responsibility.

In a peaceful atmosphere, women can fulfil their
role as transmitters of values, as economic resource
managers and as solidarity supporters and networkers.
If they have the space to build networks, women can
encourage social and political groups to take
preventive measures before conflicts break out. Given
their unique perspectives and insights on women in
conflict, the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
would benefit by the presence of more women in
formal institutions of conflict prevention and
resolution, including in preventive diplomacy and
mediation efforts.

Women's potential as agents of change, skilfully
reshaping and rebuilding communities affected by
conflict, is an important resource to tap into. However,
it is not always the case that they can be readily
available for such a huge task. In post-conflict
situations, the deficit in experience, skills,
understanding and knowledge on women and peace
issues is often a hindrance to enlisting a greater
involvement of women. Overcoming the trauma they
have had to endure can also be a factor working against
women becoming active peacebuilding actors.

Taking those challenges into account, an
important aspect of realizing the aims of resolution
1325 (2000) is fostering capacity-building for grass-
roots movements and organizations established in
conflict and post-conflict times. Recognizing that post-
conflict capacity-building is not an overnight
endeavour, the scope and time frame for developing
women's capacity should be long-term.

To conclude, let me reiterate that the
responsibility to implement relevant Security Council
resolutions on enhancing women's participation in
peace processes, including the protection of women,
rests primarily with individual Governments. Through
this debate, we can once again reaffirm our readiness to
promote the participation of women in peace processes,
including within the framework of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000).

We hope and expect that the adoption of a set of
global indicators to track implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) (see S/2010/498, annex) at the conclusion
of the tenth anniversary debate last year (S/PV.6411),
will help the Council to re-energize and strategize its
efforts in an effective manner. We hope that that the set
of indicators can help to resolve the bottlenecks that
have contributed to the delays in implementation of the
activities that the indicators are designed to measure.

