Mr. Trautwein (Germany): At the outset, let me
express our gratitude to the Romanian presidency for
putting this important item on the Council's agenda.

Today, the thoughts of my delegation and of other
delegations are with Aung San Suu Kyi, who still
cannot play her important and necessary role in her
country's endeavours for peace and security,
reconciliation and democratization.

Germany associates itself with the statement of
the presidency of the European Union delivered this
morning by the representative of the United Kingdom
and would like to add the following remarks.

Justice is classically represented as a female
goddess: Justitia. In armed conflicts, however, crimes
committed against women are the ones most likely to
go unpunished. That is why we cannot overestimate the
historic significance of the explicit inclusion of gender-
related crimes and crimes of sexual violence in the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, for
which 100 States will soon have deposited their
instruments of ratification.

Germany, as a member of the group of friends of
resolution 1325 (2000), welcomes the fact that the
mandates of United Nations missions now regularly
make reference to that important Security Council
resolution. Increasingly, questions related to resolution
1325 (2000) are discussed in both open and closed
meetings of the Security Council. During our term on
the Security Council, we actively worked towards that
goal. Whether in the context of approving
peacekeeping mandates or of reviewing the impact of
sanctions, gender implications must continue to be an
integral part of the analysis and the decisions of the
Council. In that context, we encourage the Security
Council to include a stronger gender perspective in the
upcoming mandate for the United Nations mission to
the Great Lakes region.

Five years after the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), we are still struggling with the problem of
sexual exploitation, abuse and the solicitation of
prostitutes in peacekeeping operations. We strongly
welcome the zero-tolerance policy of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) to fight those
shameful acts. Germany actively supports the work of
the Ambassador of Jordan and fully shares his concern
that the issue of sexual exploitation must not disappear
from our agenda and must be vigorously persecuted.

Germany, among like-minded countries, is
actively contributing to the steering committee for the
DPKO workshop on policy dialogue to review best
practices for enhancing gender balance among military
personnel in United Nations peacekeeping operations,
which is planned for early 2006. Germany itself began
to integrate women into the armed forces in 2001 and
is strongly committed to maximizing the number of
female soldiers in the field.

Germany welcomes the outcome document of the
recent world summit (General Assembly resolution 60/1) and the strong commitment expressed in that
important document to the full and effective
implementation of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000) and to the Beijing Declaration and Platform for
Action. It underlines the vital link that exists between
gender equality and peace and security in the world.

We consider the decision to establish a
Peacebuilding Commission as one of the greatest
achievements of the summit. It is of vital importance
that a gender perspective be integrated in the
Peacebuilding Commission and that such perspective
be reflected in the mandate of the Commission as well
as in its structure. The outcome document stresses the
importance of the inclusion of civil society in country-
specific meetings. Germany believes that the inclusion
of women's organizations will be of particular
importance.

Women are too often seen only as victims of
armed conflicts. They are indeed key to ending
conflicts and to stabilizing war-torn countries.
Effective implementation of gender equality and
increased involvement of women in all aspects of
society can contribute significantly to reducing
violence and preventing conflict. The Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women, the Beijing Declaration, the Beijing Platform
for Action and Security Council resolution 1325 (2000)
are clearly complementary and are human rights
instruments of the utmost importance.

Women are indispensable agents in the process of
building democratic structures and strengthening civil
society. Five years after the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), women remain a largely untapped human
resource in peacebuilding. Let us all work together to
complete the important task.
