Ms. Cruz-Sainchez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
On behalf of President Enrique Pefia Nieto, I thank
President Mariano Rajoy Brey and the Government
of Spain for convening this important debate in the
context of the fifteenth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000). I would also like to extend my warm greetings
to Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director
of UN-Women.

The full participation of women in all spheres of
public life is fundamental for achieving peace and
inclusive development. Mexico has actively promoted
the agenda on women and peace and security. As a
non-permament member in 2009 and 2010, during
the tenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), we
contributed to strengthening the legal framework of
the Security Council in this area by supporting the
adoption of resolutions 1888 (2009) and 1889 (2009).
We welcome the adoption of resolution 2242 (2015).

Today, 15 years later, we have at our disposal more
robust institutional frameworks to guarantee the role
of women as key actors for stability and peace, as well
as mechanisms to prevent sexual violence in armed
conflict. The Security Council should not limit itselfby
tackling this issue in an isolated or ad hoc manner. We
believe that a gender perspective should be integrated
in a cross-cutting and consistent way in all its decisions.

Peacekeeping operations and prevention and
mediation efforts are two concrete examples. In the past,
we might have thought that applying a gender focus to
peacekeeping operations simply meant deploying a
greater number of women on the ground or increasing
the number of women in the armed forces. While that
is still a priority, a broader concept of gender equality
now allows us to realize that all the activities of a
given operation - including patrols and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes, security
sector reform, the promotion of the rule of law and the
effective enjoyment of human rights - should take
into account the specific needs of women and should
recognize the importance of their participation in
interaction with local communities.

It is vital to maintain the momentum for women's
participation in mediation processes and in the
negotiation ofpeace agreements and agreements to cease
hostilities in order to promote national reconciliation
based on respect for, and the application of, the human,
social and civil rights of the most vulnerable sectors of
the population, with support from civil society.

We should keep in mind that every conflict situation
requires a different analysis of its effect on women
and children, and that all peacekeeping personnel
should include a gender perspective in the various
aspects of their operations from the moment planning
begins. This year, when we are discussing a revision
of resolution 1325 (2000) and recommendations for
reforming peacekeeping operations, we should seek
and encourage synergies and clear road maps in order
to set in motion the recommendations of the Secretary-
General.

Another relevant aspect ofthis discussion concerns
the need to allocate sufficient human and financial
resources to programmes of proven success. For that
reason, my delegation considers it essential to guarantee
the deployment of specialized gender advisers in
peacekeeping operations and special political missions.
Such a strategy will require that we strengthen all our
activities through appropriate coordination with the
other organs of the United Nations system so as to avoid
duplication and to respect the competencies of each
separate organ.

Mexico has reported to the General Assembly on the
specific steps it has taken towards its gradual return to
peacekeeping operations. As part of our commitments,
I would like to recall that we will increase capacity-
building and specialized training for Mexican officers,
in particular members of the Mexican armed forces,

based on the criteria established by resolution 1325
(2000) and subsequent related resolutions. To that end,
we have already established cooperation mechanisms
with a number of countries that will enable us to
strengthen our specific activities in the area of capacity-
building. Just last week, for example, the Government
of Mexico held one such specialized training session at
the Centre for Advanced Naval Studies of Mexico, in
collaboration with the Governments of Spain and the
Netherlands.

Within that framework, we pledge to make the
women and peace and security agenda a fundamental
component of our gradual return to peacekeeping
operations.

