Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): Six weeks ago,
the world's leaders reaffirmed their commitment to the
full and effective implementation of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000). The fact that this resolution is
one of only two Security Council resolutions that
found explicit reference in the summit's outcome
document (General Assembly resolution 60/1) is a clear
sign that its adoption five years ago was a landmark
decision. The resolution has the potential to profoundly
change the way the Organization deals with conflict
prevention, conflict resolution and peacebuilding.
However, that potential has yet to be fully used.

The fifth anniversary of the resolution's adoption
provides a welcome opportunity to assess the impact
the resolution has had on the ground and to identify
ways and means to accelerate its implementation at the
local, national and international levels. We commend
the remarkable work undertaken by the 37 United
Nations entities that have contributed to the elaboration
of the system-wide action plan. That plan provides a
wealth of information on activities being carried out
for women in conflict and post-conflict situations. It
should facilitate the review of the impact of resolution
1325 (2000). In order to make that possible, it will be
necessary to provide for interaction and consultations
with civil society, in particular women's non-
governmental organizations (NGOs).

At the national level, such interaction could form
the basis for the establishment of action plans for the
implementation of the resolution. That would help to
raise awareness of the need to promote the active
participation of women in decision-making regarding
all aspects of conflict prevention and peacebuilding.
Without such active involvement, decision-making will
continue to be ineffective. For that reason, we are also
of the view that the mandate of the Peacebuilding
Commission should include an explicit commitment to
partnering with civil society, including women's
organizations, through formal mechanisms at
Headquarters as well as at the country level. That
would go a long way towards ensuring that women's
needs, priorities and roles in peace processes are duly
taken into account in the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission. To that end, 14 women Foreign
Ministers, including the Foreign Minister of
Liechtenstein, have signed a letter on the issue of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

In order for women to be heard and for their
concerns to be taken into account, they must be
involved in peace negotiations. There is ample
evidence that women are very active in informal peace
processes. However, that is not the case in formal
processes. All too often that is due to the fact that
women are hardly represented in the official groups
that are common players in conflicts and their
settlement, such as Governments, political parties,
armed groups and militias. In addition, a lack of
knowledge of the manner in which formal processes
are conducted or of international legal and other
standards is often presented as an excuse for not
including women in such formal processes.

Strengthening women's capacity as peacemakers
must be pursued in parallel with increasing women's
participation. At the same time, women need to be
encouraged and empowered to hold decision-making
positions. Creating awareness of peace negotiations as
a tool for achieving gender equality is essential.

Against that background, we have constantly
advocated the appointment of women as special
representatives and envoys of the Secretary-General.
Such appointments could play a major catalytic role in
more strongly involving women in peace processes,
especially when they reach more formal stages. They
would also strengthen the awareness of the need to
mainstream gender issues not only into peace processes
but also into other political processes. We are of the
view that the number and consistency of such
appointments should become an essential element for
the review of the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and part of an overall assessment with regard to
the nomination of women at the higher levels of
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. At the
same time, we are aware of the need to provide the
Secretary-General with names of well-qualified
potential candidates for such posts. We therefore invite
all interested States and NGOs to join forces in
gathering the necessary information to make the
appointment of women to such posts not only a priority
but a reality.

