Ms. Bakurmutsa (Rwanda): At the outset, I
express Rwanda's deepest sympathies to Russian
Federation for the heinous assassination ofAmbassador
Andrey Karlov.

Let me thank the Spanish presidency for convening
this important debate and welcome the purposeful
adoption today of resolution 2331 (2016), which we
co-sponsored.

The trafficking in persons in conflict situations is
a problem that magnifies the necessity for international
peace and security in both conflict and post-conflict
situations. Human trafficking is a global security threat
that directly affects the vulnerability of displaced
people and refugees. It is compounded by conflicts, civil
unrest, persecutions and human rights violations. We
must not lose sight ofits expansive nature and recognize
that most countries of destination for trafficked victims
are not enduring conflicts. Therefore, it is important
to combat this crime in the countries of origin, transit
and destination. The victims, especially children and
women are targeted by criminals, many of whom belong
to transnational organized crime networks, for sexual
exploitation, slavery and other forms of exploitation.

Rwanda has developed national legislative and
institutional measures and is taking an active role
regionally in the East African cooperation framework
commissioned to devise mechanisms to prevent human
trafficking, protect victims and bring perpetrators to
justice. This is a laborious undertaking, for Rwanda
is susceptible to human trafficking by being situated
in a region experiencing sustained armed conflict.
At the international level, Rwanda is a State party to
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and the Protocol to Prevent,
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially
Women and Children, supplementing the Convention.
Rwanda co-sponsored General Assembly resolution
71/19, on Cooperation between the United Nations
and INTERPOL.

Before concluding, I would like to make two
final points.

First, we must do more on at the local, regional
and international levels to combat human trafficking
by working closely with partners across the spectrum
to strengthen legislative and punitive measures that
efficiently target the speed and scope of the network
of traffickers we are up against. The reality before
us is that we cannot afford to stand idle in the face of
human trafficking.

Secondly, and I think most importantly, we
encourage all Member States, civil institutions and
the private sector to support the fight against human
trafficking on all fronts.

