Mrs. Nguyen Phuong Nga (Viet Nam) (spoke in Russian): Viet Nam thanks the Russian presidency
for convening today's very important open debate,
as it gives States Members of the United Nations an
opportunity to take up the women and peace and
security agenda.

(spoke in English)

I thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report (S/2016/822) and his briefing. I also thank the
Executive Director of UN-Women for her briefing
and insights.

Viet Nam associates itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the representative of Thailand on
behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.

Viet Nam welcomes the progress made in the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda, as highlighted in the Secretary-General's report.
We particularly applaud the increased participation of
women and the inclusion of the gender perspective in
all areas, from conflict prevention to peacebuilding
and from peace processes to reconstruction efforts.
Viet Nam is also pleased to see the added impetus
that last year's high-level review provided for the
implementation of commitments under the women
and peace and security agenda. Viet Nam believes that
implementation lies first and foremost with States,
but real success can be assured only by establishing
partnerships, especially with a better-coordinated and
well-resourced United Nations.

Yet Viet Nam remains gravely concerned about
the continuing violence targeting women and girls,
especially those displaced by conflicts. Viet Nam
condemns all acts of violence and abuse against women
and girls. We call for strengthened efforts by the United
Nations and Member States in addressing this issue. We
urge the United Nations to strictly implement its zero-
tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse.

Peace can be sustained only if conflicts can be
prevented and addressed at their roots. Viet Nam
welcomes a sharper focus on conflict prevention,
including peaceful dispute settlement and preventive
diplomacy. Efforts should also focus on the
socioeconomic development and post-conflict
peacebuilding, recovery and reconstruction, as affirmed
in resolution 1889 (2009), introduced by Viet Nam and
unanimously adopted by the Security Council in 2009.

For its part, Viet Nam fully recognizes the crucial
role of women in conflict prevention and settlement,
State-building, sustaining peace and socioeconomic
development. For centuries, Vietnamese women not
only fought valiantly for the country's freedom and
independence but also worked hard and contributed
significantly to the recovery and development of the
country towards stability, sustainable development
and international integration. Today, as part of
our commitment to United Nations peacekeeping,
Vietnamese women officers are taking part in
training and making the necessary preparations to
be deployed in the near future in United Nations
peacekeeping missions.

