Mr. Radomski (Poland): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today's debate. It once again
confirms Chile's strong commitment to identifying and
finding ways to resolve the most pressing issues related
to international peace and security. Let me underline
that Poland aligns itself with the statement delivered on
behalf of the European Union. I would like to present a
few remarks from our national perspective.

It is a sad paradox that in 2014, when the issue of
the protection of women has been so widely noticed and
so many actions have been taken, women were victims
of unspeakable acts of violence, including abductions,
sexual slavery, torture and rape. Women and girls were
constantly attacked as members of religious minorities,
including Yazidis and Christians in Iraq. They were
disproportionately affected as displaced persons in the
worst humanitarian crises in the world - in Syria, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Ukraine. On the
other hand, just last week the New York Times reported
that 10 per cent of Western recruits to the so-called
Islamic State were women.

The root causes of all these problems lie in
the lack of respect for women and girls and in the
multigenerational cycles of poverty. That is why we
need to ensure the full inclusion of women at all stages
of peace processes and in all follow-up activities,
including in the re-establishment of the rule of law,
constitution-making processes and transitional justice.
Women and girls should be consulted at every stage of
peacebuilding activity. They must play an active role
in addressing causes of conflicts. Measures should
be also taken to hold the perpetrators of sexual abuse
accountable and to provide reparations for survivors of
sexual violence.

The United Nations sets a good example in
promoting women's empowerment. However, we need a
holistic approach integrating Security Council actions
with the efforts undertaken by other United Nations
bodies, such as the Economic and Social Council, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and UN-Women. The year 2015 is a year of
hope in that respect as it marks the anniversary of the
adoption of the landmark resolution 1325 (2000) and
the beginning of a new development agenda. Moreover,
it is the year of the review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture and peace operations. The
protection of civilians, especially women and girls,
should be at the centre of the actions undertaken this
year.

For the past few years, Poland has been an active
partner in implementing programmes and projects
supporting women's and girls' economic needs. We
have been involved in projects in Nigeria, the Sudan,
Zambia and Kenya, as well as in Palestine, Afghanistan
and other countries. Since it is women who are most
severely affected by displacement in conflict settings,
we have continued our assistance to the Syrian people
by channelling resources via the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees field office
that looks after Syrian refugees in Lebanon and
by implementing the projects of non-governmental
organizations for Syrian refugees in Jordan and
Lebanon.

We are ready to act together with the international
community in the spirit of resolution 1325 (2000).

