Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, Spain would like to express its enormous
gratitude for the outstanding work that our Blue Helmets
are carrying out. We believe that it is appropriate, on
the day after of having just returned from a Security
Council trip during which we were able observe the
work of the Blue Helmets on the ground, to once again
recall the admirable work that they are carrying out in
what are certainly difficult conditions. Nevertheless,
there are issues, such as the ones that we are discussing
today, that are clearly tarnishing the image and the work
of the United Nations. Our collective responsibility is
therefore to put a definitive end to their reoccurrence.
But the responsibility of the Security Council is not
limited only to peacekeeping operations, but to all
operations that have been authorized by the Council.

I do not think it is a matter ofpointing fingers at one
country or one troop-contributor for having committed
acts that I qualify as horrendous. The essence of this
discussion is for us to establish a collective response by
members of the Council. For that reason, the delegation
of Spain would like to focus on three essential aspects
to improve the situation: first, prevention; secondly,
investigation; and, thirdly accountability.

With regard to prevention, I believe that it is
absolutely fundamental for troop-contributing countries
to maximally tighten the procedures involved for
training their military personnel. If Blue Helmets are
properly trained by the troop-contributing countries,
we will have achieved significant progress. On that
account, I would like to highlight the importance that
we attach to troop-contributing countries certifying
to the United Nations that those training courses have
actually taken place and meet what must be high-quality
and excellent standards. That certification needs to be
renewed and reviewed on a very frequent basis. For if
we really want to be efficient in the fight against sexual
violence, we must confront the root causes, and those
causes lead us to the sad conclusion that, unfortunately,
they have a very specific impact in the case of women
and children.

Perhaps a significant preventive measure to achieve
substantial progress would be to double the percentage
of women in peacekeeping operations. That will be a
measure that will have a significant impact. I recall that
that measure is included in resolution 2242 (2015). Its
impact will be positive not only in general terms, but
also because the victims, most of whom are women, in
the context of peacekeeping operations will feel more
free and less afraid to report possible abuses that have
been committed.

Secondly, on investigation, it is necessary
to implement urgent measures aimed at carrying
out investigations of received allegations within a
maximum time frame of six months. A time frame of
six months seems reasonable to me. But if within six
months the troop-contributing country has not shed
light on facts, I believe that the Security Council and
the United Nations system should establish an inquiry
mechanism that should be set up at a maximum of nine
months from the time that the crime in question was
committed.

Thirdly, on accountability, this concerns the
Security Council and all troop- and police- contributing
countries, because we must to put in place the measures
necessary to ensure that the perpetrators are judged and
punished.

Spain warmly welcomes the measures set out
in the Secretary-General's latest report (A/70/729),
in particular those pertaining to the repatriation of a
whole contingent if the elements I have mentioned fail
and the troop-contributing country does not cooperate
with the United Nations in line with the agreements
established by the Organization. For those countries
whose armed forces have been mentioned in the
annexes of the Secretary-General's reports with regard
to cases of children in armed conflict or sexual violence
in conflicts, I sincerely urge them to cooperate with
the Organization so that all those crimes do not remain
unpunished.

In conclusion, I would like to say that there are
civilians who are targets of abuse and sexual violence
by some individuals who are supposed to be there to
protect them. For those victims, I believe that the least
they expect of us, which they deserve, is that we protect
them adequately and, if abuses occur, the Security
Council spares no effort in shedding light on such
cases as quickly as possible. I therefore think that the
adoption of a draft resolution on this specific issue is
urgent, needed and totally appropriate.

