Mr. Mlynar (Slovakia): At the outset, I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this
important annual debate on women and peace and
security. I would also like to thank all the briefers
for their comprehensive presentations. I would like to
particularly acknowledge the significant contribution
of the Secretary-General in promoting and upholding
the agenda of women and peace and security in United
Nations peace efforts.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
to be delivered later today by the observer of the
European Union.

The role of women and girls in peace processes
and humanitarian response, and women's active
participation in mediation, conflict prevention,
security-sector reform, peacebuilding and
peacekeeping, is huge but nevertheless often neglected,
or at least underappreciated. Today I would like to limit
my statement to three key areas that are important
to Slovakia.

First, let us look at the normative framework and
reality on the ground. We have created a sufficient
framework, we believe, of resolutions and commitments,
but their implementation is still insufficient. Women's
role in sustaining peace is undoubtable. Even though we
agreed to promote women's meaningful participation
in United Nations peacekeeping operations, we
have not borne witness to a rising number of women
peacekeepers. In fact, that number has not changed
drastically over the past 10 years; it has only risen from
2 to 4 per cent of women soldiers. One year after the
Secretary-General launched the system-wide gender
parity strategy, we still have only about 28 per cent of
women deployed in the field. That is the same figure as
about 12 months ago. We should reflect carefully on the
recently-published report of the Secretary-General on
women peace and security (S/2018/900), which, among
other things, highlights gaps and challenges that remain
ahead of us. The report, together with resolution 2242
(2015), provides a clear road map of what needs to be
done and how to do it in an efficient and timely manner.

Secondly, women's political and economic
empowerment must be at the centre of our women and
peace and security efforts. Focus must be put on ensuring
women's economic rights and their full participation in
economic processes, access to resources, employment
and education. We need to do better in the protection of
women human rights defenders and women key actors
in politics, public life and society. Only that way will
we be able to ensure their political empowerment and
equal participation in all spheres oflife. To successfully
achieve that, we also need to ensure the sufficient
funding of and resources for the women and peace and
security agenda, mostly in conflict-affected country.

I know that earlier today we all had a chance to
congratulate the newly elected President of Ethiopia,
Ms. Sahle-Work Zewde, with whom I had the privilege
of working in Nairobi for three and a half years. It was
really a moment ofimportance to all of us to have one of
the Under-Secretaries-General become the first woman
President of Ethiopia. Of course, examples such as that
are critical, and we all look forward to supporting her
role and continuing to work with her.

Thirdly, women's role in the security sector should
not be underestimated. Resolution 2151 (2014) on
security sector reform (S SR) underscores the importance
of women's equal and effective participation and full
involvement in all stages of SSR processes. Slovakia, as
a co-Chair of the Group of Friends of Security Sector
Reform, works closely with the Group of Friends of
Gender Parity to explore opportunities to strengthen
United Nations support for gender-responsive national
SSR processes, enhance gender parity and gender
equality and improve programming and advocacy
efforts. Therefore, the United Nations approach to
security sector reform must be gender-sensitive in
its planning, design, implementation, monitoring
and evaluation phases. Only with increased female
participation in civilian oversight and SSR processes
can we achieve the broad trust of the people in the
security sector, in particular in post-conflict societies.
Just last week the Group of Friends of SSR
organized a dialogue on SSR in the Central African
Republic with the participation of the Minister of
Defence of that country. Among the key messages was
also the need to build not only an efficient but also a
fully inclusive security sector. A strong commitment of
the Government is crucial in that regard.

In conclusion, the more we focus on the practical
implementation of what we have politically declared
and agreed upon, the sooner we will observe more
tangible and positive results on the ground and in the
everyday lives of people. That is what I believe should
be strongly at the centre of our attention.

