Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): I
wish at the outset to thank Mr. Guehenno, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for his
latest report on sexual exploitation and abuse. We
thank also His Highness Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-
Hussein, Adviser to the Secretary-General on Sexual
Exploitation and Abuse by United Nations
Peacekeeping Personnel, for his briefing on the issue as
a follow-up to his previous report to the Council in
May last year.

It is logical for the Security Council, as a body
that defines and authorizes peacekeeping missions, to
be seized of issues that hamper the operations of such
missions. Sexual exploitation and abuse is one of those
cross-cutting issues which demand a cross-mandated
coordinated response.

We therefore align ourselves with the statement
of the African Union, to be made later by the
Permanent Representative of Sierra Leone.

We acknowledge the good work undertaken by
peacekeeping personnel, but we are concerned that the
unethical behaviour of some personnel is tarnishing the
image and reputation of peacekeeping operations and
that of the United Nations as whole. Sexual
exploitation and abuse by United Nations peacekeeping
personnel represent a breach of trust vis-a-vis the local
population and host Governments, which the
peacekeepers are sent to protect and serve. The issues
at stake involve not only a breach of trust with respect
to the hosts but also the reputation of troop-
contributing countries.

The report, entitled "A comprehensive strategy to
eliminate future exploitation and abuse in United
Nations peacekeeping operations", by the Adviser to
the Secretary-General, His Highness Prince Zeid,
discusses this issue in depth and offers very good
recommendations. The challenge we now face is to put
an end to such acts and then prevent them from
happening again. In that regard, we welcome the
various measures that are being taken and urge their
mainstreaming in the management culture of the
United Nations, in training modules and in the
professional code of conduct for the United Nations
and troop-contributing countries.

As we take measures to end sexual exploitation
and abuse by our peacekeeping personnel, we need also
to understand the underlying factors that make
communities vulnerable to such exploitation and abuse
in conflict areas. The demeaning nature of poverty and
deprivation must be addressed concurrently as peace
operations continue. We believe that this is one of the
areas that the Peacebuilding Commission should
address when it becomes operational.

We must also understand the psychological and
social impact of conflict on affected societies which
are exploited by deviant elements and make an effort
also to understand the cultural and national sensitivities
of receiving Governments and communities as we
prepare peacekeeping mandates. Each peacekeeping
mission has its own unique characteristics, which
should be understood and respected. Sensitization
programmes for peacekeepers ought to be integral and
continuous components in integrated peacekeeping
missions.

While we appreciate the difficulties involved in
investigating allegations of sexual misconduct, we
wish to urge all that such allegations continue to be
duly investigated and reported. More work is needed to
synchronize the United Nations ethics and
administration guidelines with the judicial systems of
host countries and troop-contributing countries.

In that regard, we wish to reiterate the importance
of increasing the percentage of women in peacekeeping
operations to facilitate awareness campaigns and
confidence-building among vulnerable groups. We
need also to remind ourselves of our obligation to
increase the role of women in conflict management and
resolution, as per resolution 1325 (2000).

Finally, let me reiterate my Government's strong
condemnation of all acts of sexual exploitation and
abuse and its support for the Secretary-General's "zero
tolerance" policy on sexual exploitation and abuse.

There should also be a "zero complacency" and a
"zero impunity" approach to this issue, to borrow
phrases that were used in Mr. Mark Malloch Brown's
presentation yesterday on the related issue of
procurement fraud in peacekeeping operations.

