Mr. Penaranda (Philippines): On the occasion of
the eighteenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), the Philippines reaffirms its commitment
to promoting the role of women in peacebuilding.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
made later on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women,
Peace and Security.

In March 2017, the Philippines launched the second
cycle of its national action plan on women and peace
and security and, within 16 months, had achieved
significant milestones under the pillars ofempowerment
and participation, protection and prevention, and
promotion and mainstreaming of women's roles in
peace and security.

Women meaningfully participated in the peace
process with the Moro Islamic Liberation Front that led
to the eventual passage of the Bangsamoro Organic Law
last July. Five members of the Bangsamoro Transition
Commission are women. Even during the negotiations,
both panels were composed of female members who
championed the women's agenda. Among the provisions
of the Bangsamoro Organic Law is the allocation of
reserved seats for women in the Bangsamoro Parliament
and Cabinet.

The Government called on women who were
displaced by the Marawi siege to be actively involved
in capacity-building projects for community resilience.
One of the projects resulted in an action plan to ensure
that communities in transitional shelters peacefully
coexist and are protected from any threat or harm. The
action plan will be implemented by women leaders
themselves. The so-called Hijab troopers, an all-female
team within the armed forces and the police, continue
to fight the cultural and psychological aspects of the
battle in Marawi. They assist in the implementation
of programmes that help internally displaced persons
recover from the traumatizing experience of battle.
Their focus is on social healing and reconciliation as
they seek to curb the tide of violent extremism. To
ensure women's enjoyment of their human rights and
prevent violations of those rights in armed conflicts
and post-conflict situations, the Bangsamoro Organic
Law stresses the right of women to be protected from
exploitation, abuse and discrimination, as embodied
in the Declaration on the Elimination of Violence
against Women.

On the implementation of the gender-specific
recommendations of the Transitional Justice and
Reconciliation Commission, the Philippines is the
first country in the world to formulate and implement
a regional action plan on women and peace and
security. The plan is part of the Government's efforts to
implement resolution 1325 (2000) locally. It is now in
its second year of implementation.

Consistent with our goal to promote and
mainstream gender perspectives in all aspects of
conflict prevention, resolution and peacebuilding, the
Government established agency strategic action plans
to operationalize the commitments made under the
national action plan on women and peace and security.
The plans constitute the translation of the action points
of the national action plans into concrete programmes,
activities and projects.

Continued capacity-building for local Government
units, Government agencies and civil society is also
being undertaken to ensure that the women and peace
and security agenda is mainstreamed in their gender
and development plans and budgets for sustainability.
As we move the process forward, the Philippines
will continue to support the goal of realizing the
transformational potential of women's equality and
their meaningful economic and political participation
for peace and development.

