Mr. Kitaoka (Japan): I wish to begin by
expressing my delegation's gratitude to the Romanian
presidency for organizing this open debate. I would
also like to thank the five speakers at the beginning of
this meeting for their insightful presentations and first-
hand information.

Japan believes that it is important to ensure
women's participation in all efforts to maintain peace
and security, from peacemaking to peacekeeping to
peacebuilding. In that regard, we welcome the outcome
document of the 2005 world summit, which rightly
underlined that point. We also welcome the decision to
establish the Peacebuilding Commission and look
forward to the Commission's contribution in this area.

Women are concerned about the way the
peacemaking process is currently conducted. While
women often organize at the grassroots level in order
to promote peace, their access to the formal process
continues to be limited. Why? One of the reasons, we
believe, is that the actors concerned have not yet
gained enough understanding about the advantages of
having women involved in peace negotiations and
about the concrete results that such involvement can
produce. With women's participation at the negotiating
table, we will be able to integrate women's needs and
perspectives into peace agreements and settlement. In
so doing, we can ensure the central role of women in
subsequent peacekeeping and peacebuilding processes
and in post-conflict society.

In the peace process in Burundi - as we saw in
the video, for which we thank the United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) - more
than 50 women organized and presented
recommendations to peace negotiators. Twenty-three of
those recommendations were included in the final
peace accord, which incorporated a strong recognition
of the centrality of women's rights. In Afghanistan, 95
women were among the 502 delegates who participated
in the constitutional Loya Jirga, undoubtedly
contributing to the inclusion of a clause to guarantee
equal rights and duties for men and women before the
law in the country's first post-Taliban Constitution.

Citing those best practices and lessons learned,
we must continue to advocate effectively for
recognition of the importance of women's roles in all
efforts aimed at achieving peace and security.

For successful peacebuilding, including the initial
phase of development and reconstruction, self-help
efforts and ownership by the local population are
indispensable. In order to foster such self-help efforts
and local ownership and ensure women's participation
in the process, women need to be protected and
empowered. Protection and empowerment are the
central components of human security.

At this juncture, let me introduce one brief
example of what Japan is doing on the ground based on
this concept. In the Philippines, through the Japan
Bank for International Cooperation, Japan is assisting
community development programmes and regional
infrastructure projects. In these projects, community
groups drawn from the local population are taking the
lead in developing and implementing different aspects
of the programmes. What is unique about these
projects is that widows who lost their husbands to
conflict are given priority with regard to participation
in these community groups. We believe that these
projects will help women gain confidence and be
empowered to assume roles as major contributors to
development and reconstruction, and thus, ultimately,
to lasting peace.

Finally, Japan welcomes the Secretary-General's
system-wide action plan on the implementation of the
resolution. We will study the plan in greater detail in
due course, but today I would like to make two
preliminary comments.

First, one of the major causes of sexual
misconduct involving peacekeeping personnel is
considered to be the lack of training and education of
soldiers by troop-contributing countries. It is my
delegation's view that this perspective too should be
taken into account in the formulation of the action
plan.

And secondly, we welcome the assignment of
gender advisers to peacekeeping operations and the
expansion of their responsibilities, and we believe that
it is necessary to evaluate how well they have carried
out their duties and whether the peacekeeping
structure, including at the higher levels, pays enough
attention to those advisers and their work. Furthermore,
in assigning gender advisers we should ensure the
effectiveness of their efforts by avoiding duplication
with work done in other similar schemes, for example
by child protection advisers.

