Mrs. Huree-Agarwal (Mauritius): We join others
in thanking Under-Secretary-General Guehenno, Ms.
Angela King and Ms. Heyzer for their very elaborate
and useful presentations. Today's discussion has
enabled us to get a broader view of the impact of armed
conflict on women and girls, the gender dimensions of
peace processes and conflict resolution and the role of
women in peace-building. This meeting is an
opportunity to take into account the study carried out in
collaboration with Ms. King's office, with a view to
implementing resolution 1325 (2000) of 31 October
2000.

We would also like to thank all those who have
contributed to making this study possible. The
delegation of Mauritius is happy to see the issue of the
protection of the most vulnerable members of society
brought to the forefront and to see a culture of
protection and prevention being developed
progressively. We fully agree with the analysis of the
study with regard to the systematic targeting of women
and girls during armed conflicts, due to their
vulnerable status in society. Statistics testify that the
vast majority of victims of armed conflicts throughout
the world are women and children.

Women have assumed and have been made to
assume different roles during conflicts. While in some
cases they have actively participated in conflicts and
have fought side by side with men, in most cases they
are used as human shields, sex slaves and porters
during conflicts. Not only are their human rights
flouted but their dignity is undermined. They have
undergone untold suffering and various other miseries.

It is most unfortunate that very little has been
done to alleviate their sufferings, and yet, women can
play an important role in peacemaking, such as the
Mano River Women's Peace Network, which is doing
an excellent job in the Mano River Union countries,
and the Comoros Women's Association, which
organized a weapon collection programme on the
island of Anjouan during the internal conflicts. Such
endeavours at the local grassroots level should be
recognized and encouraged.

Through its peacekeeping missions and
humanitarian organisations, the United Nations should
step up efforts to work closely and in a coordinated
manner with regional, subregional and non-
governmental organizations to sensitize women with
regard to gender-based violence, the possibilities of
protection from all forms of violence and the rights of
women and children. This could be done through the
development of general terms of reference for gender
specialists within human rights components of
peacekeeping operations and through the proper
training of peacekeepers on gender and women's rights
issues.

In line with the Brahimi recommendations, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations should work
closely with the Office of the Special Adviser on
Gender Issues in implementing projects designed to
support the work of the civilian police in the field.

We would like to highlight the historic move
taken by the African Union recently in Durban towards
gender equality in Africa. Accordingly, the African
heads of State have endorsed a set of recommendations
that calls for a 50 per cent participation of women in all
African Union organs. Their initiative is commendable
and should be followed by other regional groups in
order to ensure the adequate representation of women's
interests at all levels, including key organs dealing with
the maintenance of peace and security.

Due attention should also be given to women
when creating peacekeeping and post-conflict
peacekeeping operations. Necessary assistance should
be given to women who have suffered rape and other
atrocities and to those women and girls who are willing
to testify against the perpetrators of such crimes.

We also propose that programmes for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration should
include provisions for counselling and providing
advice to women who have undergone traumas of
conflict. In order to reintegrate these women in normal
life, they should be fully rehabilitated and provided
with the necessary assistance. In this respect, we
highlight the need for women to have access to funds,
the labour market and training facilities that will give
them opportunities to contribute to the welfare and
well-being of their families, as well as to society, in the
most effective manner.

Finally, it is the View of my delegation that
women can play an important role in preventing
conflict, peacemaking and peace-building. We need to
empower them and enhance their role so that they can
make their valuable contribution to international peace
and security.

