Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): I thank you, Madam
President, for organizing this debate. I would also
like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Bangura and Ms. Allamin for their very lucid
briefings.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/203)
presents an operational context for conflict-related
sexual violence. Indeed, we want to thank him for
placing the United Nations in the vanguard of the global
fight against sexual violence.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered by the Permanent Observer of the African
Union on behalf of the African Union.

We want to welcome in particular the efforts
of United Nations Action against Sexual Violence
in Conflict to improve inter-agency coordination,
knowledge-building, advocacy and technical country-
level support. Of particular significance is the
publication by United Nations Action in 2014 of a
guidance note designed to improve and perfect data
collection on sexual violence and reporting to the
Security Council. We believe, however, that it is
essential to include in our quest for answers broader
questions about the prevalence of sexual violence in
human society. The image of men fighting and dying
in wars while women remain protected at home has
become a myth in our times. Contemporary violent
extremism in all parts of the world has rendered women
and girls exceedingly vulnerable. In today's armed
conflict, women living in areas of conflict, who are
essentially non-combatants, suffer as much if not more
than soldiers in active service.

In order for us to obtain enduring answers on this
subject, we must cast our enquiry beyond situations
of active conflict into all human situations. As
conflicts do not exist in isolation, it is unlikely that
we can understand sexual violence outside the larger
context of human society. We must seek a full moral
and helpful understanding of the correlation between
sexual violence in societies on either side ofthe conflict
divide. Preventing sexual violence is a critical element
in fighting this scourge, whatever the context. We
therefore commend United Nations Action for adapting
its framework of early warning indicators of conflict-
related sexual violence for use in several countries.
We expect this effort to enhance the ability of United
Nations mission to prevent sexual violence.

Promoting accountability and fighting impunity
are crucial to ending sexual Violence. In that regard,
Nigeria notes the important work being conducted by
the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict, including criminal investigations
and prosecutions, the collection and preservation of
evidence, criminal law reform, the protection of Victims
and reparations. We look forward to the compilation of
good practices that the Team is currently preparing.

Nigeria's national policy on gender identifies
gender-based violence as a threat to the fundamental
human rights of women. The policy recognizes the link
between gender inequality and gender-based violence,
and aims to address the systematic inequalities by
prioritizing the empowerment of women as a crucial
first step towards equality. This is being promoted
through the introduction of a gender-based perspective
in all aspects of policy planning and legislation.

The fight against sexual violence should not be
left to Governments alone. Indeed, ending this kind
of Violence is not a task that Governments alone can
accomplish. There is an important role for civil society
to play in this enterprise. We recognize the efforts of
various national and international non-governmental
organizations, and express our full support for them as
major stakeholders in combating sexual violence.

Nigeria commends the Government of the United
Kingdom for its global leadership in mobilizing
countries to act against sexual violence. As a
signatory to the Declaration of Commitment to End
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Nigeria was pleased
to participate in the Global Summit to End Sexual
Violence in Conflict, which was held in London in
June 2014. One significant outcome of the Summit
was the launch of the International Protocol on the
Documentation and Investigation of Sexual Violence in
Conflict. The Protocol outlines global standards for the
collection of evidence on sexual Violence. The aim is to
increase conviction rates for offences and deter future
occurrences of sexual violence.
We are pleased to note that the Summit generated
substantial political support all across the world.
The key task now, and the key challenge for us, is to
translate that political support into effective action
on the ground. That will require a multi-stakeholder
approach involving various actors playing different
but complementary roles. The Nigerian Government
remains firmly committed to working in a collaborative
manner with relevant international and domestic
partners to end this scourge.

Yesterday, 14 April, marked the anniversary of the
infamous abduction of 276 Nigerian schoolgirls by the
terrorist group Boko Haram. The Nigerian Government
and people are united in a strong determination to find
and free them all, as well as all the other Victims of
sexual violence perpetrated by that terrorist group.
Together with our neighbours Chad and Cameroon,
we are placing Boko Haram on the defensive. We are
confident that the group will be crushed and its leaders
and members held accountable for the war crimes and
crimes against humanity that they are committing.

Nigeria takes note of the recommendations
contained in the Secretary-General's report, and
expresses its full support for them. We share the view of
the Secretary-General that sexual violence has become
a tactic employed by terrorist groups, and that makes
it even more dangerous. This is evident in the actions
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, Boko Haram
and other extremist groups. We therefore see merit in
aligning efforts to address sexual violence with efforts
to prevent extremism.

As part of the efforts of the Nigerian Government to
counter violent extremism, steps are being taken under
a soft approach, which was launched on the premises
of the United Nations, encompassing peace, security
and development. The main focus of the approach is
deradicalization, countering the extremist narrative
and advancing economic regeneration. We support the
recommendation that Security Council missions should
focus attention on issues pertaining to sexual violence
and engage with stakeholders on the ground. We stand
ready to work with other Council members to give
practical effect to these and other recommendations
contained in the Secretary-General's report.

