Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Mr. President, may I begin
with welcoming you to the Council and congratulating
Viet Nam on its assumption of the presidency of the
Council for October. We wish you every success. I also
wish to express our sincere appreciation to Ambassador
Rice and the United States delegation for their
stewardship of the Council during the month of
September.

Given the adoption of resolution 1888 (2009)
only a week ago, this meeting has particular
significance in demonstrating to the world at large the
continued commitment of the Council to the
empowerment of women in all its aspects. In this
respect, I would like to commend Viet Nam's leading
role in organizing this debate, as well as its efforts in
preparing the resolution we have just adopted. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2009/465) and the Deputy Secretary-General for her
briefing; both of these include valuable assessments
and recommendations on how to improve the United
Nations system as it pertains to the security of women.
Finally, I wish to commend the efforts of the various
United Nations entities, as well as those of the
non-governmental and women's organizations working
selflessly to achieve the goals of resolutions 1325 (2000)
and 1820 (2008). I particularly thank Ms. Mayanja,
Ms. Alberdi and Ms. Amin for their briefings and their
contributions to our debate.

Since the adoption of Security Council resolution
1325 (2000) in 2000, there has been progress across a
broad range of issues related to the protection and
promotion of women's and girls' rights in conflict-
affected situations, particularly in terms of raising
awareness of the challenges that they face. Thanks to
the efforts of the international community, a strong
understanding of the need for gender equality and
women's empowerment as prerequisites for
international peace and security is slowly taking hold.

As mentioned in the Secretary-General's reports,
there are many ongoing projects and programmes
aimed at protecting women and girls against gender-
based violence and other kinds of risks and challenges.
However, despite the progress made so far, we cannot
fail to note that much remains to be done, particularly
in the area of implementation. As today's debate and
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/465) have
shown us, there remain many structural and
institutional impediments that we should overcome in
order to meet the challenges before us.

We believe that more effective actions must be
taken to protect and empower women. Addressing the
particular needs of women and girls in post-conflict
situations, with a particular emphasis on issues related
to their physical security, mental and reproductive
health, employment, education and access to social
services and justice, is a matter of priority that we
should tackle from the very beginning of the
peacebuilding process.

Likewise, equally strong measures are needed to
increase the participation of women in post-conflict
recovery efforts and peace processes, since that would
increase the effectiveness of such efforts. Indeed, we
should not forget that women in post-conflict countries
are not merely victims of war, but also agents of
change towards modernization and transformation,
making immense contributions to sustainable peace
and prosperity.

That is why Turkey has given its strong support
to projects aimed at ensuring increased participation by
women in all areas of social and political life. In other
words, we believe that the empowerment of women in
its entirety should be at the core of all our efforts.
In that respect, let me cite our approach in
Afghanistan. We continue to support various
programmes devoted to empowering women in politics
and governance, while undertaking many other projects
aimed at providing equal and modern education
opportunities to girls.

We believe that, while tackling the issue of
women's security, which is inextricable from
international peace and security, we should move away
from ad hoc approaches and towards a systematic one.
To that end, the appeals set out in resolutions 1325
(2000), 1820 (2008) and 1888 (2009) and in resolution
1889 (2009), adopted today, should all become a
regular part of the work of the Council in guiding the
activities of the United Nations and Member States.

We also believe that the establishment of a set of
indicators, as foreseen in resolution 1889 (2009), might
serve as a useful means by which we can monitor and
track the implementation of measures at the global
level. Thus, the new gender entity recently agreed upon
by the General Assembly in its resolution 63/311 will
also strengthen our work towards women's
empowerment by helping the United Nations pursue its
efforts in a more systemized and coordinated manner in
the area of women and peace and security.
Furthermore, like my Russian colleague Ambassador
Churkin, we believe that the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs) relating to the status of women are
important. The implementation of those MDGs will no
doubt reinforce the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).

The months ahead of us in the run-up to the tenth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) next year will
provide ample opportunities to translate these words
into deeds in order to ensure the basic rights and the
human rights of women all around the world. We in
Turkey are committed to that goal and thus will
continue our support for the implementation of all
resolutions on women and peace and security.

