Mr. Amayo (Kenya): At the outset, my delegation
welcomes the briefings by the Secretary-General,
Mr. Antonio Guterres; Under-Secretary-General
and Executive Director of UN-Women Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka; and the representative of civil society.

My delegation aligns itself with the statements
delivered by the representative of Canada on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security and
by the representative of Ghana on behalf of the Group
of Friends of the African Women Leaders Network to
the United Nations.

Let me also at this stage take this opportunity to
join colleagues in congratulating our neighbour to
the north, Ethiopia, on having elected Her Excellency
Ms. Sahle-Work Zewde as the first female President of
the Federal Republic.

Kenya also wishes to join other speakers in
extending its compliments to the Plurinational State
of Bolivia for convening this important meeting today,
focusing on the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda in the area of women's political
and economic empowerment. We would also like to
welcome the efforts made by the Secretary-General to
enhance women's participation and gender parity in the
United Nations system. We recognize that addressing
the groundbreaking resolution 1325 (2000) is a
prerequisite for the achievement of sustainable peace.

This open debate has come at an opportune
time for us. In marking the eighteenth anniversary
of resolution 1325 (2000), we in Kenya have just
concluded a high-level peer review meeting on women
and peace and security, where experiences were shared
on accountability in the implementation of resolutions
focused on women and peace and security.

Although at the global level some progress has been
made towards the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), we note that such implementation still faces
challenges in terms of bringing about the meaningful
integration of women into the peace-conflict continuum
as agents of change in political and development
forums, including as active players in the fight against
radicalization and the international threat of terror. We
therefore believe that it is critical - despite our diverse
cultural and social norms ~ to take a whole-of-society
approach where young boys and men can also see their
role in championing and implementing the women and
peace and security agenda.

At the regional level, our dedication to the women
and peace and security agenda is underlined by our
full support for the African Union Solemn Declaration
on Gender Equality in Africa and the Continental
Results Framework for Monitoring and Reporting on
the Implementation of the Women, Peace and Security
Agenda in Africa. We are pleased to be among the
member States that validated the Continental Results
Framework earlier this year, in March. Since then, recent
efforts have been focused on ensuring that Kenya's
national action plan, entitled "To involve women is to
sustain peace", aligns its monitoring and evaluation
tools with the Continental Results Framework.

Beyond regional efforts, the Government has made
significant strides towards strengthening women's
equal and full participation in peace and security
processes. Kenya's national action plan has served as
a key policy framework for both State and non-State
actors in the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda. Within this framework, we have
increased efforts to integrate gender into the national
peace architecture, as well as gender-mainstreaming
peace and security issues. Key examples of this include
the appointment of women in key decision-making
dockets such as the Ministry of Defence, which is
central to the management of armed conflict, and the
establishment of a task force on women and peace
and security within the gender sector working group,
a platform that brings together State and non-State
actors to advance national priorities on gender. Equally
important is the appointment of focal officers in all
Government ministries to champion and to monitor and
report on the implementation of the national action plan
within their sectors. Last but not least, I would note
the deployment of Kenyan women in peace-support
operations, which, as of 2017, stood at 19 per cent. This
surpasses the United Nations-recommended percentage
of 15 per cent.

Finally, we wish to reiterate Kenya's continued
engagement in the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). We believe that much more needs to be done at
the national and global levels to educate all segments
of society on the centrality of the empowerment of
women and girls in sustaining peace. Therefore, as we
approach the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000), in 2020, we urge Member States to move beyond
rhetoric and create an enabling environment for women
to actively engage in peace and security processes at
all levels.

