Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): I would like
to thank the presidency of the United Kingdom for
convening today's ministerial-level open debate. We
appreciate the insights that have been shared by the
Secretary-General and the briefers.

Trafficking in persons represents a heart ofdarkness
in our midst. The unholy nexus between terrorists and
organized criminal groups in conflict situations has
further aggravated that scenario. The Security Council,
through its resolution 2331 (2016), unequivocally
condemned all instances of trafficking in persons. In
view of the request to the Secretary-General to make
recommendations for implementing the resolution, we
take this opportunity to consider five issues.

First, the Secretary-General may consider
designating a high-level focal point for coordinating
and monitoring the system-wide efforts of the United
Nations against trafficking in persons. The principal
organs of the United Nations and their subsidiary bodies
should continue to explore ways to further reinforce
and complement one another's work, pursuant to their
respective mandates. The lessons learned from the
implementation of the Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons, as well as its regional and
national variants, could prove useful in charting a way
forward. The offices of the relevant mandate holders,
especially those on sexual violence in armed conflict,
children and armed conflict, and migration, can make
meaningful contributions.

Secondly, the victims of trafficking in persons and
related crimes, including in conflict situations, must
remain at the forefront of the United Nations counter-
trafficking agenda. The United Nations Voluntary
Trust Fund for Victims of Trafficking in Persons
needs to be supported in a sustained and predictable
manner. In view of the added vulnerabilities of
refugees and displaced persons, the United Nations and
its Member States should remain seized of efforts to
address cross-border trafficking flows as part of mixed
migratory movements. My delegation underscores
the importance of addressing this issue adequately in
the forthcoming global compact for safe, orderly and
regular migration, and we look forward to the relevant
thematic consultations.

Thirdly, despite significant gains in the legal
sphere, the rate of prosecution and conviction of human
traffickers around the world is still relatively low. United
Nations support can be instrumental to national and
international investigative mechanisms for gathering
evidence of crimes in a timely and systematic manner.
Such evidence can serve as an important building block
in efforts to hold perpetrators accountable and provide

justice and redress to the victims. The Security Council
may consider having recourse to the range of tools at
its disposal for fighting impunity for those responsible
for trafficking in persons and other related crimes in
conflict situations.

Fourthly, in most obvious cases, the proceeds
from trafficking in persons, slavery and forced labour
contribute directly to the financing of terrorism. The
United Nations should continue its advocacy and
support for compliance with the relevant international
legal instruments and obligations, as well as Financial
Action Task Force standards, in order to deal with any
weak links in combating the financing of terrorism. We
urge Member States to work on developing effective
intelligence networks, at regional and international
levels, in order to monitor, intercept and prosecute illicit
financial flows connected to trafficking in persons and
other related crimes.

Fifthly, the overarching priority of the United
Nations, which is the prevention of conflict, should
have a corollary effect on addressing the underlying
vulnerability factors of trafficking in persons and
other related crimes. Certain root causes of conflict
also create an environment conducive to the rise of
terrorism and violent extremism, as well as trafficking
in persons and forced labour. The Security Council and
the other relevant United Nations entities should remain
engaged with those causes as part of their respective
contributions to the goal and process of sustaining
peace, drawing on one another's competencies.

As a country of origin, transit and destination,
Bangladesh has positioned itself at the forefront of
the global and regional counter-trafficking initiatives.
Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina's personal commitment
to combating this scourge has been translated into a
series of legal, policy and administrative measures at
the national level.

In conclusion, in response to the Secretary-General's
call this morning, we reaffirm our commitment to
joining hands with fellow Member States in further

strengthening the coordinated United Nations response
to and action against trafficking in persons, slavery and
forced labour.

