Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): First, allow me to
express my gratitude to the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, for his report (S/2010/604) and his additional
remarks here today. It is my firm belief that the work
of the Security Council will be greatly enhanced by the
report, which contextualizes our understanding of the
causes and effects of conflict-related sexual violence. I
would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Alain Le Roy, Military Adviser Babacar Gaye and
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Margot Wallstrom for their briefings.

As the nature of conflict evolves, not only are
civilians more frequently targeted, but we are also
witnessing a disturbing trend in the use of sexual
violence as a tactic of war. The international
community is rightly appalled by such trends, and it is
also our responsibility to take action to protect
civilians and prevent such incidents.

Conflict-related sexual violence can
disenfranchize and displace entire communities. Such
outcomes are only the beginning of a spiral of social
decline triggered by armed conflict. That chain
reaction was recognized in resolutions 1820 (2008) and
1888 (2009), and our efforts to combat impunity, instil
cultures of accountability, tackle deep-rooted attitudes
and ultimately protect the vulnerable must now be
intensified.
All persons of good conscience should be appalled
by the use of sexual violence as a tactic of war, visited
upon the most vulnerable members of society. Although
only recently appointed, Ms. Wallstrom has already
brought sexual violence in conflict firmly into the

foreground of the international peace and security
landscape. The new momentum she has generated has,
we believe, contributed to the arrests of Lieutenant
Colonel Mayele and Callixte Mbarushimana in
connection with this past summer's mass rapes in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

While Special Representative Wallstrom's five-
point priority agenda recognizes the cultural and
political aspects of the problem, we share her
conclusion that sexual violence in conflict is likely to
occur where the rule of law is weak and where
adequate legal mechanisms and institutions are lacking.
Consequently, legal mechanisms to deter the use of
systematic sexual violence in conflict situations must
be put in place. It is therefore vital that the Team of
Experts on the Rule of Law receive sustainable funding
to develop institutional safeguards and paths for
redress in partnership with Government actors.

Resolution 1960 (2010), which we have just
adopted, also speaks to the need for our peacekeepers
to be fully equipped and trained to carry out mandated
tasks relating to the prevention of and response to
sexual violence. In that regard, Nigeria welcomes the
Secretary-General's development of operational tools
for the implementation of mandates for peacekeepers
with regard to the protection of civilians.

The proposed monitoring and reporting
mechanism on sexual violence in conflict is a welcome
innovation, building upon that already in place under
the children and armed conflict agenda. It is our hope
that that tool will encourage accountability and
produce timely, reliable information and trend analysis,
which the Security Council can use to carry out its
responsibility to promote the protection of civilians
from conflict-related sexual violence. We also believe
that there is scope for the Council to make greater use
of Special Representative Wallstrom as a resource,
given that her role brings her closer to situations on the
ground. Such realities can help ensure the effectiveness
of our decisions and actions.

The damage caused by the use of sexual violence
as a tactic of war is far reaching. It goes beyond the
immediate impact experienced by the individual. It
goes beyond the families fragmented by such acts. The
scars are deep and are borne by society as a whole.
Such acts manifest abhorrent attitudes to women,
threaten the progress made toward socioeconomic
equality and impede women's participation in peace
and democratic processes. An attack involving sexual
violence is indeed an attack on peace, stability and
development. If we do not arrest that trend, we risk the
normalization of sexual violence as a method of war.
Such an outcome cannot be countenanced, and Nigeria
is accordingly committed to the resolution we have just
adopted as the next step towards ending sexual
violence in conflict.

