The President (spoke in French): I shall now make a
statement in my capacity as the representative of France.

Iwarmly thank the Chef de Cabinet of the Secretary-
General, Ms. Ribeiro Viotti; the Executive Director
of UN-Women, Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka; Ms. Mina-
Rojas; and the Secretary General of the International
Organization of La Francophonie, Ms. Michaelle Jean,
for their very enlightening briefings.

I would like to pay particular tribute to the vital role
played by civil society in promoting and implementing
this very important agenda, on whose behalf Ms. Mina-
Rojas delivered a strong and committed message today.
I take this opportunity to reiterate France's support
for the initiatives of organizations that campaign for
respecting and promoting women's rights in the field.
Those initiatives must not be hindered, but instead
robustly supported and encouraged.

I also welcome the presence and commitment ofthe
Secretary General of the International Organization of
La Francophonie, Ms. Michaelle Jean, to this agenda.
The efforts of the countries of La Francophonie indeed
symbolize a strong and important message. I would like
to say another word of support, together with Germany,
for the determination of the African Union and Ghana
to establish a network of African women leaders. We
also welcome Italy's initiative to build a network of
women mediators in the Mediterranean, which was
launched yesterday in Rome.

1 turn first to the issue of our collective commitment
with regard to the practical implementation of this
agenda and the participation of women, before briefly
presenting the efforts undertaken by France on a daily
basis to that end.

We simply cannot resolve crises without ensuring
the protection and participation of women. Women must
be protected 4 that is essential - but they must also
be fully involved in conflict prevention and resolution.
That must be a genuine common priority not only in our
words but also in our actions to ensure both equality
and efficiency. The participation of women in political
processes and in conflict prevention and resolution
remains grossly inadequate: from 1992 to 2011, 4 per
cent of peace agreement signatories and fewer than
10 per cent of negotiators participating in peace talks
were women. The report of the Secretary-General on
women and peace and security (S/2017/86l) refers
clearly to this state of affairs and underscores the fact
that some areas, such as disarmament, are still closed
off to women. That shows just how much we must
change the breadth of the implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda. We must move from
words to actions. We are not talking about a peripheral
issue; we are talking about a pivotal matter that should
lie at the heart of the daily work of the United Nations.

The Security Council has adopted eight ambitious
resolutions on this subject; however, it is quite clear that
their implementation remains woefully insufficient.
Progress has certainly been noted, particularly within
the Council: three-quarters of resolutions take the
women and peace and security agenda into account
and an informal group of experts has been set up.
A network of national focal points has also been
established. But now Governments must embrace their
responsibility and develop national, and even regional,
plans and implement them. In short, it is time to take
practical action.

It is also necessary to set aside space to implement
a global, frequent and responsible evaluation of
the initiatives we carry out. We need to step up our
analysis conflicts against the backdrop of gender,
including through an exchange of best practices.
Measuring progress will also be important, as it will
present a challenge for years to come. We are well
aware of the fact that - and this has been said, but it
bears repeating - when women participate in peace
processes, the lasting success ofpeace agreements over
a period of at least two years increases by 20 per cent,
and the likelihood of an agreement remaining in place
for at least 15 years increases by 25 per cent. Once
again, therefore, that is an obligation that is not just a
matter of equality but of efficiency. The United Nations
itself must be exemplary in that regard, and we welcome
the establishment by the Secretary-General of a pool of
female talent for access to leadership positions.

France is committed to staying at the forefront of
the international community's efforts to implement the
women and peace and security agenda. I would now
like to briefly present our national action plan for the
implementation of this agenda. First, however, allow
me to recall the fact that our parity law has undeniably
enabled France to achieve decisive progress in women't
representation in the political life of my country. The
French Government has achieved parity, as has the
Permanent Mission of France to the United Nations
here in New York.

More specifically, France is implementing its second
national action plan on women and peace and security,
which covers the period 2015-2018. It is built on five
pillars: participation; protection, which during conflict
means primarily protection against violence, but also
more broadly protection for the rights of women; the
fight against impunity; prevention, especially through
raising awareness of violence against women; and
promoting the women and peace and security agenda.
For each of those pillars we are implementing initiatives
at the national, multilateral and concrete cooperation
levels. Allow me to briefly mention a few examples.

First of all, France is taking action against
impunity when crimes are committed against women,
including to enable women's access to justice. To that
end, we fully support the Secretary-General's zero-
tolerance policy against sexual exploitation and abuse.
In the same spirit, the President of the French Republic,
Mr. Emmanuel Macron, joined the circle of leaders
at the high-level segment of the General Assembly.
Along the same lines, the Minister for Europe and
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian, signed the
pact between the United Nations and Member States.
In that regard, we commend the recent appointment by
the Secretary-General of an advocate for the rights of
victims of sexual exploitation and abuse.

Our efforts are also ongoing daily on the ground.
For instance, we continue to support humanitarian
programmes aimed at assisting women affected by the
consequences of the crises in Afghanistan; the Central
African Republic; Lebanon, as a result of the Syrian
crisis; and Nigeria. We are also undertaking numerous
projects to protect women from human trafficking, as
a priority.

We must also more implement more coherently
the women and peace and security agenda and
the Sustainable Development Goals. Our official
development assistance already has fully incorporated
the gender dimension, and the number of projects with
a direct impact on the lives of women is rising as well.
France has also undertaken a comprehensive effort and
set specific goals to increase women's participation in
its armed forces. Appointments have risen significantly,
and women's representation has virtually doubled since
1998 to 15 per cent of overall troops today, which, of
course, is not fully sufficient, but progress continues to
be made. The armed forces, including peacekeeping-
operation contingents, must also be made more aware
of gender issues, and to that end gender advisers'
functions, as has been mentioned, must be sustained
within these operations.

Lastly, our national action plan dovetails closely
with the European Union's efforts, and here I am
thinking in particular of initiatives to address the
situation of women in Afghanistan and Syria and of the
recent joint initiative between the United Nations and
the European Union, known as the Spotlight Initiative,
which will make possible specific responses to violence
against women.

France can be counted on to continue to do
everything in its power to advance this agenda, which
is at the very heart of the activities and values of the
United Nations. Our vision is that of living in a world in
which women are no longer victims of violence but can
take their rightful place in conflict settlement and in
the political, economic and social life of their countries.
This is an imperative for equality and effectiveness.
Women are the key to lasting peace and security.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The representative of Ukraine has asked for the
floor to make a further statement.

