Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
thank you, Madame, for convening this open debate.
Unfortunately, the issue of sexual violence is all too
relevant to the work of the Security Council, as we
have heard when discussing many different conflict
situations this year. I would like to thank the Secretary-
General for the personal interest that he has shown in
this important dossier and I thank him, Under-
Secretary-General Le Roy and Lieutenant General
Gaye for their briefings.

I would also like to pay special tribute to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Margot
Wallstrom. In less than a year, she has had a great
impact. Her global advocacy role has given this issue
prominence in public debate, pushing for an end to
impunity, including in relation to the Walikale mass
rapes. Her field visits to speak with survivors in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Liberia and Bosnia
and Herzegovina and her briefings have brought the
voices of those women to the Council to inform our
deliberations.

If we are going to resolve and prevent conflict
effectively, we must help to protect women from
violence, particularly sexual violence. That
understanding is now fundamental to the way that the
Security Council approaches its responsibilities. In
October, on the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), many Member States identified
the need for concrete action to accompany the political
support that the Council has given to this important
agenda. We agree. We need to translate political
commitments into tangible lasting action on the
ground. Without such practical action, we will fail the
victims of sexual violence.

The United Kingdom has clearly set out its
commitments in its new national action plan. The plan
was launched on the International Day for the
Elimination of Violence Against Women. The
commitments include strengthening the role of women
in structures and processes within the Government of
the United Kingdom designed to address conflict;
country-specific action plans that set out the action we
will take on the ground to support women in priority
countries, starting with Afghanistan, Nepal and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo; working to
strengthen the implementation of commitments by the
international community; and continuing our strong
advocacy role in multilateral and regional
organizations. The British Government has also
announced the appointment of a minister with special
responsibility for combating violence against women
overseas.
Nowhere is the need for concrete commitments
greater than in situations of armed conflict. As
resolution 1960 (2010) highlights, sexual violence
continues to be a widely used weapon of warfare. It
stigmatizes survivors, divides communities,
exacerbates and prolongs conflict, and impedes the
restoration of peace and security. Impunity for such
crimes can prevent a society from recovering from
conflict.

It is clear that the proliferation of sexual Violence
against women and girls is often aimed at
marginalizing their contribution to society. It
deliberately degrades the role that they can play in
restoring the fabric of peaceful communities. So, in
addition to the appalling human cost, there is a deeply
damaging impact on societies as a whole.

I would like to take a moment to highlight the
significant steps forward that we have taken today with
resolution 1960 (2010). First, it contains a new
provision to identify parties to armed conflict that is
credibly suspected of committing or being responsible
for acts of rape and other forms of sexual violence.
That will help our efforts to tackle impunity for crimes
of sexual violence and conflict.

Second are increased monitoring, analysis and
reporting. That will help us to develop a more
comprehensive and integrated approach. More effective
monitoring of patterns of sexual violence in situations
of armed conflict should allow the Council to identify
and mandate the action necessary to prevent it.

Thirdly, we will be able to address the arbitrary
division that has been created by a monitoring and
reporting mechanism for children in armed conflict
who are subject to patterns of sexual violence when no
such protection is afforded to those older than 18.

I thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive and ambitious report (S/2010/604). I
am pleased that the Council has welcomed the report as
a strong signal of our intention to support and assist in
the eradication of sexual violence as a tactic of
warfare. This terminology and its consideration by the
Council are relatively new, but the tragic reality is not.
We look forward to progress by the Secretary-General
on his work with parties to armed conflict to ensure
that such unacceptable abuses that threaten
international peace and security come to an end.

