Ms. Mayanja: It is a privilege to address the
Council at this open debate and to introduce the report
of the Secretary-General on women, peace and security
(S/2006/770). Let me begin by expressing gratitude to
you, Mr. President, for convening this crucially
important meeting on the roles of women in the
consolidation of peace. I am also deeply heartened by
the Council's continued commitment to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

The Council has before it the report of the
Secretary-General on women, peace and security,
prepared in response to the request of the Council
contained in its presidential statement
S/PRST/2005/52. The report contains a comprehensive
and candid assessment of the first eight months of
carrying out the System-wide Action Plan for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), in support
of activities and commitments by Governments and
civil society. The assessment identifies progress and
challenges in the implementation of the Plan and offers
measures to redress the shortcomings. The Plan has
proved to be a useful tool for strengthened inter-agency
coordination.

The consolidation of peace is an opportunity to
redress grievances and problems that led to conflict in
the first place. It holds the promise of establishing
equality in a democratic environment and reforming
institutions in ways that enable women to take full
advantage of opportunities presented through the
restoration of peace. Yet, the past year has
demonstrated that our collective efforts to ensure equal
participation by women in the consolidation of peace
have thus far generally fallen short of what is required.
From the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the
Sudan, and from Somalia to Timor Leste, women
continue to be exposed to violence or to be targeted by
parties to a conflict, as well as to be marginalized in
formal processes, in particular as regards issues of war
and peace.

It is axiomatic that States, in particular those
emerging from conflict situations, and their
Governments have a vested interest in maintaining
peace and security, and hence in bringing about the
06-58727

political reorganization of society and establishing
credible institutions that can result in human security
for all, in particular for women and girls. However, it is
no secret that, even with political will at the top and
pressure from women's groups below, many
Governments are generally hesitant to challenge pre-
conflict societal values and norms that are often deeply
patriarchal and wedded to customary practices. To
overcome that challenge, the following four conditions
should be met.

First, the international community should
summon all possible political will in order to meet its
commitments to women in the realm of peace and
security. Secondly, at the national level, Governments
should establish clear accountability systems for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). Thirdly, the
Security Council should provide more effective
leadership to monitor progress in the implementation in
the field and should encourage States to do more. And
finally, States and United Nations entities should
allocate sufficient resources and capacities for the
national implementation of the resolution.

A frank and constructive discussion on how to
meet those and other challenges related to national
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) was held on
23 October. It underlined the critical importance of
national implementation as the key to achieving
sustainable peace and the equal participation of women
in peace processes. Within that framework, the
International Research and Training Institute for the
Advancement of Women last month released "Securing
equality, engendering peace: a guide to policy and
planning on women, peace and security".

The full and effective implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) will require all the will and
creativity the international community can muster. We
can succeed in achieving sustainable peace if we -
Member States, United Nations entities and civil
society - put our minds to it and use the tools,
resources and knowledge at our disposal to fully
empower women. For its part, the United Nations will
remain a strong partner for Member States and civil
society. I look forward to working with everyone in
that quest.

