Mrs. Carrion (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to join the many previous speakers
who have thanked you, Sir, for having convened
this debate. I also express our gratitude to all those,
especially the women, who work every day to promote
peace and security.

Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), the
women and peace and security agenda has made clear
progress, expanding in both breadth and depth to
occupy the important place it does today, supported by
the legal instruments, political initiatives and practical
activities of the Organization.

Despite that progress, however, we regret to note
that reports from a number of conflict and post-conflict
situations continue to point to increasing physical and
emotional violence against women and girls, who are
the primary victims of sexual violence and its negative
consequences for their quality of life and future
development. In that regard, we would stress the need
to defend the human rights of the victims of serious
violations. In our view, the United Nations system
should continue to fight against impunity, bring to
justice those guilty for such violations and strengthen
national capacities, using regional capacities to promote
international justice in the defence of women's rights.

Uruguay considers the issue of women and peace
and security to be an essential part of a larger agenda
that includes the situation of children in armed conflict
as well as the protection of civilians in armed conflict;
they are integral parts of the whole. It is therefore
essential to make coordinated progress and to use all the
instruments available to the Organization, particularly
its capacities in the field.

One instrument in such efforts is peacekeeping
operations, which in recent years have included
mandates for the protection of civilians that pay
particular attention to women and children. There has
been significant progress. However, the periodic attacks
against civilian populations, including in areas where
the missions are deployed, shows the limitations that
still exist against dealing with the perpetrators of these
attacks - limitations for the local population as well
as for the international community. Through resolution
1325 (2000), the Council has stressed the important role
that women play in the prevention of conflicts and in
peacebuilding.

Uruguay has been in the vanguard of incorporating
women into the armed forces, and that can be seen in the
number of women who are deployed in the armed forces
as well as in the Uruguayan police and in the formed
police units of peacekeeping operations. Those women
volunteers have always played a key role, and they are
also interested in returning to jobs in the field, which
shows, I think, the commitment that they have to the
goals ofthe missions. That is why I think it is important
to reiterate the need to continue to promote the greatest
possible participation of women in peacekeeping
processes, because they provide undeniable qualitative
advantages.

With regard to the implementation of the agenda of
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, we would
like particular stress to be given to women and children
through the work that we do at Headquarters as well as
through the work that is done by Blue Helmets on the
ground. We would also like to stress the importance of
having the broadest possible support for this agenda.
