Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I thank
you, Mr. President, for presiding over this important
meeting. I would also like to thank Assistant Secretary-
General Kang, Ms. Durham of the International
Committee of the Red Cross and Ms. Elman of the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security
for their informative and moving briefings and tireless
work on this important subject.

Shortly after the Secretary-General released his
report (S/20l4/693) on women and peace and security
last year, the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria released
a document of its own - a pamphlet of rules about
how jihadists should handle trafficked women and
girls, including those sold into sexual slavery. In recent
weeks, the Al-Qaida affiliate the Al-Nusra Front
released a video that appears to depict a woman, arms
seemingly bound behind her back, kneeling, while a
man declares that she has been convicted of adultery
by an Islamic court. The video then shows this woman
being summarily shot in the head by a man who himself
is clad in body armour.

Last year, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) released its own video that appears to depict a
young woman being stoned to death in the presence of
her father. In the final moments of the video, she is seen
begging her father for forgiveness. She is then led to a
hole dug in the earth surrounded by men who throw
stones at her. The young woman, in what would be
some of her final words, offers this advice to women:
"Protect your honour more than your lives."

The unique horror confronted by women and girls
in conflict is as chilling as it is urgent. While conflict
does not discriminate on the basis of gender, it does
disproportionately affect those who are marginalized,
vulnerable or oppressed. In too many societies around
the world, for too long, women and girls have been
marginalized, vulnerable or oppressed. Ifwe care about
addressing the problems encountered by women and
girls in wartime, we must be prepared to address the
enduring problems of discrimination and inequality of
women in peacetime.

As the Secretary-General documented in his 2014
report on women and peace and security, the threats
facing women and children in conflict are worsening,
not improving, in many parts of the world. We can and
we must work together to turn this tide.

Defenders of women's human rights are increasingly
targeted. Efforts to silence people like Razan Zeitouneh
in Syria and Salwa Bugaighis in Libya are efforts to
silence hope, curtail progress, impede justice and
infringe upon the dignity of women, not just in Syria
and in Libya, but around the world.

We know that refugees and displaced persons are
mostly women and children. And we know that they
suffer disproportionately from sexual and gender-based
violence. In eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the continued presence of armed groups amid an
increasing number of displaced persons and refugees
has led to shocking cruelty and rampant sexual violence.
In one of the most devastating incidents, at least 387
people - including 300 women and 55 girls - were
raped by armed groups in 13 villages in eastern Congo
between 30 July and 2 August 2010, that is 387 rape
Victims in three days.

In the face of this kind of destabilizing cruelty
and grotesque violence, the Council has mandated
peacekeeping missions in places like the Democratic
Republic of the Congo with the very difficult and very
important work of protecting civilians. Indeed, 98 per
cent of United Nations troops now serve in missions
with mandates to protect civilians.

Yet, again and again, there is a gap between what
we say must happen and what actually does. We
have seen peacekeeping missions fail to implement
their mandates to protect civilians, thereby creating
a substantial gap between principle and practice,
between mandates and implementation. A report of the
Office of Internal Oversight Services found that in 507
attacks against civilians, from 2010 to 2013, United
Nations peacekeepers virtually never used force to
protect civilians under attack. Thousands of civilians,
countless women and children among them, may have
lost their lives as a result.

United Nations peacekeeping missions must
do better when they are given a mandate to protect
civilians in desperate need of protection. That means,
at a minimum, that we must work to improve early-
warning systems, especially for sexual violence, to
help peacekeepers identify potential threats and take
preventative action. Continued shortfalls in staffing
critical peacekeeping missions in South Sudan, Mali
and the Central African Republic have left civilians,
particularly women and girls, vulnerable.

When peacekeepers themselves become a part
of the problem of sexual and gender-based violence,
rather than a solution to it, it is our fundamental
responsibility - indeed, it is a moral imperative - that
we collectively ensure they are held accountable in a
transparent and swift manner.

The Security Council also must do more. It is easy
enough for us to agree in an open debate in the Chamber
that protecting women and girls in conflict is important.
I mean, can anyone really disagree? But when called
upon to act, too often we are too slow or too silent.
When reports emerge of an alleged mass rape in Darfur
and active obstruction by the host Government of the
peacekeeping mission's ability to investigate becomes
clear, the Council has an obligation to act. And yet, too
often we do not. This must change, as our credibility
depends on it, victims need it and justice demands it.

We are making modest progress and there have been
some developments in our collective efforts. Of nine
United Nations peacekeeping operations cited in the last
Secretary-General report on this topic, nearly 70 per
cent of their military strategic concepts of operations
include specific measures to protect the human rights
of women and girls. More and more missions are
providing more robust gender and conflict analysis in
their reporting, but much remains to be done to link
analysis and reporting to actionable recommendations,
and actionable recommendations to actual action.

Largely due to the work of organizations like
those present here today, considerations on the risks
confronted by women and girls are now being integrated
into peace agreements. In 2013, more than half of all
peace agreements signed included references to women
and peace and security. The number of ceasefire
agreements that include sexual violence as a prohibited
act has tripled, as compared to only three agreements
with such provisions having been signed prior to 2012.

Here, too, at the United Nations, there is work to
be done. Women should not only be participating in
peacekeeping operations, they should be leading them.
While three women lead peace operations as Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General - one as
Force Commander and one as Acting Head - women
head only 19 per cent of all United Nations field
missions. While we welcome the deployment of three
all-female United Nations police units in Liberia,
Haiti and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we
recognize that 97 per cent of military troops and 90 per
cent of police personnel in United Nations missions are
men. If we are serious about expanding opportunity for
women everywhere, we must expand opportunity for
women right here.

Expanding opportunity and empowering women in
peacetime is essential to tackling the unique problems
women confront in wartime. After all, the best protection
from sexual violence in conflict that targets women and
girls is building societies where women and girls are

respected and have equal access to justice, educational
opportunities and health-care services - societies
where women enjoy equal protection under the law and
equal access to political space. The best protection, to
borrow the final words of the woman slaughtered in
ISIL's gruesome video, is the difficult and imperative
work of building societies that value women's lives and
minds and potential as much as their honour.

