Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank the briefers
for their participation in today's meeting and for
their contributions to the discussion. We note with
appreciation the work of Ms. Zainab Bangura, who
recently completed her term as Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in
Conflict, and her commitment to eradicating that evil.
We would also like to wish the newly appointed Special
Representative, Ms. Pramila Patten, every success.

We consider the problem of sexual violence in
conflict to be an urgent one chiefly in situations where
it is a major aspect of a conflict in the context of the
protection of civilians. At the same time, we should
avoid attempts to artificially link sexual violence with
the maintenance of international peace and security and
conflict prevention. In our View, there is no convincing
evidence that sexual violence is an underlying cause of
armed conflict. Rather, what we are talking about here
is a repulsive consequence of it.

We have studied the 2016 report (S/2017/249)
of the Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual
violence, which includes interim conclusions of the
work of the United Nations in that area. We support
the conclusion about the importance of strengthening
the national potential for preventing sexual violence in
conflict and ensuring accountability for it. It is only
through cooperation with the Governments of States
that are in a situation of armed conflict and by ensuring
that their sovereignty is respected that we can achieve
real progress in the fight against sexual violence. No
less important is a similar dialogue involving, for
instance, religious and other traditional leaders, with
regard to the issue of the stigmatization of victims of
sexual violence, their rehabilitation and reintegration
into society.

We are of course concerned about the information
concerning the ongoing sexual violence by members
of terrorist groups, in particular in Syria and Iraq. We
strongly condemn such criminal practices. We call
upon States to more actively cooperate in destroying
the shadow economy of the Islamic State of Iraq and
the Sham (ISIL), which receives an income, inter alia,
from human trafficking, sexual slavery and forced
prostitution. None of those crimes should remain
unpunished. Their effective documentation and
investigation is something that lies primarily within
the purview of the relevant authorities. As for the
establishment, in violation of the Charter of the United
Nations, of a so-called investigative mechanism in
Syria, which the report mentions, the position of our
delegation on that matter is very well known.

This is not the first time that we have to dwell on
the issue of the terminology used - and that is not
merely a point of academic interest. The issue is that
a change of concepts could have significant practical
consequences. Our delegation has repeatedly drawn
attention to attempts to broaden the scope of the
work of the Security Council in the area of combating
sexual violence in conflict, including in connection
with the use of the term "conflict-related sexual
violence" in the most recent report. In our opinion,
such seemingly technical changes are in fact fraught
with the possibility of infringing upon the mandates
of the Security Council and interfering in the terms of
reference of other United Nations bodies or States. We
need to very clearly distinguish sexual violence as a
war crime from sexual violence as a criminal act not
having anything to do with the parties to a conflict. We
think that the Security Council should be dealing with
the issue of sexual violence when it is directly related
to an armed conflict in a situation that is on the agenda
of the Security Council.

In both the concept note (S/2017/402, annex) for
today's meeting and in the report (S/2017/249) of the
Secretary-General, the issue of sexual violence has
very rightly been underscored because of the atrocities
being perpetrated by ISIL, Boko Haram, Al-Shabaab
and the Al-Nusra Front. However, for some reason,
mention is made of some "groups of extremists"
or "violent extremist groups". We would like to
underscore yet again that these and similar terrorists
entities need to be called "terrorists"; otherwise, it
can lead to lowering the level of gravity of the crimes
and to double standards in the fight against terrorism,
which is unacceptable. It is for the purpose of fighting
acts of terrorism that we have iin place a framework
of international instruments, including international
conventions and Security Council resolutions. Let us
not create any ambiguity here. We call upon everyone
to take that into account when the next set of documents
is prepared on this and other topics.

There is another trend that I want to mention
and that has become increasingly obvious recently.
Frequently, sexual violence is being considered as a
violation of human rights, and that is of course true.
However, in the context of an armed conflict, we need
to be talking first and foremost about international
humanitarian law, which requires not only Government
bodies and agents but also the non-State participants
in armed conflicts, to make sure that the norms and
standards against sexual violence are being abided
by and so that all participants bear responsibility for
violations of those norms.

Such a softening of emphasis could weaken the
existing framework in place for protecting civilians,
as well as the mandate of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Armed
Conflict. It could also lead to duplication of work
within the United Nations. The preparation of reports
on that issue is being undertaken by entities that do not
have the requisite competence, nor enough knowledge,
in the area of methodology or the substance of the
issue. To cite an example, the recent report of United
Nations Human Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine
on sexual violence related to the conflict in Ukraine is
guilty of unprofessionalism and mixing things up. And,
as the delegation of the Ukraine yet again has voiced
its unjustified complaints about Russia and referred to
that report, let me say that it also contains much data on
many cases of beatings and torture, including through
electric shock, of threats of rape, disrobing and other
crimes against men and women who have been deprived
of liberty by Government forces. We can also provide
other sources for similar information. We will refraim
from providing Council members with quotes, as that
would take up too much time.

Next month, for the third time, the international
community will celebrate the International Day of
Fighting Sexual Violence in Armed Conflict. It was
established to demonstrate the resolve and unity of
States to try to put an end to that criminal practice.

In conclusion, we would like to reiterate our
readiness to cooperate in this area in the framework of
the Council, on the basis of the resolutions adopted on
the topic.

