Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Madam President, for holding this important debate
today and for your personal commitment to this issue. I
also warmly thank Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka, Mr. Mulet and
Mr. Beyani for their compelling and sobering briefings.
I would particularly like to welcome Ms. Suaad Allami
from Iraq and to thank her for sharing her experiences
with the Council today. I also thank everyone who has
come to this meeting to demonstrate their interest and
commitment. Their presence here is an encouragement
to all of us to do more.

Today, one year on from the adoption of resolution
2122 (2013) and one year before the fifteenth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), we consider the
strides that we have made and what remains to be done
to make our commitments real on this Vital agenda. I
welcome the Secretary-General's report (S/2014/693),
which demonstrates that attention to women and peace
and security is increasing across the board. Over a third
of those included in Colombia's peace talks are women,
as we have heard. That figure rises to 75 per cent in the
Philippines.

We welcome the dedicated consideration of
gender issues in such processes since last year. There
are more trained investigators of sexual and gender-
based violence deployed than ever before. This year,
an unprecedented 40 per cent of ambassadors at the
Security Council are women. However, that progress
is incremental. Sadly, those are exceptions to the rule.
The fact that we still have to fight to include sufficient
gender expertise in our peacekeeping operations, most
recently in the Central African Republic and Mali, that
we still have to battle to have just one women included
in most peace processes, and that Governments and
armed groups continue to Violate and to abuse women's
rights, including by perpetrating sexual and gender-
based vilence, makes clear that a real commitment
to women and peace and security is still piecemeal.
The peacekeeping review and the global study are
two opportunities to galvanize action on those issues
but change must start now. The report of the Global
Summit to End Sexual Violence in Conflict will also be
published shortly. We encourage all actors to implement
its recommendations.

Presidential statement S/PRST/2014/21, which
we have adopted today, has four key elements. First,
it reiterates core principles of resolution 2122 (2013)
with regard to women's leadership and gender equality
and the working methods of the Council. Secondly,
it calls on Member States to enhance protection and
services for displaced women and girls and for sex
and age-disaggregated data to inform policy and
programming. Thirdly, it highlights the tremendous
impact of violent extremism on women and urges States
to protect and to engage with them in addressing that
trend. Finally, it calls for all actors to review and to
reinvigorate their commitments ahead of the 2015 high-
level review.

We are living through a period of unusual
instability. According to the Institute for Economics
and Peace, only 11 countries in the world are not
linked to conflict in some way. For the first time
since the Second World War, the number of refugees,
asylum seekers and internally displaced persons has
exceeded 50 million. If displaced people had their own
country, it would be the twenty-fourth most populous
in the world. That is a staggering statistic. The
United Kingdom recognizes the particular hardships
faced by refugees and internally displaced persons,
including the additional burden and vulnerability of
women and girls. We have provided the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees with
over $180 million in the period 2011-2014. We have
committed over $1 billion to helping people affected by
conflict in Syria, while in Iraq we provide $40 million
in humanitarian aid, $30 million of which supports
international non-governmental organizations, United
Nations agencies and the International Committee of
the Red Cross. That includes supporting programmes to
prevent and respond to sexual violence - for example,
by establishing women-and-children centres to provide
group counselling, as well as providing safe spaces for
children.

In crises like those in Syria and Iraq, many of the
most vulnerable households are headed by women,
who often lack access to basic necessities to meet
their needs and those of their children. The United
Kingdom has provided cash assistance to help female
refugees in Jordan pay their rent and receive livelihood
support. Pregnant women are particularly at risk. We
are providing essential equipment to new mothers
and pregnant women in Iraq and reproductive health
services for women in Jordan. We also provide financial
support for vulnerable Syrian women who are thought
to be at risk of coerced marriage.

Gender-sensitive programming must be increased
alongside access to international protection, health and
education services and livelihood activities in conflict-
affected States. We must do that for all displaced
persons, particularly women and girls. The international
community must also step up its efforts to address the
root causes of conflict. That requires concerted long-
term effort and financing. The benefits of that are clear.

Finally, we must put women and girls at the
forefront of our approach to tackling violent extremism
and defeating the extremist ideology that underpins the
barbaric acts of groups such as Boko Haram and the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. We must not allow
the crackdown on women's rights - from prohibiting
girls' education to enslaving women's bodies - to go
unheeded. Women must be part of the solution.

We have a formidable task before us. I am confident,
however, that through our shared purpose and with
effective follow-up, we can convert the expertise and
goodwill in the Chamber to greater protection for some
of the most vulnerable people around the world and
create space for women to be full and equal partners
in all endeavours to strengthen peace and security. We
must redouble all our efforts in the important year that
lies ahead.

