The President: Let me say that I have been in many
Security Council meetings, and people do not clap. But
they are clapping for a remarkable young woman.

Following consultations among Council members,
I have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf:

"The Security Council recalls its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations.

"The Security Council recalls the United
Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime, and its Protocol to Prevent,
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, which includes
the first internationally agreed definition of the
crime of trafficking in persons and provides a
framework to effectively prevent and combat
trafficking in persons.
"The Security Council condemns in the
strongest terms reported instances of trafficking in
persons in areas affected by armed conflict. The
Security Council further notes that trafficking in
persons undermines the rule of law and contributes
to other forms of transnational organized crime,
which can exacerbate conflict and foster insecurity.

"The Security Council deplores all acts of
trafficking in persons undertaken by the "Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant" (ISIL, also known as Daesh), including of Yazidis, as well as all ISIL's
violations of international humanitarian law and
abuses of human rights, and deplores also any
such trafficking in persons and violations and
other abuses by the Lord's Resistance Army and
other terrorist or armed groups, including Boko
Haram, for the purpose of sexual slavery, sexual
exploitation and forced labour that may contribute
to the funding and sustainment of such groups,
and underscores that certain acts associated with
trafficking in persons in the context of armed
conflict may constitute war crimes.

"The Security Council reiterates the critical
importance ofall Member States fully implementing
relevant resolutions with respect to ISIL, including
resolutions 2161 (2014), 2170 (2014), 2178 (2014),
2199 (2015) and 2249 (2015). The Security
Council further reiterates the critical importance
of all Member States fully implementing relevant
resolutions, including resolution 2195 (2014), which
expresses concern that terrorists benefit from
transnational organized crime in some regions,
including from the trafficking of persons, as well
as resolution 2242 (2015), which expresses concern
that acts of sexual and gender-based violence are
known to be part of the strategic objectives and
ideology of certain terrorist groups.

"The Security Council calls upon Member
States to reinforce their political commitment to
and improve their implementation of applicable
legal obligations to criminalize, prevent and
otherwise combat trafficking in persons, and to
strengthen efforts to detect and disrupt trafficking
in persons, including implementing robust victim
identification mechanisms and providing access
to protection and assistance for identified victims,
particularly in relation to conflict. The Security
Council underscores in this regard the importance
of international law enforcement cooperation,

including with respect to investigation and
prosecution of trafficking cases, and in this regard
calls for the continued support of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in providing
technical assistance upon request.

"The Security Council calls upon Member
States to consider ratifying or acceding to the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its Protocol to Prevent,
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children. The Security
Council further calls upon States parties to this
Convention and to the Protocol to redouble their
efforts to implement them effectively.

"The Security Council takes note of the
recommendations made by the Working Group
on Trafficking in Persons, established by the
Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime, since its inception, and calls upon States to
strengthen their efforts in building the necessary
political, economic and social conditions to tackle
this crime.

"The Security Council notes the particular
impact that trafficking in persons in situations
of armed conflict has on women and children,
including increasing their vulnerability to sexual
and gender-based violence. The Security Council
expresses its intention to continue to address this
impact, including, as appropriate, in the context
of its Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict, within its mandate, and in the framework
of its agenda to prevent and address sexual violence
in armed conflict.

"The Security Council expresses solidarity
with and compassion for victims of trafficking,
including victims of trafficking related to armed
conflicts worldwide, and underscores the need for
Member States and the United Nations system to
proactively identify trafficking victims amongst
vulnerable populations, including refugees and
internally displaced persons (IDPs), and address
comprehensively victims' needs, including
proactive victim identification and, as appropriate,
the provision of or access to medical and psycho-
social assistance, in the context of the United
Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts, as
well as ensure that victims of trafficking in persons
are treated as victims of crime and, in line with
domestic legislation, not penalized or stigmatized
for their involvement in any unlawful activities in
which they have been compelled to engage.

"The Security Council calls upon Member
States to hold accountable those who engage
in trafficking in persons in situations of armed
conflict, especially their Government employees
and officials, as well as any contractors and
subcontractors, and urges Member States to take
all appropriate steps to mitigate the risk that
their public procurement and supply chains may
contribute to trafficking in persons in situations of
armed conflict.

"The Security Council welcomes existing
efforts to address sexual exploitation and abuse
in the context of United Nations peacekeeping
missions, and requests the Secretary-General to
identify and take additional steps to prevent and
respond robustly to reports of trafficking in persons
in United Nations peacekeeping operations,
with the objective of ensuring accountability for
exploitation.

"The Security Council requests the Secretary-
General to take all appropriate steps to reduce to
the greatest extent possible the risk that the United
Nations's procurement and supply chains may
contribute to the trafficking in persons in situations
of armed conflict.

"The Security Council urges relevant United
Nations agencies operating in armed conflict and
post-conflict situations to build their technical
capacity to assess conflict situations for instances
of trafficking in persons, proactively screen for
potential victims oftrafficking and facilitate access
to needed services for identified victims.

"The Security Council expresses its intent to
continue to address trafficking in persons with
respect to the situations on its seizure list.

"The Security Council requests that the
Secretary-General report back to the Council on
progress made in 12 months to implement better
existing mechanisms countering trafficking in
persons and to carry out steps requested in this
presidential statement."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2015/25.

Although that may sound a little bureaucratic for
our guests here today, that is how we get the United
Nations system to work and get things done. I would
add that it is very important that the Security Council
has spoken on these issues for the first time.

I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.

