Ms. Mogobe (Botswana): I would like to start by
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
January. We wish you every success in the continued
discharge of your duties. We would like to echo the
appreciation the delegations that spoke before us have
expressed to you for organizing this very important
meeting and for the opportunity to be briefed by the
personalities you succeeded in assembling for that
purpose. The information they shared with us earlier
has been extremely insightful and helps to broaden our
understanding of the issue we are discussing today.

We also take this opportunity to thank the
Secretary-General for his reports on the subject matter,
which we found informative, even though some aspects
therein, pertaining in particular to the risks faced by
populations in armed conflict as well as to peacekeeping
mission operations, were cause for some concern.

Botswana joins the international community in
deploring the attacks claiming innocent lives as well
as the gross human rights violations occurring in the
increasing number of war zones and areas of violent
conflict across the world. We find it tragic indeed that
the lives of the innocent, including women and children,
continue to be lost due to indiscriminate killings by
those who apparently have a complete disregard for
international humanitarian law and human rights law.

It is true that States have the primary responsibility
to protect their citizens, be it in armed conflict
situations or wherever human rights abuses occur. It is,
however, also true that all responsible members of the
international community have a critical role to play in
the construction of societies that are strong enough to
prevent and address atrocities. Given the enormity of
populations at risk, it can therefore be argued that we,
the members of the international community, have not
been proactive enough in upholding the second pillar of
the responsibility to protect and building that required
capacity that would assist States in shielding their
populations from harm.

What remains an unequivocal fact is that more needs
to be done to ensure accountability and compliance with
international law. We therefore support the clarion call

for the Security Council to fully exercise its Charter
mandate and ensure the maintenance of international
peace and security, as that would represent a significant
step towards the compliance we seek. In that regard, it
would also be important for the relationship between
the Security Council and the International Criminal
Court (ICC) to be strengthened, and for the work of the
Court to be facilitated so that it may hold perpetrators
of human rights violations and other mass atrocities
accountable.

The concerns I have just raised notwithstanding, it
is only fair that the Council be credited for its notable
efforts in this regard. We are informed that at present
the Security Council has 16 peacekeeping operations
deployed around the world. We commend the Council
for this work, which understandably presents its
own variety of complex challenges. These include
ensuring the very safety of the personnel involved
in peacekeeping operations, as they themselves are
increasingly becoming targets in the conflicts they are
deployed to end. We have recently seen United Nations
peacekeepers killed while on duty in countries in
conflict. The proliferation of terrorist groups and foreign
fighters also serves to increase the potential dangers
and risks facing peacekeeping missions. We have also
seen young school girls abducted and used as pawns
by terrorists. These evolving dynamics necessitate a
comprehensive review, including the development of
an all-inclusive framework that ensures the security
and safety of United Nations personnel in their various
assignments, as well as that of the security forces and
rapid-response teams in the affected countries. These
mechanisms must also elaborate methods through
which women and girls in conflict situations can be
protected.

I shall now turn to the specific focus of today's
debate. As other delegations have emphatically pointed
out, it is women and girls who suffer the most insidious
acts of war, including sexual violations, gender-based
violence and other human rights abuses. As this
year marks the twentieth anniversary of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action, there could me no
more opportune a time for the international community
to reaffirm its commitment to the protection of
women and girls in all situations, as well as to their
advancement, to gender equality and, within the
context of today's debate, to the six strategic objectives
focusing on women and armed conflict. Among others,
those include the need to increase the participation
of women in conflict resolution at decision-making
levels, to promote women's contribution to fostering a
culture of peace and to provide protection, assistance
and training to refugee and other displaced women.
The need for a rededication to these objectives cannot
be overemphasized. It is critical fully to implement
resolution 1325 (2000). We therefore welcome the
Secretary-General's high-level review thereof, which is
scheduled for later this year.

We also see the international community readying
itself to adopt a new global agenda later this year
intended to deliver the future we want. To realize
this goal, it is clear that we will need to redouble our
collective efforts to ensure the protection of current and
future generations.

In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm Botswana's
support for international efforts aimed at protecting the
lives ofinnocent people, women and girls in particular.

