Mr. Matjila (South Africa): I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, and the delegation of the United
Kingdom for having convened this timely open debate
on trafficking in persons in conflict situations, forced
labour and other similar practices.

We wish to begin by commending the Secretary-
General for his November 2016 report on the
implementation of measures to combat trafficking
in persons (S/2016/949) and the recommendations
contained therein.

In almost every conflict situation throughout the
world, human trafficking thrives. It has been established
that illicit trafficking in drugs, stolen antiques and
small arms and light weapons often follows the same
routes used by human traffickers. These activities
threaten international peace and security, for instance
by sustaining terrorism as well as criminal and armed
groups. My delegation is mindful of the fact that
one of the highest risks to displaced persons is the
threat of being trafficked, especially refugees fleeing
from conflict.

Trafficking operations often flourish in circumstances
where institutions and law-enforcement capabilities
are eroded and weakened by sustained conflict. This
undermines the rule of law, which in turn contributes
to the other forms of transnational organized crime,
exacerbating conflict and insecurity. This is a vicious
circle that requires from us united, concerted, sustained
and cooperative efforts, whose ultimate objective
is to address conflict, including its root causes. This
requires that we address development challenges as
well as external interventions, such as those we have
recently witnessed in Libya, Iraq and Syria, which
have led to the proliferation of refugees and internally
displaced persons.

Africa awaits with keen interest the appraisal of
the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons, which will follow in the wake of
the international community's efforts to implement the
Sustainable Development Goals, focusing on trafficking
in persons. These are important steps forward in
galvanizing our joint response to countering human
trafficking, and we welcome them wholeheartedly.

South Africa also wishes to recognize and remind
Member States of the role of the African Union, which
has paid specific attention to the issue of trafficking
in persons. In 1981, the African Union adopted the
African Charter on Human and People's Rights, which
prohibits slavery and human trafficking. The Charter
is further complemented by the African Charter on the
Rights and Welfare of the Child and the Protocol to
the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights on
the Rights of Women in Africa, which make specific
provisions for the protection of women and children
against slavery.

Furthermore, the Ouagadougou Action Plan to
Combat Trafficking in Human Beings, Especially
Women and Children, adopted by the African Union
in 2006, reaffirmed the provisions, provided for an
international instrument on human trafficking and
encouraged African States to adopt legislation and
institutional measures to combat trafficking in human
beings.

South Africa has signed and ratified the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and
Punish Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and
Children. This Convention provided valuable guidance
to South Africa in the creation of the Prevention and
Combatting of Trafficking in Persons Act of 2013,
which is South Africa's first comprehensive legislation
on human trafficking, which among other things seeks
to implement South Africa's international obligations
with regard to this challenge.

In 2016, the Global Action to Prevent and Address
Trafficking in Persons and the Smuggling of Migrants
was launched internationally. South Africa was one of
the first 13 countries identified to participate in this
important initiative. On 22 September 2016, the South
African Government and the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime jointly launched this initiative, which
strongly emphasized South Africa's firm commitment
to countering trafficking in persons and the smuggling
of migrants.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that South Africa
remains highly concerned and seized with the matter
of human trafficking within our borders, but equally
within our region, continent and elsewhere in the
world. The particular impact that the trafficking in
persons in situations of armed conflict has on women
and children, increasing their vulnerability to gender-
based and sexual violence, is of particular concern.
The fact that more people are presently displaced today
than at any other time since the Second World War is a
huge challenge, which exposes people worldwide to a
range of human rights violations, including trafficking.
Working within its mandate, the Security Council
should take an assertive and decisive stance in their
prevention so that even islands of terrorism, trafficking,
armed groups can no longer be allowed to profit in any
way from human trafficking.

