Mr. Nambiar (India): I thank you, Sir, for
holding this open debate of the Security Council on
gender and peacekeeping to mark the third anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) on women
and peace and security. I also wish to thank the senior
United Nations personnel who have provided us with
valuable introductions to the topic at hand.

The critical importance of this issue stems from
the fact that civilians are increasingly the victims,
sometimes unintended and sometimes intended, of the
violent conflicts that occur in different parts of the
world today. It has been estimated that close to 90 per
cent of current war casualties are civilians, the majority
of whom are women and children, compared to a
century ago, when 90 per cent of those who lost their
lives were military personnel. Although entire
communities suffer the consequences of armed
conflict, women and children are particularly affected
because of their status in society and their gender.

Despite this, women should not be viewed solely
as victims of war. They assume the key role of ensuring
family livelihoods in the midst of chaos and
destruction, and are particularly active in peace
movements at the grassroots level and in cultivating
peace within their communities. However, the absence
of women at the peace-negotiating table is
unconscionable.

My delegation supported many of the
recommendations made in the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2002/ 1154) pursuant to resolution 1325
(2000). We welcome, in that context, the decision to
appoint a gender adviser in the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations.

Armed and other types of conflicts, terrorism and
hostage-taking still persist in many parts of the world.
My country has been the victim of a vicious campaign
of cross-border terrorism for two decades, resulting in
the deaths of at least 63,000 persons, mainly civilians,
women and children included. On 27 October, two days
ago, the first day of Ramadan, one person was killed
and 34 were injured in the Indian state of Jammu and
Kashmir when a grenade was indiscriminately lobbed
into a public telecommunications centre where people
were lined up to pay their bills. The campaign of
terrorism and intimidation seeking to force itself on an
unwilling citizenry in the state of Jammu and Kashmir
has been compounded by the misguided zealotry of the
fundamentalists who have launched a terror campaign
specifically targeting women for their so-called non-
observance of strict moral codes. In an area where
society has traditionally placed no such restrictions on
women and in which women have played such an
important role, the externally-foisted and forced
imposition of such social codes can only impact
adversely on society in general and on women in
particular.

It is our experience that terrorists exploit the
vulnerabilities of women in situations where violence
prevails and where normal life and livelihoods are
disrupted on account of terrorist activities. Perhaps
those that direct and sponsor terrorist activities are
aware that women, having the most vested interests in
ensuring a stable and peaceful society, foster values
that go against violence and terrorism.

Moreover, when provided the opportunity to
mobilize themselves through democratic processes,
women have been at the forefront of initiatives for the
consolidation of peace and security. One consistent
factor in democratic elections in different parts of India
has been the preponderance of women among voters.
The success of elections in Jammu and Kashmir last
year can be partly attributed to the high turnout of
Kashmiri women desirous of utilizing this democratic
exercise to empower themselves with the means for
producing a more secure and stable environment. It is
implicit that their participation would also foster and
strengthen activities that combat terrorism.

In Afghanistan, women are finding their rightful
place in society. The violence of the gun has largely
given way to a more peaceful and settled existence for
a large part of the population. An entire generation of
women who were denied their right to education and
work by those represented by the Taliban are now
pursuing educational and professional opportunities.
Unfortunately, the same religious fundamentalists have
now diverted their attention to other parts of the world,
including the Indian state of J ammu and Kashmir.

India recently undertook the largest democratic
decentralization exercise when it provided grassroots
level panchayats - locally elected self-governing
bodies - across the country, with decision-making
powers. Since at least one-third of all panchayat
members in India are women by statutory law, that
decision has opened up the opportunity to Indian
women to lead on peace and security issues from the
grassroots level. Undoubtedly, women having a voice
in inculcating systems that foster peace and security in
a country of a billion people will have an impact far
and wide.

Women and children constitute some 80 per cent
of the world's millions of refugees and other displaced
persons. They are threatened by the deprivation of
property, goods, services and their right to return to
their homes of origin, and by violence and insecurity.
We therefore support the Secretary-General's
recommendation that the reintegration of women
through disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes be an integral part of all future
peacekeeping missions.

The debate today has provided a valuable

opportunity for the Council and the larger membership
to be updated on and further sensitized to the important
role that women can and should play in securing peace
and international security. It is incumbent upon the
United Nations to play its role in supporting and
furthering efforts in that direction. We support the
implementation of the Secretary-General's
recommendations, although, as with all broad
recommendations, this must be conditional upon
circumstances and situations.

The representative of Pakistan has, in his
wisdom, chosen to make unwarranted and
unsubstantiated comments on the treatment of women
in India. I have earlier drawn the attention of the
Council to the invaluable role the political
empowerment of women can play in inculcating values
that serve as a deterrent to violence and terrorism. The
stark contrast between Indian and Pakistani politics,
seen in their historical and current contexts, can offer
no better evidence of the differing political, legal and
social frameworks within which each country views its
women as a resource in addressing the issue of peace
and security.

Early this month, in an open letter, dated 10
October 2003 addressed to the President of Pakistan,
the Executive Director of the Asia Division of Human
Rights Watch devoted one entire section to legal
discrimination against and mistreatment of women and
religious minorities in that country. The letter also
addresses, inter alia, the issues of the torture and
mistreatment of political opponents and journalists,
return to civilian rule and the legal framework order
and sectarian violence. The letter specifically records
that inaction on the Hudood laws persists despite the
Government-run National Commission for Status of
Women calling for a repeal of the Hudood Ordinance
on the grounds that it "makes a mockery of Islamic
justice" and is "not based on Islamic injunctions."
This, despite the outcry over cases such as the tribal
jirga-ordered gang-rape of Mukhtaran Bibi in Punjab
and the sentencing to death by stoning of Zafran Bibi
on grounds of adultery. Human Rights Watch has
monitored those and other cases involving abuse under
the Hudood laws. Informed estimates suggest that over
210,000 cases under the Hudood laws are under
process in Pakistan's legal system.

The aforementioned is just an illustration of the
problems that women in that country face. A State that
is unable and unwilling to provide basic rights to its
women is incapable of any sensitivity towards the
plight of women in other countries brought about by
terrorist actions. Conversely, it reveals the ethos -
under which the sponsors of the regressive Taliban in
Afghanistan have decided to use similar means to
subdue a civilian population, particularly women and
children, of another nation into succumbing to the
threat of terror.

