Mr. Marn (Slovenia): It is my great honour to
address the Security Council today on behalf of the
Human Security Network, a cross-regional network that
consists of Austria, Chile, Costa Rica, Greece, Ireland,
Jordan, Mali, Norway, Panama, Switzerland, Thailand,
the Republic of South Africa as an observer, and my
own country, Slovenia. Let me thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon, his Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, and
Ms. Saran Keita Diakite of the NGO Working Group
on Women, Peace and Security for their comprehensive
statements. On behalf of the members of the Network,
I should also like to express our great appreciation
to the presidency of Rwanda for convening this very
important open debate. The Human Security Network
has traditionally been engaged in these debates, since
women's full enjoyment of all human rights has been at
the core of our group's agenda from its inception.

I should like to commend the regular interaction
among the Security Council, UN-Women and the Office
of the Special Representative on Sexual Violence in
Conflict. We deem that interaction to be of paramount
importance. We also strongly encourage more direct
information sharing between the Special Representative
and the relevant Sanctions Committees and associated
expert groups, similar to the practice that has been
developed on children and armed conflict.

Our group remains greatly concerned about certain
facts provided in the Secretary-General's report on
sexual violence in conflict (S/2013/149) that indicate
systematic and widespread sexual violence used to
punish, intimidate and subjugate women, men and
children. In addition, the report highlights the increased
use of sexual violence as a means of displacing
populations, which represents a worrying trend.

The report also refers to two highly problematic
trends that were noticed by the independent international
commission of inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic,
namely, the occurrence of sexual violence during house
searches and at checkpoints and the perpetration of
rape and torture in the context of detention. We call
on all parties to cease such violations and any other
sexual-violence-related violations and, in accordance
with resolution 1960 (2010), to make specific and
time-bound protection commitments in that regard.
We also call upon the members of the Security Council
to consider using all the other means at its disposal to
address sexual violence in conflict, including making
referrals to the International Criminal Court and other
relevant actions.

All the necessary steps, including targeted
measures, must be taken to protect individuals, hold
perpetrators accountable and provide remedy for
victims. It is essential that amnesty provisions not be
applicable to crimes of sexual violence in the context
of conflict resolution and post-conflict reconstruction.
Ending impunity for perpetrators and those responsible
in chains of command is also imperative, including
personnel within the United Nations. At the same
time, the Network believes that we have to place
equal importance on addressing the root causes and
the enablers of sexual violence in conflict, as well as
on strengthening grass-roots women's organizations
and additional networks that can provide assistance to
victims of sexual violence in conflict. Only when those
victims are treated with dignity and respect and given
the necessary tools, treatment and care to enable them
to protect themselves can they become real agents of
change.

In that regard, the Network believes that applying
a more people- or victim-centred lens to the issue
would help. Moreover, we support the availability of
reparations as a form of transitional gender justice.
Reparations can deliver redress and acknowledgement
of crimes suffered, and can contribute to the fight
against impunity and to post-conflict reconstruction
and the reintegration of survivors of sexual violence.

The Human Security Network notes the report's
recommendation regarding the adoption of sanctions
and other targeted measures against individuals
and entities by the relevant Sanctions Committees.
In that regard, the exchange of information among
United Nations peacekeeping missions, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Children
and Armed Conflict and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
and the Security Council's Sanctions Committees will
be of great importance.

Let me briefly touch upon the already mentioned
United Nations zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse for United Nations personnel.
The Network takes note of the failure to include such
a policy in the relevant resolutions, and therefore
calls upon all the relevant actors to make more use of
references to the zero-tolerance policy.

Noting the Council's creation of several tools with
considerable potential for having an impact on the
women and peace and security agenda on the ground,
we remain concerned over its lack of implementation in
some of the already mentioned areas.

In conclusion, even though it is not at the forefront
of our discussion today, I should like to reiterate our
group's commitment to promoting and enhancing the
role ofwomen in peace processes. While it is crucial to
today's agenda that we maintain momentum in the fight
against sexual violence, we would again like to underline
the importance of women's empowerment as part of
the solution. We need to see, and enable, women more
and more as agents of change. Women's participation
at decision-making levels in conflict resolution and
peace processes cannot be overemphasized. Women's
participation in establishing effective prevention and
protection strategies can contribute to combating
sexual violence in conflict and promoting gender
equality. We also remain strong supporters of women
protection advisers, who can positively contribute
to facilitating and coordinating the implementation
of Security Council resolutions on sexual violence
in conflict within United Nations peacekeeping and
political missions.

We also avail ourselves of this opportunity to
highlight the importance of the recent adoption of
the agreed conclusions on the prevention of sexual
violence at the fifty-seventh session of the Commission
on the Status of Women, which, among other goals,
seek to ensure that in armed conflict and post-conflict
situations the prevention of and response to all forms
of violence against women and girls, including sexual
and gender-based violence, are effectively addressed.
We must all strive towards enabling more protection for
women and girls in conflict situations and encourage
the empowerment of women and their systematic
inclusion and meaningful participation at all levels.

