Dr. Mukwege (spoke in French): I would like to
thank you, Sir, for inviting me to take the floor during
this open debate on sexual violence in conflict.

Allow me first of all to share with the Security
Council a recollection engraved in my memory
following my first statement to the Council more than
10 years ago. A diplomat from a permanent member
State had asked, "Why are we talking about this subject
here?" That memory reminds us that we have come a
long way in addressing this subject, which is understood
to affect our common conscience and humanity and is
intimately linked to international peace and security.

I welcome the Security Council's willingness
to continue to place the item "Women and peace and
security" at the centre of the international community's
attention and on its agenda. Since the adoption of
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2009), the link
between sexual violence and international peace and
security has been clearly established and rape as a
strategy ofwar has been fully recognized as a war crime,
a crime against humanity and even as a constituent act
of the crime of genocide. That is a remarkable step
forward, because before a problem can be addressed it
must first of all be recognized. Thanks to those legal
developments, no political or military leader today
can ignore or neglect the fact that it is contrary to
international law to use rape and sexual violence as a
weapon of domination and terror.

We support all initiatives aimed at establishing a
red line against those barbaric acts of which we have
been first-hand witnesses for too long, and we hope to
see the United Nations and individual States adopting
sanctions against the perpetrators and instigators of
sexual violence in armed conflict. We believe that local
civil society organizations must be fully involved in
early warning and rapid response mechanisms and in
the collection of data on sexual crimes that would be
channelled to centres for monitoring sexual violence
established at the local, national, regional and global
levels, which would relay them as soon as possible
to the review mechanisms of the United Nations
sanctions committees.

In Panzi, we have developed a model ofholistic care
that includes medical, psychological, socio-economic
and legal assistance. I take this opportunity to remind
the Council that such care for victims mustbe considered
as a human right to rehabilitation, in accordance with
resolution 2106 (2013). Our experience shows us that
the healing process for survivors is only complete
when justice is done. That is why we fully support the
recommendations of the Secretary-General's report
(S/20l9/280) and the work ofhis Special Representative
on Sexual Violence in Conflict.

Similarly, we welcome the initiative taken by
Germany to introduce a new resolution, as it places
particular emphasis on the need for recognition of the
status of children born of rape and a comprehensive
survivor-centred approach, as well as the need to apply
sanctions, bring justice, demand accountability and
provide reparations.

We encourage all efforts to combat impunity at
both the national and international levels, as well as
the use of special tribunals, which we hope to see in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in every
country in a similar situation. We will also continue to
advocate for the implementation of transitional justice
tools. In countries striving to emerge from violence and
dictatorships, security institutions and forces must be
cleaned up, and victims have a right not just to quality
care but to truth and justice. Reparations do not just
complete the process of healing and reintegrating
victims, they enable society to recognize the pain that
has been inflicted, combat stigma, discrimination
and gender inequality, and prevent crimes of sexual
violence from recurring.

We hope that the international community will
commit to establishing a fund to address the needs
of survivors and fill the current gaps in the legal
system at the national and international levels. Such a
mechanism would include funding to provide reparation
programmes and projects in countries that either ignore
their responsibilities or need support in fulfilling
them. There can be no lasting peace without justice or
as long as States fail to listen to women victims with
dignity or involve them fully in peacebuilding and
social reconstruction.

Everywhere I go in the world, the words of
survivors - such as Nadia Murad, my fellow Nobel Peace
Prize laureate - are being heard, and their testimonies
are living proof. We cannot remain indifferent to their
cries. At the same time, the normative framework for
combating sexual violence has been steadily improving
for 20 years. The evidence is there. The documentation
exists. What is the human community waiting for to
see justice done for the Victims? We urge the decision
makers and officials here today to adopt draft resolution
S/2019/328 and thereby demonstrate the courage and
political will needed to bridge the current gap between
the law and actual practice and contribute to building a
better world free of sexual violence in times of conflict.

