Ms. Anderson (Ireland): Our warm thanks go to
Viet Nam for organizing this debate.

We associate ourselves with Sweden in its
statement on behalf of the European Union (EU) this
morning.

I might begin with a personal recollection.
Almost 17 years ago, in December 1992, I went to the
former Yugoslavia as a member of the EU mission to
investigate the rape of women during the Balkan
conflict. The experience left a deep imprint on all who
participated. It was the end of any illusion that
barbarity is confined to faraway places. There, in the
heart of Europe on the threshold of the twenty-first
century, rape was once again an instrument of war. In
an article written with a colleague after that mission,
we discussed a number of aspects of what had
happened. We included the following point: "A
distribution of roles whereby men negotiate peace in
Geneva while women devise aid programmes for
victims is fundamentally unacceptable."

That issue of roles and responsibilities remains
central to our consideration today. It is imperative that
the duality of women's situation - as both victims and
actors - be fully recognized. Men have always
inhabited those two spaces simultaneously - as

victims and victors, waging the wars and authoring the
peace. Women have largely been imprisoned in the
victim role, as the collateral damage of war and, if
present at all, a kind of add-on at the peace table.

Resolution 1325 (2000), which has been on the
books for nine years, is trying to overthrow the patterns
of centuries. The story recurs again and again, with the
fundamentals almost always the same. Men who have
been in the front line of conflict feel they have earned
the exclusive right to broker the peace. Women who are
struggling to get hearth and home together after the
fighting have other priorities. Implementing resolution
1325 (2000) therefore means climbing mountains. To
get to first base camp, we need real, transformative and
attitudinal change.

I was struck by a comment made by Secretary of
State Hillary Clinton at a breakfast meeting during the
high-level segment of the General Assembly. Secretary
Clinton said that she is repeatedly questioned by the
United States media about why she is spending so
much time on "secondary, soft" issues such as women
in conflict. She has had to explain, she said, for the
millionth time that those issues are not secondary but
primary and that they are core foreign policy issues.
The Secretary of State's experience captures a reality:
so many commentators, analysts and opinion-formers
do not truly rate the kind of discussion we are having
today. The nod of political correctness is there, but not
the conviction or prioritization that the issues deserve.

Overall, the Secretary-General's report
(S/2009/465) makes for sober reading. There are some
bright spots, in particular on the training front, and all
successes deserve recognition and commendation. But
the statistics - to take just one example, only 2.4 per
cent of signatories to peace agreements since 1992
have been women - tell their own story.

In searching for practical ways forward, the
Secretary-General's report rightly emphasizes the
importance of national plans. Ireland is currently
developing its own national action plan. As part of that
process, we have embarked on a cross-learning
initiative guided by the experiences of women and men
in countries emerging from conflict. We are currently
working in partnership with Liberia and Timor-Leste in
a tripartite cross-learning exercise. Through that
collaboration, our aim is to ensure the achievement of

real and immediate change for women who have
experienced conflict and who can and should be
stakeholders in State-building and peacebuilding. A
first cross-learning meeting was held in June 2009, a
second is to be held in Timor-Leste this December and
a third is proposed for Liberia in early 2010. A report
on the process will be shared with the United Nations
in advance of the tenth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000).

A further effort to stimulate cross-regional
discussion on implementing resolution 1325 (2000)
was the hosting in Dublin earlier this year of the
ministerial meeting of the Human Security Network.
The Permanent Representative of Costa Rica described
that initiative in his statement this morning, and I will
not repeat what he has said.

A final point is the importance of coordination.
Within the United Nations system there should be a
one-stop shop to offer guidance and advice to Member
States in drawing up national plans. We suggest that
the Inter-Agency Task Force on Women, Peace and
Security be asked to identify such a focal point. At the
national level, too, there is a role for focal points to
provide drive and leadership. In Ireland Nuala O'Loan,
a distinguished woman of wide and very relevant
experience, has been appointed to the role of special
envoy on women, peace and security. Perhaps that
model could be of relevance elsewhere.

None of us here is in any doubt about the scale of
the challenge and the urgency of action. Next year's
tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000) is an opportunity to be seized - not for another
talkfest but to assess, strategize and commit. In the
collective effort to prepare for and mark that
anniversary, we look to the Security Council to
continue to show leadership and determination.

