Ms. Shalev (Israel): I too thank you,
Mr. President, for your leadership in holding this very
important meeting. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for honouring us with his presence
this morning as we discuss the important issue of
sexual violence in conflict areas.

As a sponsor of resolution 1820 (2008), Israel
closely follows developments around the world
concerning its implementation. Since the resolution's
adoption last year, and in the nine years since the
Council adopted resolution 1325 (2000), we have seen
some progress on issues concerning women, peace and
security.

We welcome the increased deployment of gender
advisers, the routine inclusion in peacekeeping
mandates of provisions for the protection of women
and girls from sexual violence, and the growing
awareness of the need to include women in any peace
process. While all those measures are steps forward, it
is clear that we still have a very long way to go.

Israel welcomes the Secretary-General's initial
report on the implementation of resolution 1820 (2008)
(S/2009/362), which sets out a number of serious
challenges facing the international community in
addressing crimes of sexual violence. One example
from the report conveys the scale of the problem: there
have been a staggering 200,000 cases of sexual
violence in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
since the outset of hostilities. Elsewhere, in one third
of the cases tried before the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, sexual violence
was found to be part of a widespread and systematic
attack against civilians.

The tactical use of sexual violence lies at the
heart of resolution 1820 (2008), for, while rape and
sexual violence are first and foremost crimes against
individual women and girls, such acts are often
designed to deliberately and systematically destroy the
tenuous social fabric that exists during periods of
conflict. The intention is to inflict suffering and instil
fear. Families - and societies - bear the scars of
these acts long after hostilities have ceased.

The use of sexual violence as a tool of war is
surely a form of terrorism. Israel condemns it and
strongly urges the Council to strengthen its tools for
protecting women and girls. The Secretary-General's
recent report points to a number of useful actions that
Member States and the Organization can pursue. Israel
supports the immediate deployment of a commission of
inquiry to investigate crimes of sexual violence to
several areas plagued by such crimes.

Israel also looks forward to the joint study by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs on the
protection of civilian mandates. We must ensure that
mandates for peacekeeping missions in areas racked by
sexual violence contain explicit and unambiguous
provisions for the protection of civilians from such
acts. Moreover, before the renewal of such mandates,
there should be a candid assessment of results, with
mandates or strategies revised as necessary.

Increasing the deployment of women and gender
advisers would further increase the ability of missions
to effectively protect civilians from sexual abuse.
Regrettably, there have been accusations of sexual
misconduct committed by United Nations personnel
themselves. Whenever this occurs, the reputation of all
peacekeepers may be tarnished. We must be certain
that all mission personnel have been properly trained in
appropriate conduct, with transparent investigation of
all allegations and swift prosecution of those who
abuse their position of authority. The zero-tolerance
policy must be strictly enforced.

In the spirit of resolution 1325 (2000), the
Women's Equal Rights Law in Israel has been amended
to mandate the inclusion of women in any group
appointed to peacebuilding negotiations or working
towards conflict resolution. Allow me to also share
that, through Israel's international aid agency, my
Government organizes programmes in women's
leadership and capacity-building for women's
non-governmental organizations. We believe that the
skills learned in these programmes can make a real
difference on the ground in post-conflict recovery.

The international community has been
challenged. All States must, individually and
collectively, answer this challenge. Israel pledges itself
to this clear international consensus, and it extends its
hand to any partner in this important endeavour. We are
speaking not of statistics but of devastated lives, and
we should commit ourselves to getting the job done. As
you yourself, Sir, and Ambassador Rice mentioned
earlier this morning, if ever there was the global
resolve to do it, it is now.

