Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome the
convening of today's meeting and are grateful for the
stance taken by the Secretary-General in his report on
special measures for protection from sexual exploitation
and sexual abuse (A/70/729), issued in February, given
its overriding importance for the issues of credibility
and moral support of our peacekeeping operations.
As the report says, such actions contradict and
undermine the spirit of the United Nations and the
very purpose for which its missions are created, which
is to protect the populations of countries in extremely
fragile situations and the poverty produced by conflict.
Added to the suffering created in a context of war and
instability is the fact that people are endangered by the
possibility that the personnel sent to alleviate those
situations are taking advantage of the circumstances
to commit this kind of crime, which only results in
greater despair among those affected, especially the
most vulnerable, such as women and children, and to
rejection of the presence of international peacekeeping
missions.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela considers
that acts of sexual exploitation and abuse in a context
of armed conflict represent more than just a discipline
issue; they are a shameful phenomenon that may violate
international humanitarian and human rights laws. In
that regard, we emphasize that Venezuela categorically
condemns any incident of sexual abuse or exploitation
committed by personnel from any foreign contingent,
whether military, police or civilian, deployed in
peacekeeping operations or special political missions,
as well as by personnel from our Organization who are
not considered to be deployed in such operations.

We are aware of the various categories of
operations on the ground under United Nations
mandates, particularly those of the Security Council,
the various types of personnel who carry out functions
within them - civilian, military or police deployed or
not deployed - and the differences among those who
have responsibility when it comes to taking measures
to punish such crimes. However, we believe that,
despite such differences and bureaucratic complexities,
what is fundamental here is that we are talking about
unacceptable and intolerable acts that compromise and
damage the legitimacy and work of our Organization.

The United Nations must set an example of
consistency and firmness and a high level of moral
commitment when it comes to the importance of
preventing the perpetration such acts, particularly
regarding accountability, by United Nations personnel
and those outside the Organization but authorized by
it, whatever their country of origin or professional
category. In that context, Venezuela supports the
Secretary-General's zero-tolerance policy for acts of
sexual violence committed in peacekeeping operations
or any military mission that has the Security Council's
mandate or support. We should ensure follow-up
and accountability even in cases where they are the
responsibility of countries contributing troops or other
personnel.

It is also important to emphasize that according
to the figures in the report, of the 99 alleged cases in
various operations, 30 involved personnel considered
not to be deployed; 38 involved military personnel; 16,
police officers and 15, civilian personnel considered as
deployed in peacekeeping operations. Overall, 38 per
cent of the total represents military personnel and
61.2 per cent, other categories. Those numbers should
tell the United Nations, and the Security Council
specifically, that any binding action that could be taken
should involve sanctions and action to combat impunity
for all categories of personnel, whether civilian,
military, volunteers, police or support staff, regardless
of their nationality.

This is an essential responsibility for our
Organization. We agree with the Secretary-General
that transparency and accountability are fundamental
to the ability of the United Nations to demonstrate
its collective adherence to a policy of zero tolerance,
maintain the international community's trust, ensure
justice for the victims and achieve the purposes
of peacekeeping operations. It is also important to
ensure that any investigation or punishment is guided
by the principles of objectivity, non-selectivity and
impartiality. No country should receive privileged
treatment, and there should be no difference between
North and South, considering that countries of the
southern hemisphere tend to be stigmatized. We believe
this subject should not be politicized.

In our view, it is crucial to improve these mechanisms
and to ensure that frequent dialogues are held with
troop- and police-contributing countries, with the goal
of discussing the topic and improving the coordination
of action for a greater impact on prevention and the
fight against impunity. In that regard, we reiterate that
it is vital to fully implement article 44 of the Charter
of the United Nations, which requires that troop-
contributing countries be invited to participate in the
decision-making process concerning the deployment of
personnel in peacekeeping operations. In practice, that
has never really been implemented.

While we therefore welcome the discussion of
this sensitive issue in the Council, it is essential that
we ensure close coordination on it with the General
Assembly, particularly through the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations, the body in charge of
formulating comprehensive policies pertaining to the
operations of such missions so as to avoid duplication
of functions and to ensure that institutional efforts
are not scattered around the Organization. In its 2015
report (A/69/l9), the Special Committee emphasized
that the same standards of personal conduct must be
applied without exception to all categories of United
Nations personnel. That is a principle that should be
implemented in order to improve the Organization's
credibility.

Another issue where improvements could be made is
in the area ofstrengthening mechanisms to help victims,
who in many cases have to deal with stigmatization and
ostracism from their family members or communities
and can sometimes be the target of retaliation by the
perpetrators. That involves having the necessary
resources for ensuring that victims are safe and receive
proper medical and psychological care.

In conclusion, Venezuela would like to reiterate
its commitment to strengthening the institutional,
administrative and judicial mechanisms we need to deal
with such cases, especially cases of sexual exploitation
and abuse, committed by any personnel linked to
operations authorized by the United Nations. In that
regard, we have received and are discussing the text of
the draft resolution proposed to the Security Council,
and we hope it will take into consideration the views
expressed today by the members of the Council.

