The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Canada, Chile, Denmark,
Grenada, Jamaica, Japan, Liechtenstein, New Zealand,
Nigeria and the Republic of Korea, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In accordance with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Stuart
(Australia), MnHeinbecker (Canada), Mr. Maquieira
(Chile), Ms. Loj (Denmark), Mr. Stanislaus (Grenada),
Miss Durrant (Jamaica), Mr. Motomura (Japan),
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein), Mr. McIvor (New Zealand), Mrs. Yahaya (Nigeria) and Mr. Sun Joun-
Yung (Republic of Korea) took the seats reserved for
them at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Guehenno to take a seat at the
Council table.


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Ms. Angela King, Assistant Secretary-
General and Special Adviser on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women.

It is so decided.
I invite Ms. King to take a seat at the Council
table.


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Ms. Noeleen Heyzer, Executive Director
of the United Nations Development Fund for Women.

It is so decided.

I invite Ms. Heyzer to take a seat at the Council
table.


The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I should like to welcome Members of the United
Nations, our visiting speakers, our guests and visitors
at the back of the Chamber to this unusual open debate
on conflict, peacekeeping and gender.

Allow me to begin by saying a few words about
the format for the meeting. I shall shortly be inviting
Under-Secretary-General Guehenno, Assistant-
Secretary Angela King, and the Director of the United
Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM)
Noeleen Heyzer, to talk to us for a few minutes about
their work in this field. I will then invite Member
States to comment and ask questions, and I propose to
give the floor to three Council members, then three
non-Council members, or according to the numbers,
perhaps two non-Council members, until I reach the
end of the speaker's list. I shall also invite our panel to
respond to points raised at appropriate moments
throughout the debate. I shall wind up the meeting with
a short summary.

We circulated a note a few days ago setting out
the objectives for this meeting and giving a few details
about the format we will be following. Spare copies are
available in the room. I shall also like to inform
members that in my capacity as Council President I
held a meeting earlier this week with representatives of
the non-governmental organizations (NGO) Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security, at which I
invited them to raise issues of importance to their
organizations that are relevant to today's discussion. I
can say that that exchange that I had with that working
group was very informative. These groups have done
an enormous amount of work on the mainstreaming
agenda, on the issue of women and families in areas of
conflict. We circulated a short note outlining the main
points raised at that meeting, and there is also literature
from some of these NGOs available for Member States
on the table immediately outside this room. I
recommend that you pick up that literature, because
some of it is very interesting on work in this field.

I would now like to give the floor to the Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping, Mr. Jean-Marie
Guehenno.


