Mr. Vilovie (Croatia): My delegation aligns itself
with the statement of the European Union, which we
strongly support. However, in the light of the particular
importance of this timely and exceptionally relevant
debate, allow me to add a few remarks in my national
capacity.

The contemporary world is increasingly faced
with a rapidly changing international environment that
constantly adds new challenges to the international
peace and security agenda. In that context,
peacebuilding, as an effort to strengthen and
consolidate peace in countries immediately after they
emerge from conflict, represents an important tool at
the disposal of the United Nations to confront those
challenges and, at the same time, one of its core
functions. It is obvious, and not only from this debate,
that broad cross-regional support for stronger
peacebuilding is growing, encompassing not only
Governments, but also many international
organizations, as well as civil society.

We are grateful for the Secretary-General's
detailed overview of the progress achieved in the
implementation of his agenda for action set out in the
report on peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of
the conflict he issued a year ago (S/2009/304). In
particular, we find valuable the many diverse examples
from the field used to further clarify and support the
report. Equally, we appreciate the Secretary-General's
report on women's participation in peacebuilding
(S/2010/466) and the strategic, seven-point action plan
introducing necessary practical suggestions for
women's more active engagement in peacebuilding
processes, which we wholeheartedly support.

At the same time, Croatia welcomes the excellent
report on the review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture (S/2010/393, annex),
presented by the three co-facilitators. The report adds
substantially to our comprehension of the complex
issue of peacebuilding and further confirms our
perception that urgent action in this field is necessary.

On that basis, Croatia strongly supports further
strengthening peacebuilding operations through further
implementation of the Secretary-General's ambitious
agenda for action and careful consideration of the
requests, proposals and recommendations contained in
his recent reports. Simultaneously, we call for
appropriate consideration and adequate implementation
of the many valuable recommendations contained in
the report of the three co-facilitators (S/2010/393, annex). We believe that the time for a new balance
within the United Nations peace architecture has
definitely arrived.

If I were to identify just two of the most
important features that we perceive as imperative
preconditions for any successful peacebuilding
exercise, they would certainly be, first, national
ownership and, secondly, predictable and sustainable
multidimensional action by the international
community, encompassing imperative regional
considerations.

We strongly believe that peacebuilding should be
built on clearly established national priorities, but,
equally, that it should lead to full reconstruction and
further improvement of national institutions, capacities
and capabilities. In that context, we particularly
welcome ongoing efforts within the United Nations to
further strengthen and mainstream national capacities,
including conflict management capacities.

Peacebuilding is a complex long-term effort that
unites development, peace and security and human
rights, reflecting their interlinked and mutually
reinforcing nature. As has been said many times
before, there can be no development without genuine
security and vice versa, or, as we are reminded in the
co-facilitators' report, "conflict remains the single most
important impediment to development" (5/2010/393, annex, para. 3). Likewise, in harsh, insecure and brutal
conditions in the underdeveloped world there can be no
real respect for or protection of human rights and
human dignity.

Bearing all this in mind, it is obvious that only
coordinated, coherent, sustainable, mutually
accountable national and international efforts,
adequately encompassing security, human rights and
development, will bear fruit. In that regard, Croatia
particularly welcomes the new United Nations system-
wide guidelines for the integrated missions planning
process, which set standards for field-based integrated
strategies and planning. We also welcome the post-
conflict needs assessment adopted by United Nations
Development Group, the World Bank and the European
Union.

Starting from the premise that building local
capacity is the ultimate priority of peacebuilding, we
strongly support the establishment of the Senior
Advisory Group tasked to undertake a review of
international civilian capacity in order to strengthen the
availability, deployability, coherence and
appropriateness of civilian capacities based on an
assessment of existing capacities.

The interdependence of today's world - in
which, on the one hand, national crises easily evolve
into global problems and in which, on the other, global
problems inevitably prowl within national borders -
requires enhanced sensitivity to regional considerations
and their successful integration into overall
peacebuilding efforts. In that context, Croatia considers
the further improvement and deepening of cooperation
between the Peacebuilding Commission and regional
and subregional organizations, as well as the
appropriate engagement of various United Nations
entities active in particular regions, to be crucially
important.

Croatia's transition from recipient to donor
country has been fairly short and effective. Today we
are sharing our knowledge and experiences with
countries in the region, as well as with other countries
in crisis, where our post-conflict experience in nation-
building is particularly relevant. Accordingly, Croatia
assists in the development of civil society,
reconciliation and post-conflict reconstruction, as well
as in building functioning administrative capacities in
the social realm.

Finally, let me mention that as a co-founder of the
Peacebuilding Fund, Croatia fully recognizes the
critical role that timely and sustainable peacebuilding
funding plays as an early investment towards peace and
development, and in that regard strongly supports the
Fund's new simpler structures and its efforts to
introduce predictable, flexible and sufficient funding
schemes through revisited terms of reference and
guidelines. In that context, we welcome the
strengthening of a strategic partnership between the
United Nations and the World Bank and expect with
special interest the World Bank Conflict, Security and
Development Report 201].

Let me conclude by saying that Croatia -
working together with other Member States and the
United Nations as a whole, and acting with the same
enthusiasm and spirit that clearly accompanied our
ambitions some five years ago - stands ready to play
its due part in the revival of the peacebuilding
architecture and the thorough implementation of its
core functions.

