Mr. Niyonzima (Burundi) (spoke in French):
Allow me at the outset, Madam President, to thank you
for organizing this debate on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and to commend the Secretary-
General on his report (S/2011/598*).

The political will of the Government of Burundi
to promote gender equity and gender equality is well
established. Indeed Burundi has subscribed to
international agreements such as the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women, the Beijing Declaration and Platform for
Action and other international conventions and
agreements on equality and non-discrimination on the
basis of gender, and has implemented a national gender

policy.

To implement resolution 1325 (2000), the
Government of Burundi has decided that no strategy
will be adopted or implemented without taking into
clear account the gender dimension, so as to guarantee
the full participation of women in decision-making, in
prioritizing plans of action and in implementing them.
As things stand, our National Plan of Action on
resolution 1325 (2000) has been drafted and its
adoption by the Council of Ministers is expected next
month. The plan is designed to respond to the
Government's national and international priorities,
which are reflected in national policy documents, such
as the "Strategic Framework for Combating Poverty,
Second Generation", "Vision 2025" and the revised
version of the national gender policy.

The substance of resolution 1325 (2000) on
women and peace and security is chiefly built around
four pillars - participation, prevention, protection and
recovery. In terms of participation in decision-making,
Burundi has made significant progress. For example,
the 30 per cent rate stipulated by the country's
Constitution has been exceeded during the post-
election nominations in 2010. Nine of the
21 ministerial positions are currently held by
women- equal to 43 per cent. With that percentage
Burundi leads the rest of Africa. Our rate of women's
representation in the Senate places Burundi in first
place in Africa and in second place worldwide, after
Bolivia.

In hiring practices for both civil service and
private industry, women and men go through the same
selection process and have an equal chance. In many
cases, applications from women are strongly
encouraged. In matters of peace and security, Burundi's
National Security Council includes 2 women among its
seven members. Plans for gender integration in the
police force and the army have already been adopted
by the relevant ministries, and currently women are
increasingly included as part of peacekeeping missions
on the ground in other countries.

In the area of prevention and protection, the
Government of Burundi has taken stern measures to
discourage abuse of girls as wives or sex slaves, by
instituting a police unit for minors and morality under
the ministry that handles public security. As part of the
fight against gender-based violence, training sessions
are regularly conducted for the military and the
national police forces. On top of everything else, a
national strategy to fight gender-based violence has
been drawn up and will soon be adopted by the
Government. The implementation of that strategy will,
however, require strong support from the international
community.

In terms of recovery, the Government encourages
women to form associations, so as to be able to receive
assistance and support from the Administration and
other benefactors. As part of implementation of the
action plan under resolution 1325 (2000), the
Government would like to establish a support fund for
income-generating initiatives in order to enhance the
economic power of women. The Government also
encourages women entrepreneurs to create
organizations, as that will facilitate the search for
funding to bolster their companies and their
management capacities.

Many challenges, such as the eradication of
violence against women, the struggle against poverty,
changing mindsets and capacity-building of women for
their empowerment, remain to be met for effective
implementation of the resolution. I want to conclude by
thanking, on behalf of my Government, all our
development partners, who continue to give all the
necessary support to enable Burundi women to assume
their rightful place.

