Mr. Sinirlioglu (Turkey): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important open debate.
We welcome the continuing attention of the Security
Council to the women and peace and security agenda,
and we thank the briefers for their insightful remarks.

Resolution 1325 (2000) constitutes an important
milestone, not only because it addresses the
disproportionate impact of armed conflict on women
and girls but also because it represents a landmark
achievement in terms of ensuring the full, effective and
meaningful participation of women in all stages of the
conflict cycle and the peace continuum. As we approach
its twentieth anniversary, there is ample room for
discussion on concrete strategies throughout the United
Nations system to enhance its implementation. That is
particularly the case for United Nations peacekeeping.

Female personnel have already proven that they
can perform the same roles to the same standards
and under the same difficult conditions as their
male counterparts. They also broaden the skill set
available on the ground as they make unique and
substantive contributions to peacekeeping operations.
Their presence in the field empowers women in the
host communities and contributes to making the
peacekeeping force more approachable to women and
young people in the community. As such, women are
key to the success of United Nations peacekeeping
missions. Women peacekeepers also act as role models
in the local environment, inspiring women and girls in
often male-dominated societies to push for their own
rights and participation in peace processes.

Thanks to the efforts and commitments of the
United Nations, the rate of female participation in
peacekeeping forces has increased in recent years, but
it still remains below United Nations targets. Despite
the evidence that inclusiveness improves peacekeeping
efficiency and effectiveness, women remain
underrepresented in actual operations, especially
among uniformed personnel. We welcome initiatives
such as the uniformed gender-parity strategy and the
Elsie Initiative for Women in Peace Operations, which
aim to help overcome barriers to increasing women's
participation in peace operations.

In our joint efforts, we can improve the situation on
the ground if we make good use of disaggregated data
on women to draw conclusions. Reporting should have
an integrated gender perspective that feeds into the
Secretary-General's recommendations and conclusions.
In that sense, gender experts and advisers in the missions
contribute significantly to the overall success of United
Nations peacekeeping. We should make sure to continue
to make use of that asset in terms of training, advising,
assisting, mentoring and supporting the leadership and
relevant units of peacekeeping missions.

The involvement of United Nations peacekeepers
in sexual exploitation and abuse fundamentally
undermines the very foundation of the United Nations,
its credibility and the trust that the United Nations flag
enjoys. The zero-tolerance policy should be strictly
implemented against personnel involved in such cases
until the perpetrators are punished and those utterly
disgraceful acts cease completely. Turkey fully supports
the Secretary-General's efforts to that end.

We should not overlook the fact that the ultimate
responsibility for the advancement of the women
and peace and security agenda lies with individual
countries. In that spirit, we should make sure to
eliminate any discrimination or barriers against
women's participation in peace operations. Turkey also
supports the empowerment and well-being of women
and girls in various emergency, conflict or post-conflict
situations through its comprehensive development
assistance programmes. The projects we carry out in
Afghanistan and Somalia, especially in the fields of
education and health services, are concrete examples of
our efforts to that end.

At the same time, we attach great importance to
ensuring the collaboration and coordination of our
efforts throughout the United Nations system and
continue to encourage more women to participate in
United Nations peacekeeping missions. We also actively
promote the implementation of the relevant resolutions
in other international and regional platforms, such
as the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and NATO.

Successive Security Council resolutions since the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) have contributed
to the establishment of a sound normative framework.
Despite that achievement, however, today's debate
indicates that there is still the need for further serious
improvement in involving women in all decision-making
processes aimed at preventing conflict as well as
building and sustaining peace.

To create lasting peace and stability, we need
women's voices in every process, from conflict
prevention and conflict resolution to reconciliation and
post-conflict recovery. The recent conflict-settlement
history of our globe is full of success stories of women
who played crucial roles in the establishment of peace
and security. We should build on those achievements and
ensure women's rightful and meaningful participation
in peace operations.

