Mrs. Papadopoulou (Greece): Let me begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for having taken the
initiative to organize this debate pursuant to Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000), focusing in particular
on the roles of women in the consolidation of peace.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his Report on women, peace and security
(S/2006/770), which accurately depicts the progress
achieved so far in the context of the United Nations
System-wide Action Plan for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).

Greece fully aligns itself with the statement that
was made this morning by the representative of Finland
on behalf of the European Union. We also endorse the
statement made by the representative of Slovenia on
behalf of the Human Security Network.

Today's meeting offers us the opportunity to
share some thoughts regarding the role of women in
peace and security. It is indeed encouraging that since
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) public
awareness has considerably risen and public opinion
has become more sensitive regarding the position of
women in armed conflict and their positive role in the
consolidation of a peaceful environment in post-
conflict situations. Special tribute should be paid to
civil society both for its contribution to the
advancement of the status of women and for its
recognition of the role that women can play in
promoting peace, which has been acknowledged ever
since the First World Conference on Women in 1975.

Unfortunately, this positive trend has not been
coupled with the termination of violence against
women in conflict situations. The Security Council's
adoption this year of resolution 1674 (2006), on the
protection of civilians, is yet another milestone in the
protection of women in armed conflict. That resolution
condemns in the strongest terms all acts of violence or
abuses committed against civilians, including gender-
based and sexual violence, and recognizes that flagrant
and widespread violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law may constitute a
threat to international peace and security. We hope that
this step, along with the relevant provisions of
international humanitarian and international human
rights law, will help put an end to tolerance of violence
against civilians, including women, as well as to
impunity.

Let us recall that the things we agreed upon
during the 2005 World Summit - development, peace,
security and human rights, the pillars of the United
Nations system and the foundations for collective
security and well-being - are interlinked and mutually
reinforcing. Women have an important role to play in
each and every stage, from conflict prevention to post-
conflict reconstruction and stabilization.

Strengthening the rule of law and, within that,
protecting the full enjoyment of human rights by
women and advancing gender equality are significant
aspects of conflict prevention. The incorporation of the
gender dimension in early warning activities and the
actual use of that factor, both as an indicator
contributing to a more comprehensive assessment of
emerging conflicts and as an incentive to the timely
planning of gender-sensitive programmes, are certainly
very positive steps. We therefore very much welcome
the participation of women in early warning and
conflict prevention work.

In peacekeeping, the incorporation of the gender
perspective from the early phases of planning and its
mainstreaming into mission mandates is of equal
importance. Training of personnel, be it humanitarian,
civilian or military, is necessary for increasing
awareness and above all, for ensuring compliance with
the appropriate standards of behaviour and conduct. I
believe we can all agree that the best way to make sure
that these aims are met is to actively involve women
themselves. The goal of the increased participation of
women is provided for in many international legal
instruments, such as the Charter of the United Nations,
resolution 1325 (2000) and the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women (CEDAW). With a view to honouring that
commitment, Greece has ratified both CEDAW and its
Optional Protocol, and has established an office of
gender equality in the Ministry of National Defence.

Regarding peacebuilding, I cannot fail to make a
special reference to the Peacebuilding Commission and
the discussion organized yesterday by the United
Kingdom in the form of an Arria-style meeting.
Peacebuilding is a broad notion, encompassing, inter
alia, the restoration of the rule of law, the
demobilization, disarmament and reintegration process
and security-sector reform. Yesterday's Arria-style
meeting gave us the opportunity to stress the
importance of taking into account the gender
perspective in all those areas. But most of all, the
process of peace building cannot but be tightly linked
to sustainable development and the creation of a viable
economic environment.

There can be no sustainable peace and security
without development, and the empowerment of women
is key to all development efforts and their prospects for
success. That was duly recognized in the Millennium
Declaration, the promotion of gender equality being a
Millennium Development Goal in itself - and rightly
so, because discrimination against women seriously
impedes the eradication of poverty and the combating
of contagious diseases such as HIV/AIDS. Limited
access to primary education and non-equitable access
to employment power the vicious circle of poverty and
discrimination.

One cannot but stress the importance of
incorporating the gender perspective in development
policies, including poverty-reduction strategies. Taking
this fully into account, Greece finances development
projects fostering gender equality, promoting maternal
and reproductive health and focusing on combating
human trafficking, especially of women and girls.

I will conclude my intervention by making a
reference to the 2006 Nobel Peace Prize recipient.
Mr. Muhammad Yunus of Bangladesh, with his famous
microfinance banking system, has chosen to give loans
primarily to women living in poor areas for the
establishment of small enterprises. That initiative has
created a remarkably solid basis for economic
development, demonstrating the crucial role that
women can play in this respect and thus in
consolidating peace.

