Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Thank you,
Madam President, for convening this open debate on an
issue to which Portugal attaches great importance. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General,
Ms. Michelle Bachelet, Ambassador Lazarous
Kapambwe and Ms. Orzala Ashraf Nemat for their very
useful statements.

The theme of this year's open debate, "Women's
participation and role in conflict prevention and
mediation", was a core element of resolution 1325
(2000), which the Council adopted 11 years ago.
However, as underlined in the excellent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2011/598*), which we very much
welcome, that objective still eludes us to a large extent.
Today's debate is therefore very timely.

Portugal naturally shares the views that will be
expressed in the statement to be delivered later by the
observer of the European Union.

Women are indispensable actors in change and
development. As we speak, the Arab Spring is a stage
for the active participation of women in political
processes. Tunisian, Egyptian and Libyan women
today have higher expectations than in the past -
legitimate expectations regarding their role in the
shaping of their countries' futures. Women who have
striven to make their voices heard and who have played
an important role in promoting political transitions are
now looking forward to full and equal participation in
the political sphere and to contribute actively to the
stability, progress and cohesion of their societies.

 
Women indeed have a crucial role to play in
rebuilding war-torn societies and in preserving social
cohesion. They did it in Europe, during and after the
First and Second World Wars. They did it in South
America and in Africa, in countries divided by civilian
strife. They still do it on a daily basis in several
countries tormented by conflict. What is essential is to
guarantee that women are included in peace processes
and to ensure that their perspectives and direct
knowledge of specific situations and concerns are
taken into account as important contributions to the
reshaping of torn societies in post-conflict situations
and to peacebuilding efforts.

The decision of the Norwegian Nobel Committee
to award the 2011 Nobel Peace Prize to three women in
recognition of "their non-violent struggle for the safety
of women and for women's rights to full participation
in peacebuilding work" is a much-deserved recognition
of women's significant contribution to peacebuilding
and democracy. It will undoubtedly send a powerful
message to women around the world to engage in
efforts to determine the future of their countries.

While acknowledging that important progress has
been accomplished in implementing resolution 1325
(2000) and subsequent resolutions on women and
peace and security, we need to recognize that
significant challenges still remain. Women are still
underrepresented at several levels in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding efforts, just as they are inadequately
represented in formal peace negotiations. The
exclusion of women from peace talks and
peacebuilding efforts often means that insufficient
attention is paid to addressing gender disparities and
women's concerns in the post-conflict phase, thus
reinforcing a circle of inequality and marginalization.

The Council will later adopt a draft presidential
statement encouraging efforts to strengthen the
capacities of women's organizations to engage in
conflict prevention and mediation. Portugal fully
supports these specific efforts to increase the effective
participation of women mediators in peace processes,
as well as efforts to prepare women to effectively
intervene in the resolution of conflicts and contribute
to peace and stability.

In that regard, we welcome the efforts of
UN-Women to provide technical support to women's
organizations. We recognize that much has been done
at the local and regional levels to successfully
strengthen women's civil society groups. We also
welcome every effort by Member States to promote
women's political participation and to eliminate
discriminatory or constitutional barriers against
women. Further action is also needed on other
obstacles that prevent women from participating fully
in politics, such as poverty, sexual violence, the lack of
access to education, negative societal attitudes and
cultural and psychological barriers.

The Council has a key role to play in monitoring
women's participation in political processes. I take this
opportunity to highlight once again the importance of
inviting Ms. Michelle Bachelet to brief the Council on
women's political participation in conflict situations on
its agenda as a complement to the briefings that the
Council receives from other parts of the Secretariat.
We warmly congratulate her on the very important
work she is carrying out and on her leadership and
commitment. Here, we wish to reiterate our full
support for her endeavours.

In conclusion, Portugal has been striving to
support not only the promotion and protection of the
human rights of women, but also their political
participation in situations on the agenda of the Council,
such as those in Libya, Somalia, South Sudan and
Afghanistan, among others. In the pursuit of peace, this
Council cannot afford to exclude the skills and talents
of half the world's population. In this context, my
country reaffirms its commitment to ensuring women's
effective participation in peace and security and to
translate this commitment into enhanced action.

