Mr. Pintado (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): First
and foremost, Madam President, I should like to thank
you for having convened this important open debate. I
should like also to thank the Under-Secretary-General
and Executive Director of the United Nations Entity
for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women), the President of the Economic and
Social Council, and the representative of the NGO
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security for
their important briefings.

Through the adoption by the Security Council of
resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions, the
United Nations has been able to develop, integrate and
fine-tune the tools available to it to address a gender
perspective in a multidimensional manner, by
recognizing the importance of women's active
participation in the various stages of conflict
prevention and resolution, as well as in peacekeeping,
reconstruction and peacebuilding.

We welcome in particular the establishment of
UN-Women, the agency that lies at the heart of the
gender architecture of the Organization, as it
coordinates all efforts undertaken in this field.

We welcome also the inclusion of specific
indicators in the reports of the Secretary-General, as is
the case in the report before us today (S/2011/598*), as
well as the seven-point action plan. Unfortunately,
however, as a result of the unequal implementation of
resolutions dealing with the gender architecture, there
exist significant gaps. One of the clearest examples of
this is the persistence of sexual violence in conflict and
post-conflict situations.

My delegation is concerned about the
identification of patterns of sexual violence in conflict
and post-conflict situations in many States and regions.
Sexual violence as a tactic of war stokes crises, fuels
the continuation of armed conflict, promotes the
displacement of people, limits subsistence activities
and reduces opportunities for development. In order to
avert that phenomenon, it is pivotal that peacekeeping
mission personnel as well as mediation and electoral
assistance teams have sufficient specialized expertise
in the field of gender and sexual violence and also have
the capacity to act in a timely manner so as to initiate
the relevant investigations.

There can be no lasting peace unless we
guarantee access to justice as well as accountability
and support the fight against impunity. In that regard, I
wish to recall that the International Criminal Court
could exercise its jurisdiction with regard to such
crimes.

We are also concerned about the low level of
participation by women in peace negotiations. The
exclusion of women and the lack of experts in gender
matters in negotiations perpetuate inequality. As is
indicated in the current report of the Secretary-General,
issues related to women tend to be addressed at the
later stages of conflict prevention and mediation. The
Nobel Peace Prize that was awarded to outstanding
women in this field this year undoubtedly sends a
positive message, but it is nonetheless insufficient.

The presence of additional female peacekeepers
and female staff in peacebuilding operations, at both
the military police and civilian levels, would have a
clear positive effect. It is therefore necessary to
increase the number of women who hold high-ranking
posts in such operations. We welcome the decision of
the Peacebuilding Fund to allocate $5 million to the
gender promotion initiative; we hope that this will lead
to tangible results in the short term.

We believe that the provisions of these Security
Council resolutions are relevant at both the
international and national levels. In Mexico, following
an approach to prevent violence, the institutions that
are responsible for monitoring security, safety and law
enforcement receive ongoing training in the field of
gender affairs. As a result, more women have become
involved in the administration of justice, with the
notable example of the appointment of the Attorney-
General, Marisela Morales - the first Mexican woman
to hold this important post. In turn, the national
defence agency has trained almost 80,000 personnel in
the field of gender equity, and this year will see the
graduation of the first female air force pilot. In the
diplomatic sphere, a high number of female
representatives have had a bearing my country's
foreign policy, starting with Ms. Patricia Espinosa
Cantellano, Minister for Foreign Affairs.

The recommendations contained in the report of
the Secretary-General are highly useful in identifying
existing shortcomings in the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and in ensuring the
harmonization and coordination of United Nations
efforts in that area.

Mexico will continue to support the protection,
empowerment and participation of women in decision-
making processes, as we are fully convinced that
women are key stakeholders in strengthening the three
pillars of lasting peace, namely, economic recovery;
social cohesion and political legitimacy. The
commitment of States Members of the United Nations
and of civil society is essential in order to continue to
strengthen the central role played by women in the
maintenance of international peace and security.

