Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the initiative of the United Kingdom to
convene today's ministerial-level open debate. I
should like also to thank Secretary-General Guterres
and Executive Director Fedotov for their briefings.
China also listened attentively to the briefings by
Commissioner Hyland and Ms. Elman.

Today some parts of the world are ravaged by
incessant armed conflict and the rampant abuses of
armed groups, terrorist organizations and transnational
organized criminal rings, which pose a grave threat
to the safety, health and dignity of local populations.
One of the dire consequences is the growing scourge
of human trafficking in conflict situations. Victims are
often subject to forced labour and slavery and vulnerable
groups, including women and children bear the brunt.
China strongly rejects all forms of human trafficking in
situations of armed conflict and supports international
efforts to tackle this scourge in a concerted manner.

First, we must step up efforts to combat human
trafficking and slavery in conflict situations, as
actors in this phenomenon - armed groups, terrorist
organizations and transnational organized criminal
networks * are highly mobile and can move across
borders and between countries of origin, transit
and destination. On the one hand, the international
community should vigorously support the countries
concerned in combating criminal activities and
provide them with targeted capacity-building support
in the areas of law enforcement, border control and
financial regulation, in line with their own national
conditions and upon their request. On the other hand,
we need to enhance international cooperation with a
focus on law enforcement collaboration and leverage
the role of regional and subregional organizations and
pool all resources available to investigate, disrupt and
dismantle trafficking networks. We need to encourage
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, UN-
Women, the International Organization for Migration
and other United Nations agencies and international
organizations to provide conflict-affected countries
with financial, human and technical support, in line
with their respective mandates and expertise.

Secondly, we need to attach greater importance
to combating terrorism. Terrorist organizations, such
as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, obtain
funding by means such as the trafficking in persons,
forced labor and enslavement and resort to brutal
tactics. The international community should uphold
uniform counter-terrorism standards; take coordinated
and concerted action; exercise zero tolerance against
terrorism and resolutely address crimes of trafficking,
exploitation and enslavement of populations in conflict
situations, in particular women and children; take an
integrated approach that encompasses political and
economic means and stop the financial flow of funds
obtained from enslavement and human trafficking to
terrorist organizations; and dismantle their criminal
networks. We need to take robust and effective measures
to combat the use by terrorist groups of the Internet to
disseminate terrorist audio and visual products in order
to incite individuals to commit acts of terrorism and
for recruitment purposes. We must protect people in
conflict areas from becoming easy prey to terrorist and
extremist ideologies and falling victim to such crimes as
human trafficking. In the meantime, we need to ensure
that victims and survivors of such crimes receive the
assistance they need to facilitate their reintegration.

Thirdly, we must reinforce efforts towards a political
settlement of conflicts. Protracted regional conflicts
provide a breeding ground for human trafficking and
other criminal activities. The international community
should work harder to find political solutions to hotspot
issues with a renewed sense of urgency, assist countries
in conflict in advancing their political process and their
national reconciliation in line with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and in
settling their disputes and bridging their differences
by peaceful means, including through dialogue and
consultation. We need to give greater weight to the
prevention of conflicts and help countries to improve
their ability to achieve sustainable development,
consolidate a basis for peace and root out the conditions
and drivers for human trafficking and enslavement in
conflict situations, so as to provide an enabling external
environment for the protection of women and children
in conflict situations.

China will continue to support the international
community in exercising a zero-tolerance policy against
human trafficking in armed conflict and enhancing
the protection of the rights of women and children in
armed conflict. China will work with its partners to
safeguard peace, security, stability and development at
the international and regional levels.

