Mr. Mayr-Harting: As this is the first time that
I have had the chance to speak under your presidency,
Sir, I would first like to congratulate you on having
assumed the presidency of the Council and wish you
the best of luck in that important task.

I am speaking on behalf of the European Union
(EU) and its member States. The candidate countries
Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Montenegro and Serbia; the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia,
align themselves with this statement.

We thank the Secretary-General, Under-Secretary-
General Mlambo-Ngcuka, High Commissioner Pillay
and Ms. Brigitte Balipou for their statements here
today. We also welcome the Council's adoption earlier
today of resolution 2122 (2013), outlining further steps
on women, peace and security.

We welcome the theme of today's debate, with
its particular focus on the rule of law and transitional
justice during and post-conflict, which have received
limited attention to date. Yet the breakdown of the rule
of law in conflict leads to a broad range of violations
of women's and girls' rights. To address that challenge,
post-conflict reforms need to be gender-sensitive and
women's access to justice in conflict and post-conflict
settings needs to be secured. Women need to be
represented in the justice sector.

The provision of fair, transparent, effective and
accountable justice mechanisms for all is crucial to
ensuring the benefits of the rule of law for everyone.
Women's and girls' rights must be secured; they must
also be ensured in informal justice systems. Given the
broad range of conflict-related violations of women's
rights - including enforced disappearance, early and
forced marriage, human trafficking and Violations
of economic and social rights - transitional justice
processes need to address them in full. The EU is
now working on establishing its policy on transitional
justice. The way justice related issues are addressed in
peace negotiations has a strong impact on the pursuit
of post-conflict justice and mediators can play an
important role in that regard.

The EU Concept on Strengthening EU Mediation
and Dialogue Capacities aims to promote the
representation of women and the availability of
adequate resources for dedicated gender expertise at
an early stage of the mediation process. We call on the
United Nations system to increase the participation of
women in mediation activities, including as chief and
lead mediators, and to include gender experts in the
mediation teams. Supporting women's civil society
groups is crucial to developing domestic constituencies
for women's engagement in conflict resolution.

We call on the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations Office of Rule of Law and Security
Institutions to ensure gender expertise in the planning
of peacekeeping operations or special missions with
rule of law mandates and the gathering of gender-
aggregated data when making a baseline assessment of
rule of law institutions.

We welcome the comprehensive approach of the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/525) and
particularly welcome the increasingly targeted and
concrete recommendations for action. We underline
the need for continued regular reporting and briefings
to the Council. However, we note the need to further
enhance the links between the information provided to
the Council and the outcomes of the Council's work,
particularly the mandates of the United Nations peace
operations. We would also welcome reporting on the
rule of law action point of the seven-point action plan
on gender-sensitive peacebuilding.

We note positively the Council's growing practice
of including sexual and gender based violence in the
designation criteria for targeted sanctions regimes.

The European Union supports the work aimed
at increasing the role of women in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts and in peacebuilding,
promoting women's equal participation in all efforts
for the promotion of peace and security and providing
an integrated approach to prevent and punish acts of
sexual violence, as well as to bring justice, services and
reparation to its victims.

In that regard, we acknowledge the important
contribution of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court to expanding the scope of gender and
sexual-based Violence. We encourage States that have
not yet done so to ratify the Statute, enact domestic
criminal legislation of those atrocious crimes and to
routinely and systematically prosecute them as the
primary means of ensuring accountability.

We commend the work of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in
Conflict, Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, and of the Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law.

The increasing number of national and regional
action plans for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) provides the opportunity to compare different
experiences in order to further improve our work. To
further map our actions and experiences, we support
the call of the Secretary-General for an independent
global study on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) to prepare for the 2015 high-level review. Finally,
I again thank you, Sir, for organizing this important
debate.

