Mr. Radomski (Poland): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening and presiding over this
meeting today. We are deeply honoured by your
presence among us.

Let me also join all other members of the Council
in expressing my thanks to Deputy-Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed and the African Union Special
Envoy on Women, Peace and Security, Ms. Bineta
Diop, for their comprehensive briefings.

Poland is concerned by the extent to which women,
men, girls and boys are impacted by the interrelated
challenges in the Sahel region. Among the factors
causing unrest and insurgencies in the region are
increased tensions between farmers, food insecurity,
unemployment and, of course, terrorism. These
important issues have dramatic consequences, affecting
women and girls with particular intensity and further
complicating the regional security situation. Not only
are women and girls the victims of terrorist attacks,
but they are also being radicalized by terrorists. As we
have heard, almost two-thirds of the suicide bombings
by Boko Haram in 2017 were carried out by women and
girls. Their desperation demonstrates how crucial it is
to continue efforts to provide peace and security for
women in the Sahel region. Like all other members of
the Council, we are also appalled by the large scale of
sexual violence in the region.

Reflecting on the key challenges to ensuring
women's security and prospects to participate in
sustainable development processes, I want to stress
the need for the implementation of the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and its recent
recalibration in order to ensure that it is responsive
to the countries of the region and to mobilize greater
resources for the region.

Resolution 2349 (2017), of March 2017, adopted
following the Council's visit to the Lake Chad basin,
is an important step in favour of women's peace and
security in the region. Also, the call to action adopted
at the high-level conference on women, violence and
terrorism in West Africa and the Sahel, organized in
April in Dakar, constitutes a step in right direction. We
should be building on it further.

We also strongly believe that the Security Council
and the United Nations as a whole have to promote
women's positive role as agents for change in transitions
from stabilization to long-term peacebuilding and
development. With this in mind, over the past 18 years
the Security Council, through its numerous resolutions,
has created a solid normative framework, and good
progress has been made in terms of implementation.
What is needed now is more strategic and consistent
implementation, followed by regular evaluations.
Meetings like this one help to identify gaps between
the framework and the situation on the ground.

We fully support initiatives to increase women's
participation in democratic elections, decision-making
and peace and development processes. We consider
it essential to include gender considerations and the
meaningful participation of women in early warning,
mediation and conflict resolution efforts. Equally
important is the mainstreaming of gender-specific
language and the human rights of women in peace
agreements. A greater role for women also needs
to be ensured in post-conflict peacebuilding and
economic recovery.

In conclusion, let me reiterate that further
cooperation with the African Union and civil society
is vital to increasing women's participation in peace,
security and sustainable development processes in the
region of Sahel and the Lake Chad basin.

