Ms. Wallstriim: First of all, I would like to thank
you, Sir, and the Permanent Mission of Japan for this
opportunity to address the Security Council as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict.
Why should this body, which debates matters of
war and peace, debate the security of women? I am
honoured to add my voice to the Council's
groundbreaking consideration of that question. I will
also share a frank assessment of the gaps in our efforts
to address sexual Violence, the challenges I observed
on my visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and how my vision and five-point agenda aim to
respond. I would like to leave the Council with two
forward-looking recommendations: that sexual
violence be given continuous consideration and that
prevention be made a top priority.

From the Trojan War to the nuclear age, rape has
existed in symbiotic relationship with armed conflict.
And yet, it is a relationship we are just beginning to
understand. History has perpetuated the ancient myth
of "arms and the man", prioritizing the plight of
soldiers on the front lines While relegating women to
the sidelines.

This Council, however, has helped redefine the
relationship between rape and war and, more broadly,
between women and peace and security. Resolution
1820 (2008) was a historic response to a heinous
reality. It was a response commensurate with the
understanding that conflict-related sexual violence is
collective violence aimed at destroying not only
people, but their sense of being a people.

The complementary efforts of other United
Nations bodies to advance gender equality,
development and justice are crucial, and I look forward
to working With them as a bridge to the broader United
Nations membership. Yet our approach to rape in
places Where peace and order prevail no more equips
us to address systematic rape as a war strategy than our
approach to murder prepares us for genocide. In terms
of their intent, extent and impact, the crimes are
incomparable.

In the wake of the Second World War, the United
Nations Charter was adopted to "save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war", which "has
brought untold sorrow". But still, the scourge of rape
continues, and its sorrows are largely left untold.
Succeeding generations continue to be born of rape at
gunpoint and stigmatized as the stepchildren of war.
Governments and armed groups that tolerate sexual
terror make a mockery of the United Nations Charter
and this Council's action to enforce it. Those who
employ sexual violence to punish, humiliate, terrorize
10-33085
or displace commit crimes against the victims and
crimes against humanity.

Sexual violence creates and perpetuates an
atmosphere of insecurity. This leads to a drastic decline
in the number of girls able to safely attend school and
the number of women able to access water points,
marketplaces and polling booths. As a biological
weapon, it increases the disease burden on a
community, including HIV and AIDS. It uproots and
fractures families, dissolving community bonds by
turning victims into outcasts. The psychological scars
remain beneath the surface of a society and, like any
explosive remnant of war, make peace less possible.

Far from being a niche issue, sexual violence is
part of a larger pattern. The changing nature of conflict
is characterized by an increased civilian-combatant
interface, which has seen the targeting of populations
and the placing of women and girls at ever greater risk.
Rule by rape is used by political and military leaders to
achieve political, military and economic ends.
Politically motivated rape is a disturbing trend
witnessed in the wake of Kenya's contested elections
and, more recently, in broad daylight on the streets of
Guinea. Such crimes create a security crisis that
demands a security response.

So what is the response of the United Nations
system, and what is missing?

The United Nations system is generating
proposals for effective monitoring and reporting to
identify and plug gaps, measured against performance
benchmarks. I would like to say a few words about
these critical gaps, to which my vision is intended to
respond.

First, the knowledge base on which we act has
been impaired by analytical gaps. Perhaps the most
insidious is the notion that rape is an inevitable by-
product of war. Sexual violence and its extreme
consequences are not intrinsic to conflict and
displacement. Rather, there is a sense that rape leaves
perpetrators without blood on their hands and that it
can be put down to biological need or the fog of war.
So we must be clear - mass rape is no more natural,
inevitable or acceptable than mass murder. Research
reveals variations in the use of war rape and situations
in which it is rare, so we know it is not a necessary
corollary of conflict. The United Nations has
traditionally analysed sexual violence through a
gender, reproductive-health and development lens,

which means that security factors and actors are often
overlooked. But wartime sexual violence is a crime
that can be commanded, condoned or condemned. I am
convinced that once we better understand these
dynamics, prevention will be within our power.

However, a range of factors inhibit survivors
from coming forward to report: lack of services,
shame, low rights-awareness and high security risk. To
inform interventions, we need data that captures trends,
early warning indicators and patterns of attack. While
we cannot expect accurate bookkeeping on the
battlefield, inadequate information-sharing and
coordination has meant that sexual violence data
remain fragmented and anecdotal. Nonetheless, I
would argue that from the way sexual violence spans
history, the burden of proof in wartime should be on
those who suggest that rape is not rampant. When law
and order collapses, dealing with rape should be
automatically included in contingency plans.

A related gap is accountability: the need to put
names to war's most complex horrors. History does not
repeat itself; people repeat history. I therefore welcome
the expansion of the list of shame of groups that recruit
child soldiers to include groups credibly suspected of
patterns of sexual violence. The Secretary-General's
second report on resolution 1820 (2008), to be
compiled by my office and presented at the end of the
year, will propose listing criteria aligned with those
developed by the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict. We cannot arbitrarily cut off concern for rape
victims at age 18. My vision includes tracking the
security dimensions of sexual violence by making use
of women's protection advisers as a counterpart in the
field.

Another gap is in the routine inclusion of sexual
violence - against boys and men as well as against
women and girls - as part of the protection of
civilians. Ad hoc methods have been employed, such as
the "firewood patrols" in Darfur, but we need to
systematize such efforts. In June I will launch, together
with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
the United Nations Development Fund for Women, an
analytical inventory of peacekeeping practice to
address conflict-related sexual violence. That
document will capture promising practice and elements
of an effective response.
To see these protection challenges first-hand, I
recently visited the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
a vast and remarkable nation, where I met resilient and
dynamic women. Yet this story is eclipsed by the
horror story that Congo remains the rape capital of the
world. This mars its image and potential for economic
growth. While the Congo's mothers, daughters and
sisters walk in shame, their rapists walk free. Victims
are doubly victimized by this injustice. Yet Congo has
a robust legal framework and a declaration on zero
tolerance. It also has a comprehensive strategy on
combating sexual violence, owned jointly by the
Government and the United Nations system. The laws
must be implemented and the strategy operationalized.
Political leadership is needed right across the spectrum,
from the President, the National Assembly and
provincial governors to religious and community
leaders.

Sexual violence remains a dominant, even
escalating, feature of the conflict. The refrain I heard
from women across the Kivus was, "If only it were not
for the war". Recent reports suggest that 60 per cent of
victims surveyed in the Kivus had been gang-raped by
armed men. More than half of these assaults took place
within the supposed safety of the family home, at
night, often in the presence of the victim's husband and
children. I heard evidence that four out of five women
seeking care from health centres claim to have been
raped by men in uniform. The core of this problem is
impunity, which is the rule, rather than the exception.
Rape victims receive no justice and no reparations. In
South Kivu province, there are just 54 magistrates,
only two of them women.

The Congolese people deserve a credible army
that can defend and protect them. The uniform should
symbolize a service that women can run to, not run
from. It should not represent a patchwork of militias,
stitched together without a screening process. The
headquarters of the Forces armees de la Republique
democratique du Congo bears a sign that reads: "La
discipline est la mere des arme'es". But discipline must
be backed with concrete measures to replace makeshift
tents with barracks, improvised attire with uniforms
and an implicit license to live off rural populations
with a reliable payment chain.

Similarly, the Police Nationale Congolaise lacks
practical means to respond to sexual violence. In a
context where rape is described as an epidemic, the
Women and Child Protection Unit in Goma shares one
motorbike to use to apprehend suspects. Violent
criminals ride on the back of the bike as they are taken
to the small shed that serves as a holding station.

Nonetheless, I was inspired by the dedication of
members of the police, judicial and hospital staff,
non-governmental organizations and local authorities. I
am also pleased to report progress in the practice of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo on the ground. One
example is its market-route patrols. At first, very few
women followed the patrols, but over time, more and
more began to take advantage of these escorts. The
improved sense of safety has led to improved trade,
which has contributed to economic development.

My findings from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo coupled with the aforementioned gaps analysis
reaffirm the five-point priority agenda that I have
outlined for my mandate, namely: ending impunity;
empowering women; mobilizing political leadership;
increasing recognition of rape as a tactic and
consequence of conflict; and ensuring a more coherent
response from the United Nations system.

First, the reign of impunity must end. This is a
critical part of the broader mandate of the Security
Council to shepherd situations from might to right,
from rule of war to rule of law and from bullets to
ballots. If women continue to suffer sexual violence, it
is not because the law is inadequate to protect them,
but because it is inadequately enforced. I will work
with Governments to explore options for drawing upon
the technical expertise of a team of experts on the rule
of law, as mandated by the Council's resolution 1888
(2009).

Secondly, we are not just protecting women from
violence, but empowering them to become agents of
change. A ceasefire is not synonymous with peace for
women, if the shooting ceases but rapes continue
unchecked.

The third point is to mobilize political leadership.
Resolutions are not ends in themselves, but tools in the
hands of political leaders. I intend to rally States and
United Nations and regional bodies to own this agenda
and to feel accountable for its success. I will also
mobilize non-traditional stakeholders, as sexual
violence is not just a women's issue.

The fourth point is to increase recognition of rape
as a tactic and consequence of conflict. Those who
10-33085
tolerate sexual terror should be on notice that they do
so in defiance of the Security Council, with its power
to enact enforcement measures. Resolution 1807
(2008), which imposes a travel ban and freezes assets
of individuals in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
who commit serious violations of international law,
including sexual violence, is a powerful example of
effective Council action.

The fifth point, coordination, is critical to avoid
gaps and overlaps in United Nations activities. I will
work through the inter-agency network, United Nations
Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict, which has
provided strategic support in five integrated mission
settings: the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Liberia, the Sudan - in Darfur - Chad and C6te
d'Ivoire, helping agencies rise above institutional
mandates to deliver as one. It is encouraging that the
Security Council has amplified the call for
comprehensive strategies to combat sexual violence in
its mandate renewals for Cote d'Ivoire and the Sudan.

The final theme responds to the most urgent
gap - that is, prevention. The terms of the debate have
shifted from reacting to sexual violence as to any other
tragedy, to preventing sexual violence as if it were any
other threat. This means both helping the victims and
helping to ensure that there are no more victims.

My Office will prepare an early warning matrix
of risk factors to sound the alarm from the ground up. I
look forward to working with a military liaison officer
who can interface with force commanders, ministries
of defence and armed groups to identify patterns of
violence.

Our current knowledge comes mainly from the
survivors. For too long, it has been considered
unpalatable to inquire into the motivations of
perpetrators and non-State actors, as if doing so would
legitimize their conduct. Understanding perpetrators is
the missing piece of the puzzle.

There has been much focus on command
responsibility. That is warranted, but we should not
ignore the importance of peer liability. Peer pressure is
a powerful influence in armed groups, and in the
inverted moral universe of war, violence becomes a
virtue and rape a rite of passage. In the words of a
former combatant pleading guilty to charges of
repeated rape before the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia,
"our wrongs were so terrible that we clung to
them and tried to justify them. I tried to be proud
of my actions and to think they were the actions
ofa successful soldier".

I recommend pioneering a peer education model on
sexual violence prevention.

Going on the offensive against sexual violence
will require the Council's continuous consideration.
Bold language in thematic resolutions must not be lost
in translation when it comes to country-level action.
The well-framed mandates of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo have made a real difference, and I applaud
the efforts made during the Council's most recent
mission to the Congo in May 2009 to ensure that the
five army officers blacklisted for sexual violence were
brought to justice.

States bear the primary responsibility for
protecting their citizens from violence. I see my role as
helping to build the capacity of Governments to meet
their obligations. Women have no rights if those who
violate their rights go unpunished. I am haunted by
what I heard in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo- that women are still not safe, under their
own roofs and in their own beds, when night falls. Our
aim must be to uphold international law so that women,
even in the war-torn corners of our world, can sleep
under the cover of justice.

