Ms. Sapag Munoz de la Pena (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): It is a pleasure, Sir, to see you presiding over
this meeting. I would like to convey our condolences
to the Russian Federation. Chile deeply deplores the
events that took place.

This complex and diverse transnational
phenomenon should be addressed from a holistic,
coordinated perspective through the system, including
in the Council and its subsidiary bodies, as it is
linked to the central themes of its agenda, such as the
protection of civilians in armed conflict; women and
peace and security; children and armed conflict; and
the financing of terrorism.

The use of victims of trafficking in combat, sexual
exploitation and forced labour has very much become
a hallmark of armed conflict and humanitarian crises.
The link between sexual violence and trafficking is
plain to see. We have watched with horror how armed
groups use sexual violence, the commercialization
and the enslavement of girls and women as a tool of
terrorism and a source of financing. Our repudiation
of these acts must be unequivocal and compelling and
must be backed up by measures to prevent them and to
provide rehabilitation and reintegration to the victims.
The exponential growth of migratory flows and

internal displaced people - the figures today are
higher than at any other time since the Second World
War - has been fuelled by humanitarian crises

associated with the worsening of existing conflicts and
violent actions by non-State groups. In that respect, as
part of the Arria Format meeting organized by Australia
and Chile in 2014, we identified the need to urgently
promote political solutions to the challenges that
States and the international system face in addressing
migratory governance and the situation of vulnerable
groups exposed to trafficking, such as internally
displaced persons. This debate is a response to this call.

It is vital to create and raise awareness of this
scourge to prevent it, prosecute traffickers, protect the
victims of trafficking and rehabilitate and reintegrate
them, as we said earlier, and finally to eradicate human-
trafficking in conflict situations.

The Council has the ethical and political
responsibility to firmly support the efforts of the
international community to that end, including
compliance with the relevant conventions and protocols,
as well as with resolutions 2195 (2014) and 2253 (2015),
which address the relationship between organized
crime, including human trafficking, and terrorism. We
are in favour of better coordination and cooperation
between national judicial systems and the United
Nations system in order to dismantle criminal networks
and bring to justice those who profit from trafficking.

With respect to specific measures to meet the
aforementioned goals, together with supporting those
measures contained in resolution 2331 (2016), which we
co-sponsored today, we propose the following.

First, we must promote exchanges between
specialized agencies, peacekeeping operations and
United Nations peacebuilding stakeholders so as to
address the fragmentation that exists in this sphere.

Secondly, we must address human trafficking
linked to the exploitation of mineral resources and
promote effective measures relative to the supply
chain, such as the commercial due-diligence guidelines
on minerals from conflict zones, where many women,
boys and girls are forcibly employed.

Thirdly, we must incorporate the issue of the
trafficking of women and girls in conflict in the agenda
of the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace
and Security, known as the 2242 Group, created by
Spain, since this is considered to be a challenge in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
Fourthly, we must ask the groups of experts of the
sanctions Committees to include human trafficking in
their reports to those Committees in order to assist with
the work of the Council in the event of the adoption
of the targeted sanctions included in resolution 2331
(2016).

Finally, and fifthly, I ask the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict and the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict to tackle this
scourge in their reports to their respective subsidiary
bodies, given, inter alia, that these components can
constitute an early-warning sign that can help to detect
and prevent future crimes against humanity.

