Mr. Viinanen (Finland): The representative of
Sweden has already spoken on behalf of the European
Union presidency, and I associate myself fully with his
statement. I have the honour of making a few
additional remarks.

Nine years ago, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1325 (2000) for the protection of women,
for their participation and for the promotion of their
rights in conflict and post-conflict situations. Last year,
the Council adopted resolution 1820 (2008),
condemning sexual violence as a tactic of war, and last
week it adopted resolution 1888 (2009) to further
strengthen the United Nations response to sexual
violence in conflict. We welcome recent developments
and the resolution adopted today, resolution 1889
(2009), which draws our attention to the crucial
question of women's empowerment and participation
in conflict and post-conflict situations.

Mr. President, you have chosen a very pertinent
focus for this open debate on women and peace and
security. Building sustainable peace requires much
more than the mere absence of violence. Restoration of
the rule of law, the local economy and basic services
should be the priority in any post-conflict situation.
This should happen alongside meeting the obvious
need to ensure everyone's physical safety and security,
which includes freedom from fear of sexual violence or
harassment.

After a violent conflict, women are often the best
experts in identifying the most crucial needs of their
communities. Their experience, knowledge and
determination are needed for the markets to start
buzzing with life again, for the children to go to school
and for the community to heal. Yet, women are still too
often left out of the peace negotiations and the
following processes where priorities and budgets for
early recovery and peacebuilding are planned and
decided upon. Finland emphasises the right of women
to fully participate in post-conflict peacebuilding.

We do not only need to make sure that we have
women present at the table at all levels of decision-
making. We should consider working towards agreeing
on international standards regarding participation of
women and men in peace and post-conflict processes.
We also need to make sure that women can fully use
their potential, skills and leadership to foster quick and
sustainable recovery and peacebuilding. To that end,
Finland, together with Liberia, convened the
International Colloquium for Women's Empowerment,
Leadership, Development and International Peace and
Security in Monrovia last March.

The United Nations plays a unique role in
conflict prevention, mediation, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. However, during the 60 years of United
Nations peacekeeping, no more than seven women
have served as Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General in the field. No woman has ever
been nominated as a lead mediator in a peace process
led by the United Nations. This has to change. We, the
United Nations Member States, need to ensure that the
change takes place.

We urge the United Nations to lead by example.
We commend the Secretary-General for his efforts to
increase the number of women in senior leadership
positions, and we encourage him to break even more
ground in the years to come. We welcome the call, in
the resolution just adopted, to the Secretary-General to
develop a strategy to that end. The Secretary General
should ensure that all his envoys and representatives
include women in all formal peace processes they lead.
They should actively seek the views of women also
outside of the formal negotiations. Furthermore, we
encourage the United Nations, together with the World
Bank and relevant regional organisations, to include a
requirement for women's participation in the standards
of post-conflict needs assessments and to track gender-
specific budget allocations.
Next year will mark the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000). There has been progress in its
implementation, but a lot of work remains to be done
before our commitments are fulfilled.

The unanimous decision by the General
Assembly, in its resolution 63/311, to create a new
gender entity was long awaited worldwide. Now we
must set up the ambitious goal of having the new entity
up and running by mid-2010. This will be a key step
forward in enhancing the effective contribution by the
United Nations to the promotion of women's rights and
participation worldwide, including in conflict and post-
conflict situations.

The recent adoption of resolution 1888 (2009)
and its request for the appointment of a special
representative of the Secretary-General to provide
leadership and improve coherence and coordination of
United Nations action against sexual violence in
conflict was a major step forward. Ensuring full
participation and rights of women and girls is the best
way to prevent sexual violence, and the mandate of the
new special representative should be put in place with
that in mind.

Moreover, we need indicators for tracking what
has or has not been done. In that regard, we are
delighted that the new resolution sets a timeline for the
development of global indicators. However, indicators
need to be complemented with a mechanism for
monitoring compliance and with the political will to
make the cost of non-compliance much higher than it is
today. Ultimately, the cost of excluding women from
peacemaking and peacebuilding is peace itself.

