Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Let me begin by thanking Spain for organizing
this open debate. We are grateful to the Secretary-
General, the Executive Director of UN-Women and all
the other speakers for their substantive contributions to
today's discussion.

This month marks the fifteenth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000), which enshrined the topic
of women and peace and security on the Council's
agenda. The importance of its implementation and
the commitment of States to achieving its objectives
were recently underlined once again at the Global
Leaders' Meeting on Gender Equality and Women's
Empowerment, which was recently organized at United
Nations headquarters by the People's Republic of China
and UN-Women. We congratulate the organizers on its
successful holding, which once again underscored the
importance of the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action, which remain key guidelines in the context
of expanding the rights of and opportunities open to
women over the past 20 years.

In the Beijing Declaration, States reaffirmed their
determination to take the steps necessary to achieve
peace so as to promote the advancement of women and
recognized the leading role that women have played in
the promotion of peace.

We voted in favour of resolution 2242 (2015),
which was prepared by Spain and the United Kingdom
and was designed to take stock of the 15 years of
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and to set
out the main guidelines for further efforts by Member
States and the United Nations system as a whole in the
important task of ensuring the participation of women
in conflict prevention and resolution. There is no doubt
that, given the particular importance of the resolution
and its comprehensive character, which encompasses
various areas of activity of the United Nations and the
international community as a whole, the preparation of
this document was a very difficult and ambitious task.

Unfortunately, the late issuance of the global review
of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
the lack of time to carefully study and consider all the
aspects of the recommendations made had an impact on
negotiations on the draft. As a result, we believe that,
in a number of cases, it was impossible to come up with
tried-and-tested language that fully corresponds to the
various mandates and remits of the various entities,
including those of the Security Council involved in
counterterrorism activities.

In the course of negotiations, our position was
that it was important to avoid any distortions and to
maintain the existing divisions of labour, as doing
otherwise could have an adverse effect on the work of
all those bodies.

We do not believe that it is justified, in the format
of the discussion of the resolution adopted today, to
prejudge the outcome of other review processes under
way in the Security Council on issues of peacebuilding
and peacekeeping operations. We do not agree with the
view that there is a need to set up an informal expert
group on issues relating to women and peace and
security. We believe that the creation of new bodies
is no guarantee of the effectiveness of the work of the
Council. Overall we feel that it is a dubious approach
that is aimed at establishing more and more auxiliary
bodies covering various items on the agenda. It is also
inappropriate to refer this issue to such a structure
within the Security Council, owing to its informal
character.

Given the increase in the number of armed
conflicts, we believe that it is important for the Security
Council to focus specifically on issues relating to the
maintenance of international peace and security. We
believe also that specific violations of human rights,
including those of women, should be considered in
specialized international bodies.

Despite the aforementioned shortcomings, we
hope that the adoption of resolution 2242 (2015) will
contribute to the effective implementation of the
multifaceted tasks facing the international community
in the framework of the women and peace and security
agenda. Given the importance and relevance of this
issue, we deemed it necessary to vote in favour of the
draft.

The report of the Secretary-General outlining the
results of the global review of the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) clearly indicates that over the
past 15 years, progress has been achieved in promoting
the participation of women in the prevention and
resolution of armed conflicts and in post-conflict
reconstruction. We would like to individually thank all
of those who participated in the preparation of these
documents.

We find it encouraging that in 2014, women were
part of every mediation effort by the United Nations,
as well as the majority of national delegations, in
nine of the 12 peace processes involving the United
Nations. The number of peace agreements containing
specialized provisions pertaining to women has
increased significantly. The number of women in
parliaments and Governments in countries emerging
from armed conflict has also increased, and work in
this area should continue.

In this context, we support a number of the
conclusions reached by the Secretary-General,
for example, the fact that there is still insufficient
participation of women in conflict-resolution and post-
conflict-reconstruction processes, despite the existence
of an official normative framework. We agree that there
is a need to prevent conflicts at an early stage. At the
same time, we believe that conflict prevention must be
based on international law, including the Charter of the
United Nations.

The recommendation ofthe global review on taking
a localized approach to the issue of women and peace
and security is very useful. This takes into account the
specific features of each individual conflict. We agree
that cookie-cutter, one-size-fits-all approaches based
on so-called best practices that are applicable to all
countries and situations are not effective.

We continue to call on the Security Council, in
considering the issue of women and peace and security,
to work on the basis of the existing divisions of labour
within the United Nations system, without duplicating
the role of such bodies as the General Assembly, the
Human Rights Council and the Commission on the
Status of Women, all of which have their respective
mandates. Consideration of issues related to the topic
of women and peace and security cannot substitute
for the whole broad range of commitments related to
gender equality and the empowerment of women that
have been undertaken by each State.

Our position continues to be that national plans of
action on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
cannot be used as an instrument to assess national
policies aimed at enhancing the status of women. Such
plans should be drawn up on a voluntary basis by those
States that are in the grip of armed conflict or at the
post-conflict reconstruction phase. As noted by the
Secretary-General, the drawing up of such plans is not
an end in itself; the outcome is what is important.

The Russian Federation, for example, does not
have such a plan. However, we have put in place all of
the conditions necessary to fully realize the potential
of women. This has made it possible to attract many
bright, highly qualified women to politics. Russian
women are also active participants in the social and
political spheres. For example, they make up more than
70 per cent of civil servants. Women currently occupy
the positions of Chairperson of the Federation Council,
Deputy Speaker of the State Duma, Deputy Prime
Minister of the Government of the Russian Federation
and Minister for Health Care, and also serve as high-
ranking officials of local executive bodies in a number
of regions.

Women are actively involved in the work of civil
society in Russia. To date, one third of all non-profit
organizations, and we have tens of thousands of them,
are women's organizations, which do a great deal of
social and charity work aimed at supporting women,
children and families; prevent domestic violence,
human trafficking and sexual violence; and other
activities important to the community.

Today women face new and increasingly serious
threats. In areas controlled by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, Jabhat Al-Nusra, Boko Haram and
other terrorist organizations, women are increasingly
becoming the victims of targeted violence, forced
marriage, sexual slavery and human trafficking.
Violence against women is used as a means of
intimidating the local population and disrupting
established social connections.

There is no doubt that the international community
must put an end to this appalling situation. The combat
against terrorism and the coordination of efforts in
this area should remain a priority in the work of the
Security Council and other specialized agencies of
the United Nations system. Consideration of cross-
cutting issues, including gender equality and the
advancement of women, should be carried out based
on the appropriate mandates, so as not to decrease but
enhance the effectiveness of the work of those bodies.
Only through joint efforts and appropriate coordination
of the efforts of all stakeholders, first and foremost
all Member States, based on strict compliance with
international law, can we achieve the desired results.

