Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): Viet Nam would like to thank
the German presidency for convening this open debate.
We would also like to express our appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his valuable report (S/2019/280)
and to the other briefers for their in-depth remarks.

Although we have come a long way in combating
sexual violence in conflict, the use of sexual violence
as a tactic of war and terrorism continues on a large
scale. Victims suffer severe pain and social exclusion
deepens their scars. Children born of wartime rape
never understand why they are discriminated against
even before they have come into the world. At the same
time, most perpetrators have not been held accountable
for the crimes they have committed. The vicious cycle
of violence, exclusion and revictimization is therefore
unbreakable, undermining our peacekeeping and
peacebuilding efforts.

While conflict prevention is an ideal and long-
term way to address the root causes of such suffering,
immediate actions are urgently needed. In that regard, we
strongly support the recommendation of the Secretary-
General that all parties to conflict make commitments
to prevent and address conflict-related sexual violence
and we welcome the progress highlighted in the report.

To develop a more holistic approach, we would like
to emphasize the following points. First, there can be no
place for stigmatization in any society. More awareness
campaigns are needed to awaken the conscience of all
members of society so that they embrace victims with
the love and kindness that they desperately need. We
must eradicate stigmatization in order to save the lives
of thousands of survivors, open the door to the future
that survivors deserve and build a bridge of connection
between survivors and societies.

Secondly, life-saving services for victims,
including medical care, psychological support and legal
aid, should be made more available and accessible.
To that end, the primary role of States should be
strengthened and complemented by assistance from
relevant United Nations entities, specialized agencies
and peacekeeping missions. This may include technical
assistance, capacity-building, sharing of expertise in
law enforcement, gender-mainstreaming, women's
empowerment and development.

Last but not least, the women and peace and
security agenda - and the issue of sexual violence,
in particular - should be looked at from both the
protection and the participation angles. We fully
support initiatives to further promote the participation
and leadership of women in peace processes, including
in peacekeeping missions. We also champion the greater
participation of women in developing and advancing a
culture of peace, as women are the ones who instil the
values of love, harmony, compassion and resilience in
societies and across generations.

In conclusion, the fight against conflict-related
sexual violence is no doubt a long one but, regardless of
how challenging it is, we need to sustain our momentum
and devote our energies to ending this brutality. For our
part, Viet Nam reaffirms its commitment to working
with the international community in this endeavour.

