Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): We extend our appreciation
to the German presidency for organizing this important
debate and prioritizing the role of women in conflict
situations, including their protection and empowerment.
We are also grateful to the Secretary-General for his
Action for Peacekeeping initiative, with women in
peacekeeping as one of its pillars, and also the gender-
equality implementation schemes he has introduced in
the structures of the Organization.

Ethiopia co-hosted, together with Canada, the
2019 Peacekeeping Ministerial preparatory meeting
on women and peace and security in Addis Ababa
on 28 and 29 January. We trust that the meeting
contributed to drawing the attention of defence
ministers from around the world and other heads of
delegation who underlined the need to execute concrete
measures in the advancement of the women and peace
and security agenda.

We remain committed to the women and peace and
security agenda, which is one of the eight priorities
identified under the Secretary-General's Action for
Peacekeeping initiative. As the co-Chair ofthe Group of
Friends on Action for Peacekeeping and a major troop-
contributing country to United Nations peacekeeping
operations, Ethiopia is supporting efforts towards the
implementation of that initiative.

We firmly believe that the full and effective
participation of women is essential to peacekeeping
performance. That has been proved in the performance
of the more than 800 Ethiopian women peacekeepers
currently deployed in various United Nations missions,
as well as the African Union Mission in Somalia.
Though Ethiopia is a leading contributor of female
peacekeepers, we recognize that a lot remains to be
done. In that context, I wish to reaffirm our commitment
to continuing to enhance women's participation in the
military, police and civilian components, including in
United Nations peacekeeping operations.

We absolutely agree with the vision that
underscores the fact that long-term peace and stability
will be achieved where the international community is
able to make sure that women enjoy equal opportunities
in their participation, including in decision-making
processes. That is the reason why Ethiopia is working
for gender parity in our uniformed personnel, which
aligns with the United Nations gender parity strategy in
peace operations, which sets a target of 15 per cent for
women among contingent troops, as well as a goal of
20 per cent for women in formed police units by 2028.

The progress made in mainstreaming a gender
perspective in the work of the United Nations since
the adoption of landmark resolution 1325 (2000) and
succeeding United Nations resolutions on the effective
participation of women at all levels across conflict
prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding processes
mustbe reinvigorated by all States Members of the United
Nations. Structural barriers that marginalize women
and hinder their effective participation, including legal
and cultural obstacles, must be resolved expeditiously.

It is evident that the growing risk of violence
and threats to the physical safety of women and their
exposure to sexual abuse in conflict situations should
be addressed with utmost urgency and priority. We
strongly believe that mainstreaming the women
and peace and security agenda requires effective
coordination and consistent engagement among relevant
stakeholders in regional and subregional organizations,
as well as States, development agencies, women's
interest groups and peace and security partners within
the framework of the women and peace and security
agenda. Accordingly, cooperation between the African
Union and the United Nations is instrumental in
integrating a regional approach into the women and
peace and security commitments.

Let me conclude by highlighting the importance of
appreciating and supporting initiatives of the African
Union Peace and Security Council geared towards the
implementation of the Continental Results Framework
for Monitoring and Reporting on the Implementation of
the Women, Peace and Security Agenda in Africa.

