Mrs. Escobar (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): Spain
welcomes the initiative of the Japanese presidency to
hold this open debate on the role of women in
peacebuilding.

Spain aligns itself with the statement made by the
representative of Finland on behalf of the European
Union.

The question of the role of women in
peacebuilding is of great relevance, because in the
transitional processes that follow conflict, the
foundation of a democratic and equal society can be
created - provided that the needs and priorities of
women and men are considered throughout the process.
Such efforts must be based on respect for human rights
and must reflect an awareness of the differences and
inequalities between the sexes, which can be
exacerbated at the end of a conflict if women and girls
are prevented from fully participating in and benefiting
from reconstruction processes.

In that regard, a number of elements are required.
There must be equal participation by men and women
in efforts to maintain peace and security. A gender

perspective must be integrated into all aspects of
peacebuilding, thereby guaranteeing that all the needs
of women, girls, men and boys are placed on an equal
footing in a systematic manner. Women and girls must
be protected from sexual abuse and gender-based
violence, and impunity must be ended. This means
including women, who are usually relegated to a
secondary role, in decision-making processes leading
to the adoption of necessary institutional, judicial,
political, educational and economic changes.

Promoting equality at all levels is more difficult
when resources are lacking and when women's
initiatives are marginalized. Plans of action are useful
tools to that end and require efficient review
mechanisms and, of course, funding, ideally from
regular budgets. Women and children in the field can,
with international assistance, obtain employment and
realize not only their political rights but all of the
rights to which they are entitled. The issue of
reparations for victims has been the subject of in-depth
consideration by the panel of experts established at the
request of the Secretary-General, under the
chairmanship of Prince Zeid Al-Hussein of Jordan,
which has issued a very enlightening report. Spain is
gratified to see that a new panel of experts has been
formed with such a mandate.

The Security Council should consider the
possibility of creating a focal point responsible for
gender issues and other issues relating to the effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). The
importance of the resolution must transcend the
necessary and thought-provoking celebration of the
anniversary on 31 October of the unanimous adoption
of the resolution. Since 2000, only 39 of the Security
Council's 261 resolutions or texts have contained any
reference to gender issues. Only five of the 59
resolutions adopted in 2004 dealt with the issue of
violence against women, and only eight made reference
to resolution 1325 (2000).

Spain attaches great importance to the effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). In 2004, the
then Minister of Foreign Affairs of Sweden and the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Spain
jointly signed an article entitled "Women, peace and
security", which, inter alia, deplored the lack of
participation of women in peace processes.
In that same year, in the Security Council, Spain
highlighted the importance of the Council's giving
serious consideration to the establishment of a
permanent mechanism for the effective follow-up of
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in the
context of the various conflict situations that it deals
with on an ongoing basis.

In another development, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) prepared a
document containing the main guidelines of its gender
policy, which include the requirements set out in
resolution 1325 (2000). Spain, which will hold the
chairmanship of the OSCE in 2007, intends to
disseminate information about, and promote and
organize events based on, the resolution, giving it the
importance it deserves.

The most recent guiding plan for Spanish
cooperation, for the period 2003-2008, attaches priority
to items on conflict resolution as well as gender issues
in development policies. The implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) is a key objective for the
Spanish Government. Spain, whose official
development assistance in the area of gender-related
issues has increased by 70 per cent in the past two
years, is participating in projects aimed at safeguarding
the human rights of women and children, particularly
as regards the economic and political empowerment of
women in conflict and post-conflict situations and in
peacebuilding processes - in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Albania, Lebanon, Iraq, as well as in other areas of
high priority for Spanish cooperation such as sub-
Saharan Africa, for instance, in Mozambique.

Spain intends to support UNIFEM, with which it
is already cooperating, in the context of ongoing
projects in Liberia, whose Minister for Gender and
Development participated in a panel this past Monday.

The International Research and Training Institute
for the Advancement of Women (INSTRAW), with
Spanish cooperation funding, has in 2006 developed
plans for the empowerment of women at the local and
national levels in various reconstruction processes,
particularly in Latin America.

In conclusion, the Spanish Government has
established a group of experts, which includes the
ministers concerned and independent experts from the
academic world and civil society, whose goal is to draft
a national action plan for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). We expect the plan to be
completed sometime next year.
