Mr. Laurin (Canada) (spoke in French): Thank
you, Mr. President, for having convened this important
open debate. It is now two years since the passing of
resolution 1325 (2000). This resolution was a
watershed in acknowledging the different impacts of
war on women and girls and the critical and unique
contributions women make to peace-building and
reconstruction. We recognize, though, that while the
United Nations system has made progress, we are
closer to the beginning of our work than to the end.

This week's release of the much anticipated
report of the Secretary-General on women, peace and
security reminds us that full implementation of this
important resolution is crucial. Canada supports the
Secretary-General's call for stronger integration of
gender considerations throughout the work of the
Security Council and the United Nations system. As
France said, we believe that the members of the
Council should request and make use of information on
the situation of women and girls in its consideration of
particular conflict situations. The Council should
ensure that gender aspects are seriously considered in
its analysis and are reflected in its decisions. This
approach must become just as routine as financial
probity.

The limit to the Secretary-General's reports
should not prevent the integration of gender
perspectives.

(spoke in English)

The Council should be carefully looking at
implementation mechanisms. In this regard, we
strongly support Colombia's suggestion that a plan of
action be prepared. We also welcome the United
Kingdom's proposal to identify each year a member of
the Security Council to oversee the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and work with the appropriate
parts of the Secretariat to achieve that. We join the
representative of the United States in looking forward
to having dialogue with the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and with the Department of
Political Affairs on how they mainstream a gender
perspective in their activities.
Canada welcomes the Secretary-General's report,
and we share his concerns, as women and girls
continue to be severely targeted in and negatively
impacted by armed conflict. We are pleased to see the
comprehensive and wide-ranging recommendations for
action in the study and the report. The
recommendations, we hope, will cause Member States
to move beyond words to action.

Canada, as we stated at the open meeting on 25
July 2002, continues to actively implement the
commitments we made at the time of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), and we call upon all Member
States to do likewise. We refer to the March 2002 aide-
memoire adopted by the Council and stress that the
issue of women, peace and security needs to be
considered as part of the agenda on the protection of
civilians.

We also call for explicit reference to gender
considerations in the mandates of all the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General. We
encourage the Council to take advantage of the
appearances of Special Representatives in this forum to
hold them accountable on these aspects of their
missions.

Integration of gender perspectives in peace
support operations is vital. In this regard, we look
forward to the upcoming report of the Secretary-
General requested by the Fifth Committee of the
General Assembly on the gender mainstreaming
strategy for all of the Organization's peacekeeping
activities and the associated resources required to
achieve this. We will again urge our Fifth Committee
colleagues to authorize the resources needed to
strengthen the capacity of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations specifically to address gender
issues.

Gender advisers in the field deserve proper
support from Headquarters, as recommended by the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations. This
support is essential to their success.

Canada also wishes to underscore the need for
continued efforts in the post-conflict reconstruction
phase. The Security Council, the United Nations and
Member States have every interest in ensuring that the
rights of women and girls are not set aside in
reconstruction situations, such as Afghanistan.

The signing of a formal peace agreement does not
necessarily eradicate violence in communities and
families. Domestic violence must be addressed in the
building of sustainable peace for all - women, men,
girls and boys. We are encouraged to see the
recognition of the link between women's security and
domestic violence in conflict and post-conflict
situations.

Canada shares the view expressed by the
representative of Liechtenstein on the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court. My Government
welcomes the emphasis the Secretary-General placed
on the importance of the continued expansion of the
international legal framework to address particular
crimes experienced by women in armed conflict. Given
the extremely serious gender-based crimes that
occurred during the decade long civil war in Sierra
Leone, we commend the prosecutor of the Sierra Leone
special court for appointing two gender advisers. His
action is important progress.

My delegation would like to join the voice of
delegations calling for a better gender balance
throughout the United Nations system. We refer
specifically to the message expressed last week by the
Third Committee of the General Assembly in adopting
the draft resolution sponsored by Canada, Australia and
New Zealand on the improvement of the status of
women in the United Nations system. By this text,
more than one hundred and twenty-five co-sponsors
expressed concern that only one out of fifty-one special
representatives or envoys of the Secretary-General is a
woman, and that the percentage of women assigned to
peace operations has decreased. The draft also urged
the Secretary-General to redouble his efforts to realize
significant progress towards the goal of 50 per cent in
the near future.

We look forward to the release of the United
Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM)
report and to further collaboration with other Member
States, including the Friends of Women, Peace and
Security and our human security network partners, on
the follow-up work to be done.

Canada strongly and actively supports full
implementation of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000). We thank you again, Sir, for providing a forum
for this important debate.

