Mr. Prica (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, let me commend you, Mr. President, for
organizing this open debate on such an important issue
as women and peace and security.

My delegation fully aligns itself with the
statement already delivered by the Permanent
Representative of Slovenia on behalf of European
Union. At the same time, I would like to add some
points reflecting our own national activities.

Bosnia and Herzegovina recognizes the
importance of resolution 1325 (2000) and will continue
to work towards its full implementation. We welcome
the advances that have been made in this area by the
United Nations system and Member States since the
historic adoption of the resolution, eight years ago.
Generally speaking, we can clearly see from the
Secretary-General's reports that the United Nations has
supported the systematization and institutionalization
of efforts to strengthen action in solving the gender
problem; but the work is still far from done. We have
to ensure that the provisions of resolution 1325 (2000)
are implemented completely and that women can fully
participate at all levels of decision-making. We must
also strengthen the status of women in all fields.

We are very concerned at the fact that systematic
sexual violence against women and girls in armed
conflicts has been, and still is, used as a war strategy
and that it remains a direct threat to international peace
and security. Speaking from our own experience from
the 1990s, Bosnia and Herzegovina strongly condemns
all acts of violence against women and girls in armed
conflicts and post-conflict situations. From the very
beginning, therefore, Bosnia and Herzegovina
sponsored and supported General Assembly resolution
62/ 134, entitled "Eliminating rape and other forms of
sexual violence in all their manifestations, including in
conflict and related situations", which was adopted on
18 December 2007.

Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes the Secretary-
General's initiative to launch a multi-year global
campaign with the goal of bringing together the United
Nations, Governments and civil society to end violence
against women.

Two years ago, the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina adopted a five-year gender action plan
incorporating the main provisions of resolution 1325
(2000). Much has been achieved in the area of adopting
appropriate legislation on the protection of civilian
victims of war. The law now gives women victims the
status of civilian victims of war and helps them on
their path towards full reintegration into the
community, giving them a chance for professional
improvement and providing them with monthly
allowances and medical and psycho-social assistance.
Under the plan, expert teams have been established to
engage in analysis, provide legal assistance to victims
and conduct workshops on the basis of, among other
things, sharing lessons learned.

In addition to the Government's activities, the
non-governmental sector is successfully involved in
improving the situation regarding the issue. A very
good example is that of a project carried out by the
non-governmental sector that has established a
database of women victims in my country. In spite of
society's traditional attitude towards women victims,
3,000 women have already been inscribed on this
database, which remains open. Privacy is guaranteed,
and all women were granted long-term financial aid.

Bosnia and Herzegovina strongly believes that
women should be more involved in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts, peace negotiations,
peacebuilding in post-conflict situations and the
promotion of sustainable peace. However, women still
need considerable support and capacity-building to be
effective in today's society, which traditionally has
been dominated by men.

In conclusion, I would like to assure the Council
of Bosnia and Herzegovina's full commitment to close
cooperation with the States Members of the United
Nations in the comprehensive implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).

