Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Mr. President, I
wish to start by congratulating you on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for the month of June
and for having convened this open debate on a critical
issue: conflict-related sexual violence. I wish also to
reiterate once again Angola's full support for your
presidency this month in order to ensure that it is a
successful month in the work of the Council. I should
like also to commend Egypt for the remarkable work
done during the month that just ended.

Let me thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his opening remarks and also thank the briefers,
Ms. Bangura, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and
Ms. Giammarinaro, for the very insightful briefings
presented to the Council. This is a way of reaffirming
the standing commitment to the defence and protection
of the Victims of sexual violence and trafficking
in persons.

It is totally unacceptable that, since the holding
a year ago of our last open debate on conflict-related
sexual violence and the consensual adoption by the
General Assembly of resolution 69/293 establishing
19 June as the International Day for the Elimination of
Sexual Violence in Conflict, sexual violence in conflict
continues to occur extensively and the perpetrators
are rewarded with impunity. As stated in most recent
report of Secretary-General on conflict-related
sexual violence (S/2016/361), during 2015 widespread
violations against women and girls were documented
and remain very much without any real action taken by
the mechanisms that we have in the Council.

Crimes against sexual integrity, as well as
systematic sexual violence and abuses in areas in Syria
and Iraq controlled by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL), form part of a system of punishment and
reward in the terrorists' attempts to consolidate their
power in the regions under their control. Moreover,
sexual violence has become a driving factor in forcing
the displacement of civilians, while sexual enslavement
has become a central feature in the recruitment of
males, local youths and foreign fighters to join the
terrorist ranks. Resolution 2242 (2015), on women and
peace and security, pointed out how sexual violence is a
part ofthe strategies and ideologies of certain extremist
groups aimed at increasing their power, revenue and
recruitment and an instrument aimed at destroying the
social fabric of the target communities.

Resolution 1820 (2008), for its part, recognizes
how sexual violence became a tactic of war and a threat
to global peace and security, underscoring the fact that
rape and other forms of sexual violence can constitute
war crimes and crimes against humanity.

The United Nations Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism, in its provisions ensuring the
social protection, participation and empowerment of
women in strategies to counter terrorism and violent
extremism, recognizes women as a crucial driving force
in achieving a sustainable peace and the interlinkages
between counter-terrorism strategies and efforts to
protect and empower women and girls and to combat
conflict-related sexual violence.

We must regretfully note that in spite of such strong
pronouncements and the international community's
stand on this issue, translated into a considerable number
of legally binding decisions such as Security Council
resolutions, strategies and plans of action to counter
terrorism and violent extremism, we are witnessing
the escalation of conflict-related sexual violence,
committed mainly but not exclusively by extremists
and terrorist groups such as ISIL, Al-Shabaab, Boko
Haram, the Taliban and Al-Qaida.

The report of the Secretary-General highlights
how sexual violence has been a driver of forced
displacement - from the Middle East, the sub-Saharan
region and the Horn of Africa - with 950,000 new
refugees and migrants fleeing to Europe in 2015 and with
such massive displacement and cross-border activities
leading to an increase in trafficking in persons for
sexual slavery. The most distressing aspect across the
entire spectrum of the situation of sexual exploitation
and slavery is the physical and psychological trauma
inflicted upon the victims, with fear and cultural stigma
preventing the reporting of abuses.

National institutions in countries where sexual
violence takes place, namely, the police and the
judiciary, must enhance capacities in order to instil
confidence in victims of sexual violence. I hope that,
with the meeting taking place at the moment involving
our police chiefs, that situation will be carefully taken
into account. Strengthening national institutions is
essential to ensure accountability and trials, which
are critical steps in preventing and deterring potential
perpetrators, building credible judicial and law-
enforcement institutions and establishing the rule of
law. In that regard, Angola values greatly the work
of the United Nations Team of Experts on the Rule
of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict in providing
assistance to Governments, including in the areas of
criminal investigation and prosecution, militaryjustice,
legislative reform, protecting victims and witnesses
and providing reparations for survivors.

Another area of major concern is the continuing
allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse by United
Nations peacekeepers and non-United Nations forces
acting under Security Council mandates. Of particular
concern are the allegations of sexual abuse of minors
in the Central African Republic and Somalia. It is
indeed regrettable and paradoxical that United Nations
peacekeeping mission personnel, entrusted with the
main task of protecting civilians, take advantage of
women, girls and boys in extremely fragile situations
for such despicable human rights violations. In that
connection, Angola fully supports the Secretary-
General's zero-tolerance policy for sexual exploitation
and abuse, and welcomes the continuous commitment
and the strengthening of measures aimed at their
protection based on the principles of transparency,
accountability and impartiality. We also join the
proposal presented this morning by Spain to increase
the presence of women's protection advisers in the
field to monitor, analyse and report on conflict-related
sexual violence and to facilitate dialogue with parties
to conflict on protection commitments, as an effort to
enhance prevention, early warning and timely responses
to conflict-related sexual violence.

In conclusion, there is still a great disparity
between international human rights standards and
national legislation in conflict-affected countries,
which often minimizes these crimes. In that regard,
Angola encourages the international community to
assist Governments in fighting impunity by developing
and implementing national action plans and strategies
in line with international standards on combating
sexual violence and trafficking in persons.

