Ms. Burgstaller (Sweden): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Nordic countries: Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Norway and, my own country,
Sweden.

First, let me thank the Secretary-General and the
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Bangura, and Ms. Misaka of the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security for their
informative statements, and express the continued and
strong support of the Nordic countries for their work
against sexual violence in conflict.

The appalling situation faced by survivors of
sexual Violence calls for our urgent attention. Sexual
violence in conflict must stop. A strong normative
framework is in place, the Security Council resolutions
on women, peace and security being the most prominent
constituent, and we call on the full implementation of
those resolutions. As the Secretary-General points out
in his report (S/2014/181), we have reached a stage where
implementation is what counts. The responsibility
lies with all of us and Member States must commit
themselves to implementation. The burning question
is: how do we do it?

It is important to address both the causes and
consequences of sexual violence. We need to work on
deterring new crimes and we need to hold perpetrators
accountable. While the primary responsibility for
that lies with the States, the role of the International
Criminal Court is also of crucial importance. The
Nordic countries commend the work done by the United
Nations Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict in strengthening the capacities
of States to address such violence. The Justice Rapid
Response/UN-Women roster of sexual and gender-
based violence justice experts has proven to be another
important and effective tool to address crimes related
to sexual and gender-based violence in conflict.
Promoting gender equality and women's
participation is critical if we are to ever tackle the
causes of sexual Violence. We must always remember
that women are not only victims; they are also a
great resource for their communities and countries.
A fundamental part of combatting sexual violence
is that women will be actively involved in political
decision-making and in the economic life in their
societies, and that their voices are heard and respected.
Women's input is key to finding the right solutions and
putting an end to these crimes. The role and influence
of civil society in preventing and addressing sexual
violence are essential and must be supported.

Therefore, investments in gender equality and
women's full enjoyment of human rights 4 not least
in fragile States - must be seen as core to preventing
sexual violence in conflict. We know that women's
participation is essential for building sustainable peace.
We need to ensure that women's rights must never be a
marginalized side activity that takes place only after
all the hard security issues have been dealt with. It is
crucial to ensure that the women, peace and security
agenda is duly reflected in all engagements relating
to international peace and security. We expect the
Security Council to ensure that gender perspectives are
consistently mainstreamed in country resolutions and in
authorizations and renewals of mandates, as laid out in
resolutions 1960 (2010) and 2106 (2013). We would like
to highlight in particular the requirement that missions
establish monitoring and reporting arrangements on
sexual violence.

The Nordic countries would also like to emphasize
the importance of women's participation in the design
of security sector reform (SSR) and in disarmament,
demobilisation and reintegration (DDR) processes.
We welcome the Secretary-General's focus on that in
his report. Flawed SSR and DDR processes can lead
to impunity and insecurity with widespread sexual
violence, even after the end of a conflict.

The number of internally displaced persons and
refugees continues to rise to unprecedented levels.
In his report, the Secretary-General points to sexual
violence as a driver of displacement and highlights the
increased risks faced by displaced women and girls,
who make up the majority of displaced persons. To
further assist in that regard, the United Nations should
advance the deployment of women protection advisers
and gender advisers in both peacekeeping and political
missions, as well as in humanitarian operations. Across
sectors and actors, the United Nations needs to remain
vigilant about the need to address sexual violence in
conflict by ensuring the highest standards and training
of its personnel.

Another issue that is reflected in the Secretary-
General's report and which deserves more attention is
sexual violence perpetrated against men and boys. The
lack of national legislation, specialized services and
the stigma associated with those violations are among
the factors that prevent recognition of that violence as
a crime.

Effective measures to end impunity should be
combined with multisectoral services for survivors of
sexual violence, including their access to legal services
and health services. The Nordic countries support the
Secretary-General's call for survivors' access to the full
range of sexual and reproductive health services and
welcome his acknowledgement of the United Nations
particular responsibility in that regard.

I thank you, Madam President, for this opportunity
to share some of our views on preventing sexual
violence in conflict.

