Ms. Balipou (spoke in French): I would like to
start by expressing my gratitude for the opportunity to
address the Security Council. I speak today on behalf
of the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and
Security. I am also here in my capacity as a magistrate
in the Central African Republic, a board member of
Femmes Africa Solidarite' and a founding member of
the Women Lawyers Association of the Central African
Republic. The Working Group welcomes the Secretary-
General's latest report (S/2013/525) on women and peace
and security, which provides clear analysis and data on
progress in implementing resolution 1325 (2000), while
also identifying remaining gaps and challenges. We
would also like to welcome Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-
Ngcuka, the new Executive Director of UN Women.

I wish to convey to the Council greetings from
the Central African Republic, which over the past two
decades has experienced a crisis that has undermined
both its unity and national cohesion. Since 24 March,
the situation on the ground has spiralled out of control
and into a full-blown conflict, which has impacted the
entire civilian population and especially women and
girls, who have been subjected to rape and other forms
of sexual violence on a large-scale. The recruitment of
child soldiers has also taken on major dimensions. We
live in fear. We are being killed indiscriminately in large
numbers; we have been impacted by rampant looting;
we lack food and supplies; our children have not been
able to go to school since March; and our country is
being destroyed. The Central African Republic needs
urgent security and humanitarian intervention. Our
human rights are being violated right before the eyes of
the international community.

The Security Council has today taken significant
steps to fully implement resolution 1325 (2000), on
women and peace and security. The new resolution 2122
(2013) lays out key commitments regarding women's
participation. It is quite clear to our colleagues from
civil society who work on a daily basis to implement
the framework resolutions on women and peace
and security that the main challenges in terms of
participation continue to be unmet, especially when
it comes to the participation and inclusion of women
in all conflict prevention, resolution and post-conflict
reconstruction.

It is high time to dismantle the barriers to the full
participation of women at all levels of decision-making.
It is also high time, 13 years after the unanimous
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), for consistent
resourcing and sustained political will to support the
legitimate role of women in preventing and ending
conflicts and in rebuilding countries following conflicts
such as that currently plaguing my own country, the
Central African Republic.

We women of the Central African Republic demand
full involvement in peace negotiation processes. It is
high time to ensure respect for women's fundamental
rights and to guarantee effective responses to women's
protection concerns. Such calls are echoed by women
in Syria, Afghanistan, Myanmar, Colombia, Libya,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and every
community affected by armed conflict.

In support of the full implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) and of ensuring that its implementation
reflects the full scope of framework resolutions on
women, peace and security, today I will address
the following key points regarding justice, conflict
prevention, demilitarization and disarmament, security
and comprehensive multisectoral responses.

First, on the issue ofjustice, the agenda for today's
debate, "Women, rule of law and transitional justice in
conflict-affected situations," is of great importance to
my country. This vision of justice is rooted in peace
efforts and requires that peace agreements not include
amnesties for crimes against women. Such justice is
achieved by ensuring gender parity in transitional
justice systems, including reconciliation, and women's
political participation as political candidates and voters.
These efforts should guarantee reparations for crimes
under international law, including those that seek to
eliminate rather than perpetuate gender inequalities.

That in turn depends on non-discrimination, equal
citizenship rights for women, access to safe public
transportation, the effective delivery of basic services
such as health care, water and electricity, and witness
and Victim protection programmes. Due to the conflict,
our justice system in the Central African Republic has
been almost completely destroyed, making it impossible
for someone like me, a magistrate, to serve the people. It
is currently impossible for women to accessjustice. The
judicial infrastructure in the Central African Republic
needs to be rebuilt, the perpetrators of violations must
be held accountable before the law, and resources must
be allocated to enable the documentation of crimes.

Secondly, conflict prevention lies at the core
of the women, peace and security agenda and of the
maintenance of international peace and security. It
requires us to undertake an in-depth analysis of the
causes of conflict, which includes the proliferation
of small arms and light weapons, acute societal
inequalities, and the inability of States to protect their
population. The prevention of armed conflicts requires
strengthened investment in ensuring women's rights,
equal ducation, and a women-led civil society. These
issues are critical to preventing wars and conflicts. In
the Central African Republic, it is vital that the root
causes of conflict be addressed and that rising religious
tensions be assuaged through open dialogue. We call
for the full participation of women's civil society
organizations in the planning for the legislative and
presidential elections to be held in 2015.

My third point concerns demilitarization,
disarmament and security sector reform.
Demilitarization must be an essential element in
conflict prevention. Traditional security areas, such
as disarmament, demobilization and security sector
reform, must be made accessible to women. We ask
that this be taken into consideration during the planned
deployment of African Union peacekeeping troops to
the Central African Republic and of any other additional
forces.

Fourthly, with regard to multisectoral responses,
the entire population of the Central African Republic
is critically in need of humanitarian assistance, the
delivery of which requires a secure environment. In
communities ravaged by armed conflict, humanitarian
responses must be mobilized in line with international
humanitarian law and established good practices, taking
special account of gender in the design, delivery and
evaluation of programmes. This is key to ensuring the
safety of girls and women through the implementation
of effective protection and prevention measures so as
to enable them to access necessary services and to
advance women's leadership at all levels, including in
situations of forced displacement. Securing additional
comprehensive multisectoral responses through
sufficient funding and by ensuring the availability of
medical, legal, psychosocial and livelihood services is
crucial for women's empowerment in conflict and post-
conflict situations.

The implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
is too urgent to continue to wait. Women's civil
society groups must be engaged as key partners and
be deeply involved in peace, mediation, negotiation
and governmental processes. Women's rights must
be prioritized by implementing national and regional
action plans pursuant to resolution 1325 (2000), as well
as at the regional level by holding regular meetings with
women's groups and women leaders, and by ensuring
that women's priorities are substantively incorporated
in all key negotiations. Political and financial
resources must be allocated to women's civil society
organizations, and the principles of resolution 1325
(2000) must be embedded in the post-2015 development
goals and indicators.

I appeal to the Council to ensure that the conflict
in the Central African Republic is not forgotten, and to
take swift action in that regard. Each day of inaction
is a day of too many lives lost needlessly. We call on
members of the Security Council to be role models by
consistently and fully implementing resolution 1325
(2000).

