Mr. Tenya Hasegawa (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset I would like to thank the Uruguayan
presidency of the Security Council for convening this
open debate on sexual violence in conflict as a tactic
of war and terrorism, thereby highlighting one of the
greatest atrocities committed against human beings in
the context of conflict.

Sexual violence used as a tactic of war as part of a
widespread or systematic attack on civilian populations
is capable of exacerbating and significantly prolonging
armed conflict. We can see that terrorist groups commit
acts of sexual and gender-based violence as part of their
strategic objectives, thereby dealing a harsh blow to
entire communities and directly affecting the human
rights of women and girls, as well as their health,
education and participation in public life. That is why
Peru believes that conflict-resolution strategies and the
fight against terrorism must necessarily include efforts
to protect and empower women and girls and to combat
conflict-related sexual violence.

Despite the efforts of the international community,
many documented cases of sexual violence in conflict
still exist. In that context, the Organization's work on the
ground has been critical in collecting information and
facilitating dialogue to obtain protection commitments
from parties in conflict.

We cannot ignore cultural stigma and victims' fear
of suffering reprisals or intimidation by their abusers,
including against their families or witnesses, which
cause most of them not to report the violence. That
goes hand in hand with the lack of trust and credibility
in national institutions, particularly when sexual
violence is perpetrated by the very forces responsible
for providing necessary protection.

With regard to the relevant measures undertaken by
Peru on the issue, the Ministry ofWomen and Vulnerable
Populations established a registry of displaced persons,
which led to the adoption of measures to protect the
rights of women and girls in conflict and post-conflict
situations. Similarly, a law adopted in 2005 established
a comprehensive reparations programme for victims
of the violence that occurred between 1980 and 2000,
including those who suffered human rights violations
such as rape. Furthermore, among measures to prevent
violence against women, Peru adopted a law on equal
opportunity between men and women, the national
programme on gender equality and the national
programme against violence against women, which
includes the issue of sexual violence in armed conflict.

Peru welcomes the trend of systematically
incorporating the gender perspective in the mandates
of peacekeeping operations and the inclusion of women
as participants in conflict prevention and resolution.
That is why Peru has been increasing female personnel
in each of the six peacekeeping missions in which it
participates, currently representing about 15 per cent of
the personnel on the ground.

Peru considers the promotion of gender equality
and the empowerment of women to be fundamental in
addressing the root causes of conflict-related sexual
violence by transforming harmful sociocultural norms
and combating violent extremism. In that sense, our
country has been working towards achieving the
Sustainable Development Goal 5, aimed at achieving
gender equality and the empowerment of all women
and girls.

Similarly, Peru supports the inclusion of a gender
perspective in United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Based on that awareness, the uniformed personnel
provided by Peru to peacekeeping operations receive
specialized predeployment training on the protection,
special needs and human rights of women and children
in conflict situations.

In conclusion, I would like to say that Peru is
committed to working with other States in tackling the
related outstanding issues in order to achieve a peaceful
environment in which all women, without exception,
can enjoy their lives to the fullest, free of mistreatment.
That is why it is essential to deal comprehensively with
sexual violence related to conflict.

