Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): My delegation is
grateful to Uganda for having organized this debate, as
it gives us an opportunity to continue our discussions
on the two latest reports on peacebuilding. We are also
grateful to the Secretary-General for having presented
them today. Austria warmly welcomes both reports and
looks forward to the United Nations system's
continued coherent engagement in implementing the
agenda for action, as well as the new action plan laid
out in the report on the role of women in peacebuilding
(S/2010/466).

I should also like to welcome the Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), Ambassador Wittig,
and to thank him for his presentation today and his
leadership of the Commission.

Austria associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of the European Union
later in this meeting.

The Secretary-General's follow-up report on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2010/386) rightly points out that, despite important
progress made by the United Nations and its partners in
the area of peacebuilding, the main challenges remain.
We welcome the Secretary-General's efforts to enhance
effective leadership, both at Headquarters and in the
field, as well as those aimed at improved planning and
strategy development. Enhanced coordination, from
our point of view, must also take place outside of the
United Nations system in order to avoid duplication
and to ensure the efficiency of peacebuilding efforts.

We appreciate efforts to intensify cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations, such as
the European Union and the African Union, as well as
with the international financial institutions. It is
essential to make maximum use of partners with a
comparative advantage on the ground.

My country has repeatedly stressed the
importance of national ownership of peacebuilding
processes. In order to promote national leadership and
ensure the sustainability of progress, all peacebuilding
efforts need to draw upon existing national capacities
to the greatest extent possible. We therefore welcome
efforts to assess existing capacities as a basis for the
deployment of international civilian expertise. The
ongoing review of civilian capacity will contribute to
ensuring that civilian expertise in peacebuilding is
deployed in an efficient and timely manner, and that
specialized skills to address women's need are
included.

Decisive action aimed at establishing durable
peace and long-term sustainable development must be
undertaken from the earliest stage onwards and go
hand in hand with the possible deployment of
integrated peacekeeping missions. This is a point that
the Council has repeatedly discussed over the past
months and years.

Restoring the rule of law, ensuring respect for
human rights, and providing for the effective
disarmament, demobilization and the reintegration of
former combatants, security sector reform and the
return and reintegration of refugees and internally
displaced persons must be key priorities in the
immediate aftermath of a conflict. They must be
complemented by the reform and re-establishment of
effective and independent justice institutions and
reconciliation mechanisms.

A coordinated and coherent approach is needed in
order to ensure women's full participation in all
peacebuilding efforts. The relative absence of women
from peace negotiations and post-conflict planning
processes has recently been demonstrated by concrete
figures in a study by the United Nations Development
Fund for Women. Women rarely assume core
Government functions; they are not able to ensure that
their issues are addressed in peace accords and peace
processes; and they are not in a position to ensure the
prioritization of their needs in planning processes or
adequate financial allocations to address them. This
problem needs to be addressed by the Council and the
United Nations system in a more consistent manner.

Austria therefore fully supports the Secretary-
General's action plan for gender-responsive
peacebuilding with its seven commitments, and calls
upon the Secretariat and other relevant bodies and
agencies to translate these commitments into concrete
programmes, ensuring that the peacebuilding priorities
identified by the Secretary-General in his 2009 report
(S/2009/304) are met in a gender-responsive way to
ensure the full participation of women.
Austria highly welcomes the crucial role of the
PBC in addressing a country's post-conflict needs and
in promoting and ensuring women's participation in all
peacebuilding efforts as outlined in the report of the
Secretary-General.

We would like to underline the need for the
Council to involve the PBC and make use of its advice
from the very outset. This is clearly an area where
improvement - ifI may say so - is possible. I would
add that this also applies to the relationship between
the Council and the country-specific configurations of
the Peacebuilding Commission. We have also looked at
possibilities for intensifying this cooperation, and I
think the informal working group on working methods
has made a number of very important suggestions in
this field as well.

By promoting a coherent and integrated approach
that highlights the principles of national ownership and
regional cooperation, the PBC provides valuable
support for long-term democratic consolidation and
sustained economic development. The fact that Liberia
has recently been added to the agenda of the PBC
proves that the PBC's engagement continues to be
perceived as providing substantial advantages and
benefits to post-conflict countries.

We welcome the report of the three co-facilitators
on the review of the Commission (S/2010/393, annex),
its thorough analysis of strengths and weaknesses and
the broad range of recommendations made therein, and
it will be good to hear all three facilitators today in the
framework of our debate.

Austria looks forward to the Council's and the
General Assembly's consideration of the report and to
the adoption of a resolution in due course in order for
the Secretary-General and all other relevant actors to
set the implementation of the recommendations in
motion.

Furthermore, we are looking forward to regular
updates by the Secretary-General on efforts to ensure
women's full participation in peacebuilding. The
indicators to measure progress in the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) constitute a useful tool to
track progress in this regard.

Finally, Sir, I would like to thank you and your
delegation for preparing the draft presidential
statement that will be adopted today.

