Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like to
start by commending you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting, thereby illustrating your special
appreciation and sensitivity to a subject that is key to
the work of the Security Council. I would also like to
thank Mr. Guehenno for his briefing. I would
especially like to welcome to the Council Ms. Amy
Smythe, whom we met and saw at work in Bunia. Her
work is also beneficial to the Council. Finally, I would
like to say that we are very honoured by the presence
of Ms. Angela King, Assistant Secretary-General and
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Gender
Issues and Advancement of Women. Of course, I also
welcome the presence among us of a good number of
women leaders from various countries, who have
enriched our deliberations this morning.

It is my delegation's belief that the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) marked an important landmark
in addressing the issue of women and girls in conflict
and post-conflict situations, demonstrating a renewed
awareness of this issue by the international community.
The protection of women in situations of armed
conflict, the promotion of their role in conflict
resolution and prevention and the adoption of a gender
perspective for peacekeeping operations are all issues
at the centre of international concerns that hold
enormous potential for renewed commitment by the
international community. If fully implemented, the
resolution will make an effective contribution to
strengthening international peace and security.

The continuing violence against women is
particularly heightened in conflict situations. Women
and young girls are still the prime targets of violence in
armed conflict. They are the most exposed to the
scourge of HIV due to the sexual violence against
them. As new conflicts break out, the number of poor,
defenceless women tends to increase.

We commend the Secretary-General for the
leadership he has shown in ensuring that gender
representation in the Secretariat and in the overall work
of the Organization is a reality. We recognize that the
United Nations bodies have enhanced the role women
can play in ensuring lasting peace in crisis situations.
We are also aware of the efforts made, by the United
Nations system, Governments and civil societies, to
support the role of women in peace-building.
Nevertheless, women are still underrepresented in
political and decision-making processes. Therefore,
this morning's debate is a very special contribution in
changing that reality.

On the occasion of this debate on women in
conflict situations, it is my duty to pay special tribute
to the courage of women who have given us examples
of real heroism in situations of very difficult tension
and war. One example comes to mind, to which two of

my colleagues have already referred - that of
Petronille Vaweka, who in Bunia faced a very drastic
situation, protected by some Uruguayan

peacekeepers - some of whom were women- and
yet who exhibited a courage that provides a very good
example for all of us. It also illustrates the importance
of direct, first-hand experience by Council members, as
we had when we visited Bunia.

I would like to pay a special tribute to Angolan
women for the essential role they played during the
long and extremely difficult years when the Angolan
people were forced to struggle in defence of legality
and their inalienable right to decide their future. Aside
from the role thousands of women played at the
battlefront, carrying out their civil duty side by side
with their male counterparts, Angolan women were
instrumental in maintaining social cohesion in the
overcrowded cities and villages, in the camps for
internally displaced persons and refugee camps with
displaced populations, as widows and wives of soldiers
absent at the battlefront and as victims of the dire
economic situation and massive unemployment. They
became the sole support of millions of families. Thanks
to their initiative and resolve, those women ensured the
survival of millions of children, ensured that their
families could maintain a life with the minimum
standards and ensured that millions of families could
survive the oblivion of war and despair. They played a
key role in maintaining the cohesion of society. By
doing so, they made an immense contribution to their
emancipation.

Angolan women continue to face great difficulties
because they are still disproportionately affected by
poverty. The programmes for repatriation,
rehabilitation, reintegration and post-conflict
reconstruction address the question of poverty
reduction and have adopted a gender perspective, as
referred to in resolution 1325 (2000), taking into
account the special needs of women and girls. We are
aware that much still needs to be done to fully integrate
women into the mainstream of post-conflict
reconstruction. And we are aware that the assistance of
the international community is vital if we are to
overcome the immense problems still faced by women
in particular. My Government has initiated several
activities with a view to advancing and empowering
women in political, social and economic life. Some
progress has been achieved in gender equality, but
much more remains to be done.

There is awareness that the effective promotion
and maintenance of international peace and security
requires a full understanding of the impact of armed
conflict on women and girls. We therefore welcome the
establishment of the reporting system on sexual
violence, abuse, exploitation and trafficking of women
and girls among the military and civilian populations,
followed by enforcement and monitoring mechanisms
for peacekeeping personnel and the establishment of
disciplinary and oversight mechanisms in all
peacekeeping missions. We understand that reversing
the situation of women in a gender perspective requires
political will and determination to fulfil our
commitments concerning the protection and promotion
of women's rights. Ensuring sustainable social
development and improving the situation of women are
objectives requiring joint efforts. In that regard, we
fully support and encourage the Secretary-General to
ensure the increasing participation of women in
peacekeeping processes.

