Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka: It is an honour to address
the Security Council and to present this year's report
of the Secretary-General on women and peace and
security (8/2013/525).

Like the Secretary-General, I thank the presidency
of Azerbaijan for hosting this debate and for
introducing the topic of women, the rule of law and
transitional justice in conflict-affected situations. I
thank the other speakers, especially the Secretary-
General and Ms. Navi Pillay, High Commissioner on
Human Rights. I also thank Ms. Brigitte Balipou, a
trailblazing women's rights lawyer from the Central
African Republic, who will be speaking today for
civil society, which is very significant. I also join the
Secretary-General in welcoming the adoption of a new
recommendation on women in conflict prevention,
conflict and post-conflict situations by the Committee
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women, which is another important milestone.

Above all, I thank the entire Council membership
for demonstrating its determination, by adopting
resolution 2122 (2013) today, to put women's leadership
at the centre of all efforts to resolve conflict and
promote peace. The resolution is about the leadership
of women as peacemakers. It puts the onus on all of
us - the Security Council, the United Nations, regional
organizations and Member States - to create the space
and provide seats at the peace table for women. I know
for sure that women are adequately trained for these
roles. They are available and willing to be appointed at
the highest levels. It is up to us -the United Nations,
UN Women and Member States - to ensure that women
are there at the peace table as mediators. Their teams
must encourage negotiating parties to invite women to
the table and address women's issues in ceasefire and
peace accords. This is in the best interest of lasting
peace.

It is critical that the Security Council members
ask for briefings on the specific impacts of conflict on
women, which the resolution facilitates, and that they
ask that all conflict-related crimes perpetrated against
women be reported by international commissions of
inquiry, sanctions committees and other accountability
bodies. Friends of peace processes and hosts of donor
conferences are also urged to provide additional
financing for the inclusion of women's groups and
women leaders. Women's rights organizations must be
supported in their efforts to build constituencies for
peace and justice.

Of course, the inclusion of women alone will not
solve all our problems. There is a need for much more
to be done if peace processes are to be effective and
inclusive. Gender analysis must be used to identify the
impact on women's rights of all peace-related decisions.

The report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda shows progress and good practice over the
past year. Ninety-three percent of directives for
police components in missions now include specific
instructions to address women's security; this is
already 40 per cent more than last year. International
commissions of inquiry now routinely include gender
crimes investigators.

I warmly welcome the appointment of Mary
Robinson as the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General to the Great Lakes Region, and thank A'i'chatou
Mindaoudou Souleymane for her work as Acting African
Union-United Nations Joint Special Representative for
Darfur. We are now seeing what could be described as
a generation of gender-responsive mediation practice
from these and other peace leaders. Elements of this
practice include holding early and regular consultations
with women leaders and women's rights groups;
securing a gender advisor for the mediation team; and
ensuring that crimes against women are addressed in
ceasefire and peace negotiations. I include here the
efforts this past year of a growing number of senior
officials - including Margaret Vogt in the Central
African Republic and Special Envoy Prodi in the
Sahel region - to ensure more inclusive and gender-
responsive practices.

This year, 3 out of 10 peace agreements in United
Nations-supported processes included provisions on
women's political participation or protection. That is an
important improvement. The Council will agree with
me that such provisions should be included in all peace
accords.

We also see that post-conflict countries that are
using temporary special measures, such as electoral
gender quotas, have more women in parliament, well
above the global average of 21 per cent. But the report
of the Secretary-General also shows that we cannot be
complacent, because gains made can also be lost. And
we see that over the past years, the numbers of women
at senior levels in the United Nations - for instance,
in field missions - have remained relatively stagnant.
While there has been some progress in political and
peacebuilding missions, there has been a decrease in
the share of women in top mission leadership positions.
With the Council's help, I am determined that we make
progress. As UN Women, we will be supporting that
process.

Mass atrocities, including violence targeting
women and girls, have occurred in the past year in
the context of such diverse situations as those in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mali and Syria.
That has to be a challenge that we face together. In other
contexts, such as Afghanistan, there has been increased
targeted killing of women leaders and human rights
defenders. In some areas of peacebuilding there is an
increase in spending on gender equality and women's
empowerment, which we must applaud. Therefore, we
are seeing both progress and challenges.

At this point, the support recommended by
the Secretary-General in his report has not been
provided as foreseen, rarely reaching the 15 per cent
minimum. I am therefore committed to reaching those
targets. The Secretary-General's report also sets out
strategic measures for all stakeholders to accelerate
implementation, many of which are reflected in
today's resolution. Those measures focus on removing
obstacles to women's peace leadership and on building
the capacities of the Security Council and the United
Nations system to address gender issues across all peace
and security work. There is also a call for a global study
of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) to help
us all prepare for the 2015 ministerial meeting of the
Council on this topic.

Before I conclude, let me touch again on today's
topic. In recent years, the Security Council has paid
increased attention to transitional justice, recognizing
that victims have a right to truth, justice and reparations.
Respect for the rule of law is therefore connected to
every aspect of peacebuilding. But the President of
the Council is right in asking what the meaning of the
rule of law is without respect for women's rights. In
some contexts, the law itself is gender-biased. It fails
to criminalize some forms of violence against women.
Even where laws are consistent with international
human rights standards, authorities may be inconsistent
in their application. We know very well that there is
a climate of impunity for crimes committed against
women.

I welcome resolution 2106 (2013), adopted last
June, to strengthen capacities to stop the use of sexual
violence as a tactic of warfare. I stand shoulder to
shoulder with my colleague Zainab Hawa Bangura,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, in the fight against
impunity for such war crimes. Her support and
collaboration are valued.

I want us to remember today that the public and
visible forms of gender-based violence in wartime are
based on the private violence against women in many
homes, and on the serious inequalities between men
and women.

Women's leadership and collective action have
changed the world by combatting violence against
women and building equality. Women's leadership is
central to reconciliation and conflict resolution, and
to peacebuilding efforts that bring results for families
and communities. That is why I wish members good
progress in this area. I welcome today's resolution on
women's peace leadership. When we next report to the
Council, we would like to show that we have made even
more progress and that, together with the Council, we
have made the world a better place for women.

