Mr. Weisleder (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to begin by thanking you, Sir, and your delegation
for organizing this debate on such an important subject.
I also wish to thank Ms. Rachel Mayanja for her
briefing on the annual report of the Secretary-General
on women and peace and security (S/2008/622) and
also the statements of Ms. Ines Alberdi, Executive
Director of the United Nations Development Fund for
Women, and Ms. Sarah Taylor, Coordinator of the
NGO Working Group on Women and Peace and
Security. We also thank Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for his
briefing.

Negotiation of peace agreements and post-
conflict reconstruction are nothing new for women,
who are catalysts for national reconciliation. They
strengthen development efforts and are fundamental
factors in the restoration of stability in societies that
have suffered the ravages of war. Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) was the first recognition by the
Security Council of the fundamental role that has been
played historically by women in maintaining and
restoring international peace and security. However, in
most cases, the contributions of women have
unfortunately been unofficial, far from the negotiation
tables, and their potential to spread peace has been
belittled or underestimated on far too many occasions.

The exclusion of women from the processes of
conflict resolution and peacebuilding has an
excessively high cost that we cannot afford. That
exclusion not only weakens the effectiveness of
conflict-prevention mechanisms, but also drastically
reduces the opportunities for peacebuilding. It is
important to remember that in traditional societies -
in many cases that is where armed conflicts have taken
place or are continuing - the role of women in the
family and in society is absolutely pivotal. Lasting
peace cannot be built based upon the status quo, which
has allowed inequality and the imbalance of power to
continue and has, in the majority of cases, been one of
the deep-seated causes of conflict. The peace process
must identify the specific needs of women and must
appropriate the necessary resources to address them.
Such a process would then produce enormous results
for society. We must transform prejudices and patterns
of social discrimination and those laws and customs
that are obstacles to the equal participation of women.

As Simone de Beauvoir said, one is not born a
woman, but becomes one. But in order to change this,
we must give explicit support to the participation of
women, in particular in decision-making, so as to
achieve gender equality and women's empowerment.

Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) also
represented a change of paradigm by placing women at
the heart of the consideration of the issue, not just as
victims but as engines for change forging their own
destinies and as brave contributors to peace and
development in societies suffering from armed conflict
or emerging from conflict.

We must expand the role of women in
negotiation, mediation, dialogue, constitution drafting,
elections, reconstruction and justice. The report of the
Secretary-General (S/2008/622) gives us various
examples of success stories around the world, where
the effective participation of women has borne fruit.
That has been the case in some peacekeeping
operations, where, as members of military observers or
police forces, women have made it possible to increase
security and to reduce incidents of sexual abuse,
facilitating the involvement of other women and
strengthening access to services. That is part of the
purpose of the Secretary-General's report, and it is a
balanced report.

However, we still lack sufficient political will and
resources to promote the systematic participation of
women in United Nations peacekeeping operations.
The report of the Secretary-General disturbingly
highlights the fact that only 2.2 per cent of military
personnel in United Nations peacekeeping operations
and 7.6 per cent of civilian police personnel are
women. To date, our Organization has only one woman
Head of Mission in one peacekeeping operation. It is
crucial that we adopt essential measures to avoid
gender violence in armed conflicts, in particular the
use of sexual violence as a weapon of war.

Reality as it exists for millions of women should
be taken into account. We must offer them equal
opportunities and we must identify their specific needs.
In order to do that, we must break with the patterns of
marginalization in protection and economic recovery
and strength of democratic institutions, governance,
justice, reform of the security sector and compliance
with the rule of law.

Costa Rica considers that incorporation of the
gender perspective is an indispensable tool for dealing
with the terrible effects of conflict and is helpful too in
conflict prevention. Women have the capacity to bring
peace to all factions and to every home. For that
reason, we should capitalize on their potential and
work actively to include them in the processes and
strategies for conflict resolution and the political tasks
of the post-conflict period, because peace should not
only be sustainable but above all, it must be inclusive,
allowing everyone to enjoy its dividends on an equal
footing.

Costa Rica does not want to idealize or to
overburden women by exaggerating their capacities in
those functions. However, because of the characteristic
qualities of women, we are convinced that policies of
gender equality and the inclusion of women constitute
very important contributions in our efforts to avoid
conflicts and to resolve them when they do occur.

