Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): At
the outset, let me register Tanzania's sincere
appreciation to the delegation of Romania for
organizing this open debate on Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000). This debate is coming at an
opportune time after world leaders adopted an outcome
document last month that affirmed gender equality and
the promotion, protection and full enjoyment of all
human rights and fundamental freedoms as essential in
advancing and complementing development, peace and
security.

Today, on the fifth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000), we celebrate and further affirm the
indispensable role of women in conflict prevention,
resolution and peacebuilding. My delegation associates
itself with the statement to be made by Namibia on
behalf of the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) member States.

The close interlinkages between security,
development and human rights have revealed the
imperative of an integrated approach to peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Over the past five
years, we have underscored what should be the central
role of women in conflict prevention, peace advocacy,
negotiations and the implementation of peace and
security agreements. The proposed Human Rights
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission will be
crucial to the promotion and protection of the rights of
women. The ongoing discussions on the formation of
these new organs present us with an entry point to
anchor the effective involvement of women as
participants in and beneficiaries of the mandates of the
two organs to ensure gender justice and gender
equality.
The adoption of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000) on 31 October 2000 marked a turning point in
the protection of women in conflict situations, as well
as ensuring their right to participate fully in peace
processes. As an equal component of any society,
women should have equal and active participation in
formulating political, economic and social policies.
Furthermore, as victims of exclusion, vulnerable
targets in conflicts, mothers and breadwinners, women
have high stakes in conflict prevention, conflict
resolution and all issues related to peace and security
in society.

However, we note with concern the absence of
women, not only in peace processes, but also in most
spheres of decision-making. The absence of women is
further reflected in the reports of both the Secretary-
General and the Security Council. There is thus a need
to increase gender training at all levels of peacekeeping
operations. Gender training and placement should not
be taken as ad hoc measures, but ought to be
mainstreamed affirmatively. This shift requires a
change in attitudes and mindsets towards the status and
capabilities of women. We acknowledge the progress
made by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO) with regard to the issues of peace and women
and mainstreaming. We encourage the Department to
continue its expeditious implementation of the policy
outlined this morning by Mr. Guehenno, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.

Resolution 1325 (2000) broke new ground by

empowering women - who are often both the
deliberate targets and silent victims of violent
conflicts- in the critical areas of war, peace and

security. The effective implementation of the resolution
is therefore a necessity, and we are encouraged by the
formulation of a system-wide action plan for that
purpose. The action plan presents us with an
implementation framework that will allow for
coordination and collaboration among the various
United Nations bodies. It will also provide us with a
monitoring framework upon which to measure results.
Requisite resources, both financial and human, need to
be made available for the successful implementation of
the action plan.

While we recognize the positive role of
peacekeeping personnel, we are appalled by the few
elements that are still tarnishing the good reputation
and the overall credibility of the United Nations.
Sexual exploitation and abuse of civilians by
peacekeeping personnel is a violation of the trust of
those who delegate to them the responsibility to
protect - and it should be condemned by all of us. We
commend the Secretary-General's policy of zero
tolerance for acts of sexual harassment and abuse. To
prevent further sexual exploitation and abuse, all
allegations should be investigated and reported and the
Security Council and the troop-contributing countries
should take more robust measures.

We also believe that the spirit and letter of
resolution 1325 (2000) should apply in peacekeeping
missions, with the greater involvement and
participation of women at all levels. That will inject
more gender sensitivity in peacekeeping mandates and
in implementing strategies for the protection of
civilians in conflict and post-conflict situations.

Finally, in the envisaged Peacebuilding
Commission, the role of women in post-conflict
situations should be central from the very beginning at
all levels, particularly at the country level, with the
visible participation of civil society. This is a unique
opportunity to incorporate gender issues as integral
components of the transition from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding, and finally to sustainable development.

