Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I thank you, Madam President, for convening
this very important meeting at a very timely juncture.

Members of the Council can bear witness to the
numerous times I have actively sought to draw their
attention, and that of the Organization - as represented
by the Secretary-General, various high-level officials,
the Secretary-General's special representatives and
humanitarian agencies - to the atrocities, violations
and immoral religious opinions held by armed terrorist
groups for over three years against Syrian women. This
Chamber can bear witness to the many times we have
warned of the dangers of the spread of non-Islamic,
Takfiri, pagan terrorism and the need to combat its
perpetrators, as well as to the hundreds ofletters, reports,
statements, photographs, videos and medical evidence
that my delegation has provided to international officials
over the past three years, including documentation of
the responsibility of various armed terrorist groups and
the sponsors who have deployed them in Arab States,
the region and beyond for the crimes of rape, sexual
abuse, kidnapping, human trafficking and the murder
of women and girls in Syria.

This Chamber also bears witness to the number
of times that we have asked the Governments of those
States that support terrorist armed groups with funds,
weapons and media assistance to stop that support, halt
their hostile and interventionist policies against my
State, and show respect for the conditions of membership
in this international Organization, primarily respect for
the sovereignty of States and non-intervention in their
internal affairs.

Unfortunately, the efforts of our delegation have
only been met with shameful rejection and denial.
The so-called international community, including
some high officials of the United Nations and several
Western States that are known for how often they speak
out in support of the rights of women, together with
Western and Arab media outlets, have all been too busy
levelling accusations against the Syrian Government.
Their main attention has been focused on criticizing
the Government, inventing falsehoods against it and
demonizing it in order to weaken Syria's sovereignty
and destroy its State in order to create a situation of
utter chaos as has happened in Libya, for example.

Today, more than three years after the start of the
multinational terrorist war that was launched against
my country, in which the women of Syria have suffered
the worst forms of extremism and terrorism, painful
facts and reality have proven the validity and accuracy
of what we have tried to tell the Council so very often.
Today, in their reports and statements, including in
the report before us today (S/2014/693), the Secretary-
General and his representatives have acknowledged
and recognized the reality of terrorism affecting Syria.
However, that recognition and acknowledgment have
come too late. Yes, the Member States are too late
in helping the Syrian Government in its war against
terrorism.

The question before us now is, what is the cost of
that delay? Unfortunately, the price has been the lives
of hundreds of thousands of Syrian citizens, including
men, children and the elderly, and the suffering of
millions from the worst forms of terrorism, extremism
and the destruction of infrastructure. What is most
deplorable today is that until this very minute we have
not yet heard a word of apology from those who persist
in their mistakes and crimes or an apology for their
prolonged denial of reality.

A number of members and non-members of the
Security Council have evoked in their statements today
the magnitude of the suffering of Syrian women in
Syria and in refugee camps in neighbouring countries.
Some States have boasted that they have spent millions
of dollars to assist Syrian women in their ordeal, and
that is true. However, the very same countries have
overlooked - and blatantly so - the fact that the
policies of their Governments towards my country
were the primary cause for this level of suffering of
Syrian women and this degree of deterioration of their
status as a result of the direct involvement of those
Governments in financing and underwriting terrorism
and in facilitating terrorists' transit and passage. From
the start of the crisis in my country, those countries have
armed terrorist armed groups and have acknowledged
that fact publicly. They have supported terrorists
financially and through the media, have helped with
recruitment for these organizations in their territories
and have created training camps for terrorists in various
countries before sending them off to Syria to carry out
their crimes following a name change from "terrorists"
to "the moderate opposition".

We should also never forget the so-called sex
jihad, in which girls have been recruited - France and
Tunisia are supposedly the greatest sources for these
misled and misguided girls - to travel to Syria through
the borders with Turkey, Jordan and Lebanon, where
terrorist groups are carrying out killings, rapes, sexual
and psychological abuse, forced marriages, trafficking
in human beings and human organs, making women
victims of Takfiri ideologies and a distorted and
backward vision of women, in which they are treated
like spoils of war and personal property - slaves - of
the terrorists who falsely call themselves jihadists.

In conclusion, today, now that terrorism has
come knocking at the gates of those States that have
long denied its existence in Syria and is exploiting
women and girls, and now that extremist and criminal
ideologies are spreading, it is time to ask whether those
States engaged in a terrorist war against my country
should not start rethinking their criminal plans and
their support for terrorism in Syria. Is it not time for
senior officials at the United Nations to reconsider their
scepticism about the evidence provided by the Syrian
Government about the activities of foreign terrorist
fighters in Syria? Is it not time now for everybody
to start implementing resolutions 1325 (2000), 2133
(2014), 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014), in a manner free of
subjective and prejudiced interpretations?

We reiterate here our call for a sincere and
honest international effort focused on putting an
end to the crimes committed by criminal groups and
seeks to create a mechanism for holding accountable
Governments of States that have jurisdiction over those
who support or help spread those ideologies. Those
ideas will, with their violations, denigratinons and
demeaning view of women, have a noxious impact on
the rights of women everywhere because their negative
effects and ramifications will not be limited to Syria.

