Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I would like to commend and thank the
President for the holding this public meeting. We
believe that discussing the issue that was the subject of
debate at a meeting yesterday and the matter under
consideration today should indeed take place in public,
in order that the entire world may be aware of what
occurs at the United Nations. In other words, we
should ensure that we truly apply transparency to the
work of the Security Council, which is something we
often talk about but rarely want to do.

I would also like to express my gratitude for the
briefings given by Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, and
Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein, Special Adviser to
the Secretary-General on Sexual Exploitation and
Abuse by United Nations Peacekeeping Personnel.
Their presentations were both clear and detailed as
regards the matter under consideration.

Argentina has always condemned cases of sexual
abuse and exploitation, which bring discredit and
dishonour upon the laudable goals of peacekeeping
operations. The international community must be
resolute in repudiating sexual abuse and exploitation,
while at the same time continuing to support
peacebuilding and peacekeeping efforts in countries
suffering from conflict. We therefore believe that,
bearing in mind the complex environment in which
peacekeeping operations take place, the United Nations
must put in place consistent and specific controls
aimed at preventing and punishing cases of sexual
abuse and exploitation, as well as ensuring that no
allegation goes uninvestigated.

Our country resolutely follows, and will continue
to adhere to, the timely zero-tolerance policy launched
by the Secretary-General. That policy should enjoy the
necessary reach and be promoted widely throughout
national and regional training centres for Blue
Helmets.

In that connection, we would particularly like to
emphasize the usefulness of the report prepared by
Prince Zeid, Permanent Representative of Jordan to the
United Nations. We would like to thank him for the
interest and dedication he has devoted to this matter.
As was the case with his report last year, this year's
report will make an extremely important contribution
to the deliberations of the Special Committee for
Peacekeeping Operations. We recall that the
Committee has developed a series of recommendations
to enable the Secretariat to address this problem. We
are pleased to note that many of those
recommendations have already been put in practice.

We believe that there must be a comprehensive
approach to address this issue. That approach must
involve every agency on the ground. As we know,
agency personnel have, unfortunately, in some cases
also been responsible for committing these abuses.
Moreover, the system's response must also be
comprehensive and exhaustive.

With regard to rules and regulations, it is
important to standardize criteria and clearly
disseminate the standards of conduct expected of Blue
Helmets. In that connection, it seems to us that
combining three texts into a unified whole is a good
step on the part of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations. Every effort must be made to translate that
text into all official languages and the majority of
languages represented by troop-contributing countries.
Doing so would contribute to greater dissemination and
understanding of the desired objectives.
Similarly, we think that the proposal to modify
the text of the 1997 memorandum of understanding of
is a welcome initiative, whose goal is to better define
the type of behaviour expected of contingents, as well
as the specific responsibilities of troop-contributing
countries.

It is important to implement measures that
emphasize existing responsibilities in the areas of
organization, management and command, as well as to
improve access to recreational activities for troops.

With regard to punishing abuse, it seems to us
essential for there to be clear terms of reference for the
carrying out of investigations. It is also necessary that
the basic principles of due process be respected at all
times. Troop-contributing countries must be
responsible in their action so that proven crimes do not
go unpunished.

Lastly, in saying that there must be a comprehensive
approach to dealing with this matter, we mean that there
must also be a speedy and effective strategy to provide
assistance to victims. That must include access to
reproductive health services, psychological care,
counselling, administrative and legal support and, as
appropriate, financial compensation.

We believe that, in the context of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, the General
Assembly has a crucial role to play in the debate on
this issue and in the taking of decisions on the matter.
We hope that the Organization, through the General
Assembly, will be able to take the urgent action that
this problem requires and that we will see a gradual
reduction in the recurrence of acts of sexual
exploitation and abuse, since the latter cast a shadow of
suspicion on the vital contribution of peacekeeping
operations to international coexistence.

There is no doubt that that the majority of men
and women who serve in such operations do so with
great altruism, professionalism and courage, even, on
occasion, sacrificing their lives in the cause of peace.
For their sake, and to honour the memory of all those
who have fallen in the line of duty, we must resolutely
condemn and put an end to cases of sexual exploitation
and abuse.

