Ms. Megheirbi (NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security): I am speaking on behalf
of the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and
Security, a civil society coalition that advocates for the
equal and full participation of women in all efforts to
create and maintain peace and security. That work
includes the promotion of women's human rights and
combating sexual violence. I am also here in my
capacity as president of the Attawasul Association, a
Libyan non-governmental organization in Benghazi
working on women's empowerment. I have lived
through the Violence imposed on the Libyan people by
a brutal dictator for 42 years. That includes the
intensified aggression after the 17 February revolution,
in which sexual violence was used as a weapon of war.

We appreciate the ongoing work of numerous
actors to combat Violence against women. That
includes the efforts of the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict. We welcome the analysis and
recommendations contained in the latest Secretary-

12-2393]

General's Report (S/2012/33) on conflict-related sexual
violence. As the report makes clear, sexual violence is
often used as a weapon to torture, terrorize and
threaten peace. It is important to remember that each
paragraph of the report represents human beings -
women, men, children and communities affected by
that threat to peace and security. That includes
individuals from my community who, like most
Victims, have not received and likely will not receive
proper services, protection, acknowledgement, justice
or accountability. This represents a collective failure of
the international community to effectively respond to
the threat.

Addressing conflict-related sexual violence
requires powerful and urgent leadership at the
international, regional and local levels. That leadership
is essential across the United Nations system and from
every Member State. Today, I will address three key
areas in which leadership is essential: prioritizing
prevention, ensuring a survivor-centric approach, and
strengthening justice and accountability.

First and foremost, the prevention of conflict-
related sexual violence is paramount and must be the
Council's priority on this issue. The Security Council
itself has underlined the importance of prevention.
After the mass rapes in Walikale, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, in 2010, the Council stated that all
possible steps should be taken to prevent such outrages
in the future. Given the political, technical and
financial resources required, can we say that all
possible steps have been taken to prevent conflict-
related sexual Violence? Can we say that to women,
girls and their communities in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, or to the survivors in my
country, Libya? Can we say that to the rest of the
world? Have Member States and the United Nations
invested all available political, technical and financial
resources to prevent further atrocities? If not, why not?

We urge all actors to address the root causes of
sexual violence. Those root causes include gender
inequality, political exclusion, social and cultural
stigma, militarization and the proliferation of arms.
Women's human rights and full participation cannot be
ignored. In fact, women's full and equal participation is
fundamental to addressing those root causes, and
therefore to preventing sexual violence in conflicts.

Secondly, when prevention efforts fail, survivors
must be the priority of all service provision and

protection. The survivor-centric approach must
encompass the provision of medical, psychological,
legal and other services to survivors, as well as
effective avenues for reparations and redress. We
support the recommendations in the Secretary-
General's report in that regard, and we strongly call on
all actors to make that a reality. Service and protection
strategies must be designed in full consultation with
women and affected communities. Particular attention
must be paid to the rights and concerns of women and
girls, who are often at increased risk in displacement
settings, as the current report notes in many cases,
including Somalia, Darfur in the Sudan, and Sri Lanka.

Thirdly, survivors demand nothing less than
justice and an end to impunity. Accountability for
crimes of sexual violence must be included at every
stage, from ceasefire agreements to all aspects of
post-conflict reconstruction. That is central both to
preventing future crimes of sexual Violence against
women and to the healing of societies. At both the
national and international levels, security sectors and
judicial systems must address the culture of impunity
for these crimes. Measures must include improved
vetting of reintegrated soldiers and bringing suspected
perpetrators to justice, in domestic courts where
possible or through referral of situations to the
International Criminal Court and other international
courts for prosecution. Where those systems are failing
survivors, comprehensive reforms should be
mandatory. Maintaining the full dignity of survivors
must be at the core of all of these processes.

As a Libyan, I want to emphasize the need to
hold accountable all parties involved in any act of
sexual violence, and to prosecute them accordingly.
That includes politicians and military commanders who
order or permit such acts as a weapon of war, as well
as those who commit the crime.

I would like to state our concern regarding all
situations where women's rights continue to be violated.
On conflict-related sexual violence specifically, we note
that the Secretary-General's current report does not
reference a number of relevant situations where sexual
violence has been perpetrated. Those include
Afghanistan, Iraq, Israel, the occupied Palestinian
territories and Haiti, among others. We urge the
Secretary-General to take all measures to ensure that
all relevant countries are included in future reports.
Furthermore, we condemn the perpetration of sexual
exploitation and abuse, which are all too often
committed with impunity.

In civil society, we are often at the forefront of
combating sexual violence from the grassroots to the
international level. We encourage all actors to support
civil society at all levels in all areas of that work.
Furthermore, in their own work in the Security Council
or in the United Nations, members should ensure that
they are working to fulfil the obligations of resolutions
1325 (2000), 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009), 1889 (2009)
and 1960 (2010). That includes ensuring that all
country reports and mandate renewals are truly
responsive to the protection and promotion of women's
human rights.

In conclusion, on behalf of the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security and on my own
behalf as a Libyan woman, I would like to ask you,
Mr. President, your colleagues on the Security Council
and all other members of the international community
to take the urgent action on conflict-related sexual
violence that we have outlined here today, namely,
prioritizing prevention, ensuring a survivor-centric
approach and strengthening justice and accountability
efforts.

