Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): I would like to start by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of April. We wish you every success in leading the work
of the Council during your presidency and thank your
delegation for convening today's debate on an issue
of crucial importance. We are grateful to Secretary-
General Ban Ki-Moon and to his Special Representative
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Hawa
Bangura, for their briefings this morning. We also
take this opportunity to congratulate Ms. Bangura
on her appointment and to commend her for the great
determination she has shown in carrying out her task.

Armed conflicts leave a devastating effect on
societies around the world. Violence breeds more
violence. Undoubtedly, women often bear the brunt of
the many destructive consequences of war and strife.
In that regard, sexual violence in the context of armed
conflicts remains pervasive, which is a devastating
reality that has yet to be resolved and one requiring
steadfast efforts at all levels.

In adopting resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009)
and 1960 (2010), the Security Council sent the clear
message that sexual violence would not be tolerated
and that ending sexual violence was essential for
maintaining international peace and security. All States
have the moral and legal responsibility to uphold the
rights of all citizens, including women, and to protect
them from sexual violence.

Protecting and promoting the rights of the Afghan
people has been the cornerstone of all our efforts to
build a peaceful and stable Afghanistan. Central
to those efforts is enabling women to regain their
historical role as proactive citizens in Afghan society.
Afghanistan is pursuing the vigorous implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) through our national priority
programme. We have also launched our national action
plan for the women of Afghanistan as a lO-year blue
print that contains specific and time-bound benchmarks
for progress in various areas. As the implementation of
the action plan continues apace, we are confident that
we will realize our vision of seeing Afghan women
thrive and be empowered in all sectors of society - the
social, political and economic.

Afghanistan is fully committed to preventing
all forms of violence against women, including
sexual violence. In that regard, in 2009, we enacted
a law on the elimination of violence against women,
which provided for stronger judicial means to combat
violence. Throughout the country, perpetrators of such
crimes are increasingly being held accountable where
such crimes are committed, with their cases being
prosecuted before the law.

In reference to an observation made in the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2013/ 149), we wish to
state with full confidence that the Government and
the people of Afghanistan do not and will not tolerate
impunity against any form of human rights violation.
Together with our judicial authorities, the Afghan
National Security Forces are working diligently to
uphold law and order in all areas of the country. As we
move forward, we are confident that our efforts will
continue to bear fruit and that women will be further
empowered.

We also wish to highlight the following.
Afghanistan is fully committed to upholding human
rights in Afghan detention centres. In that respect, a
number of concrete measures have been taken by the
National Directorate of Security, including capacity-
building measures, human rights awareness workshops
for personnel and the establishment of a human rights
division to monitor and investigate human rights
situations. The Afghan police and other security forces
are following a similar approach. In the wake of the
20 January report by the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) on alleged cases of
prisoner mistreatment, President Karzai issued a decree
establishing an independent commission to investigate
the cases referred to in the UNAMA report. Since then,
greater focus has been given to ensuring full adherence
to human rights standards in Afghan detention centres.

As the security transition proceeds, Afghanistan
is also resolute in achieving a successful outcome in
its peace and reconciliation process, which is aimed at
ending the current conflict and strife. By ending the
conflict, we will eliminate the very conditions that were
conducive to challenges in the field of human rights.

As members of the High Peace Council and as
members of civil society, women play a central role
in the peace process. The results of our peace and
reconciliation efforts will in no way jeopardize the
hard-won gains of the past 11 years, especially those
relating to human rights, and to the rights of women in
particular.

Before concluding, I wish to state that the
international community has a key role to play in
supporting continuous efforts aimed at ending all forms
of violence against women, including sexual violence,
in conflict-affected and post-conflict countries. For our
part, Afghanistan remains firmly committed to playing
its part in ensuring the full protection ofwomen's rights
around the world and to preventing sexual violence and
all other forms of violations of human rights.

