Mr. Haydar (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): We have carefully read the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2015/203) prepared by the Office
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict. While we appreciate
Ms. Bangura's efforts, her understanding of the events
in Syria regrettably remains fundamentally partial and
one-sided, like her two previous reports (S/2013/149 and S/2014/181).

In order to assess the events in Syria objectively
and without politicization, the Special Representative
should respond to the repeated invitations that the
Syrian Government has extended to her to visit Syria
and the region, which we recently agreed to. The
Syrian Government looks forward to her visit, which
will enable the Special Representative to accurately
report on sexual violence in Syria and to document the
responsibility of the armed terrorist groups, regardless
of their names, for acts of murder, abduction and rape
along sectarian lines, gang rapes, enslavement, torture
and sexual violence against women and girls in Syria.

Those crimes are part of the Salafi and Takfiri
ideology, which the armed terrorist groups seek to
propagate in the area and the world. Those terrorist
groups have persisted in their criminality, to the point
that the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria has opened
camps for the recruitment of women and girls in the
northern countryside of Aleppo in order to train them
on suicide operations, on the one hand, and to recruit
them for sexual violence, on the other. They have also
issued a manual for dealing with women as spoils of
war and how to capture and sexually assault them by
way of one of the most heinous forms of sexual violence
against women and Violations of their dignity.
In the context of the present report, my delegation
would like to make the following comments on the
section regarding the situation in Syria.

First, those who prepared the report based
themselves and their allegations against the Syrian
Government on the reports issued by the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab
Republic. My country would like to reaffirm its position
that the work of the commission since its establishment
has been neither professional nor objective, but rather
has been highly politicized and was essentially based
on allegations and lies aimed at distorting the image
of the Syrian Arab Republic. In that regard, I would
like to stress that the Syrian Government rejects any
allegations made against the Syrian armed forces and
denounces the fact that such allegations continue,
especially in view of the fact that the Syrian authorities
have not received any requests from any offices of the
United Nations in Damascus or from the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to Visit
any site to verify any information they received - be
it from their private sources or the Syrian Government.
I assure the Council without hesitation that the
relevant authorities in Syria would be happy to receive
any specific accurate information regarding such
Violations, which our Government and army reject, and
that it would address such allegations with the utmost
firmness, in accordance with the law and the customs
and traditions of our people.

Secondly, we reiterate the need for the Special
Representative in her future reports to address the fatwa
regarding sexual jihad, which is part and parcel of her
mandate, and to put an end to these morally deviant
and barbarous fatwas, especially since representatives
of several States have affirmed that girls from their
countries have fallen victims to such heinous fatwas,
Recent among such statements was the statement of
the British authorities that they had lost contact with
three British girls who crossed into Syria, having fallen
victims to such a fatwa and having been recruited
through social media. The Syrian side will present to
Ms. Bangura some of the victims of the sexual jihad
and the practices of the armed terrorist groups against
women and girls.

Thirdly, the suffering of the Syrian women
displaced in the refugee camps in neighbouring States
is essential and should be stressed. In that regard, we
must express our serious concern over the continued
suffering of Syrian girls and women in those camps
and the fact that they are subjected to trafficking,
rape, forced marriage and insecurity. All of that has
been documented in reports of the United Nations and
international organizations concerned with the rights
of the child, including the recent report by UNICEF,
which indicated that the doubling in the number of
rapes of Syrian female minors in camps in Jordan and
Turkey was comparable to the incidence of rape at the
beginning of the Syrian crisis, which was 32 per cent
in the first quarter of 2014. We must also recall the
exploitation of the Syrian female minority in Lebanon
as one State has begun to arrange marriages without
registering them in their official records. Reports have
shown that they are married to wealthy men from the
Gulf who have become accustomed to buying Syrian
female refugee minors as wives in the slave markets
in the refugee camps, with the help and supervision
of non-governmental organizations working under the
cover of doing humanitarian work.

Finally, representatives of a number of States have
expressed concern over the spread of sexual violence
against Syrian women. However, they ignore the fact
of the policies of their own Governments against my
country, which is the reason for such suffering, due to
the involvement of those Governments in financing
terrorism, facilitating its spread, securing its financing
and building camps to train terrorists before they are
sent to Syria where they are re-branded as the moderate
opposition.

Syria is committed to supporting international
efforts to combat all forms of sexual violence and to
punish the perpetrators and instigators, on the one
hand, and to break the unjustifiable silence on the part
of numerous specialized United Nations bodies, on the
other.

We would also like to affirm our wish to continue
to cooperate with the United Nations, especially with
Ms. Bangura, to reveal the truth about Syria free of
politicization. The competent authorities remain ready
fully prepared to receive any names or incidents from
the Special Representative for investigation in the
context of continued cooperation with her Office.

