Mrs. Patterson (United States of America): I
wish to congratulate you, Sir, on your selection of this
topic for your presidency's thematic discussion. We
would also like to thank the speakers for their
contributions to our understanding of this issue. The
United States agrees that the United Nations must
acknowledge and strengthen the role of women in the
peace process, and we take seriously the challenge of
bringing women as the equals of men into the
mainstream of decision-making in that regard.

Owing to their particular experiences, we believe
that women can and do bring certain unique qualities
and perspectives to the peace process. Women have
been historically underrepresented in most peace
negotiations. In the past, women's traditional roles in
society have often been the excuse for that exclusion.
Ironically, those same roles as child-bearer and
nurturer lend a perspective that is all too often ignored.

I should like to mention the opportunity I had to
witness the role that women had played in the peace
process in El Salvador when I served there a few years
after the peace agreement. Women may have
constituted up to 40 per cent of the troops of the
guerrilla group FMLN, so they naturally became major
figures in the peace process. That gave them visibility,
which they then used to get elected to public office.
One of the major female guerrilla leaders ran for the
office of Vice-President a few years after the peace
agreement. These Salvadoran women lobbied to reflect
gender equality in what became the FMLN party, and
their advocacy led to the establishment of a women's
secretariat in 1993 and to the establishment of a 30 per
cent quota for that party in 1996. But it was not just
women on the left who raised their political profile
during the peace process; women of all political parties
and beliefs became involved.
Involvement of women in the peace process and
then, very importantly, as political figures advances
what are sometimes called women's issues generally.
Most important, in the Salvadoran Assembly, women
from the far left to the far right - many of them
elected during the multi-year peace process - formed
a women's caucus that focused on issues of particular
interest to women, such as maternal and infant
mortality, the rights of children, sex crimes and
domestic violence.

To cite a case in point, all the female legislators
became extremely active in raising awareness about
domestic violence, writing legislation to criminalize it
and setting up shelters for abused women and children.
The Salvadoran First Lady made that her particular
issue. In a few short years, domestic violence had
become unacceptable; women felt confident in
reporting abuse to the authorities, and programmes -
including counselling for men - were instituted
throughout the country to combat it. Domestic
violence, which had previously been considered a
private matter, had become a serious crime.

Women in El Salvador were also very active in
local and national reconstruction efforts. Many women
who had been members of armed groups became
involved in large- and small-scale construction
projects. Their experience as combatants challenged
many of the prewar conceptions against such labour
and forced society to further recognize the role they
could play.

Today, women in El Salvador continue to be key
actors in that society. Galvanized and infused by
political activism during the war, Salvadoran women
continue to be highly organized at all levels of society.
The success of El Salvador's peace process is, in many
ways, the result of women being involved in the
process from the outset. I might add, too, that the
United Nations played a critical and very successful
role in the Salvadoran peace process.

I realize that El Salvador may be different from
other post-conflict situations, in that a high percentage
of women were directly involved as leaders in the
conflicts, so their participation in the peace process
was more natural. And in general, women have made
huge legal and political strides in Latin America in the
past 30 years, serving as Presidents, Ministers of
Defence and heads of parliament, so the involvement
of women in the peace process naturally reflects their
role in larger society.
To state the obvious, El Salvador is not
Afghanistan, and very different strategies will be
required to involve women in peace processes and
reconstruction, depending on the local situations.
Despite persuasive arguments for the inclusion of
women in the peace process, there is enormous
resistance to the notion in most parts of the world. The
exclusion of women from important decision-making is
still deeply ingrained in many societies. Changes to
that way of thinking will require conscious, deliberate
effort by all of us, particularly in the international and
NGO communities, in order to further involve women
in the peace process. Society not only dictates the need
for women to be involved in the peace process; it
demands it.

