Mr. Ugurluoglu (Turkey): I would like to express
our appreciation to the Spanish presidency for
organizing this timely debate. I would also like to take
this opportunity to thank Prime Minister Rajoy Brey for
his words yesterday of solidarity on and condemnation
of the heinous terrorist attack perpetuated in Turkey on
10 October.

The year 2015 is a landmark year for gender equality
and the women and peace and security agenda. This
year we not only celebrate the twentieth anniversary of
the Beijing Declaration and Platform of Action, but we
also mark the fifteenth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000). Furthermore, the recently adopted Sustainable
Development Agenda (General Assembly resolution 70/1) has a Goal dedicated to gender equality. The
high-level review conducted on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), along with the review processes
carried out vis-a-vis United Nations peacekeeping
operations and peacebuilding architecture, has
yielded a sound foundation for us to reflect on the
international framework for prevention, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding, with a strong emphasis on the
empowerment of women.

We welcome the continuing attention paid to the
women and peace and security agenda at the Security
Council and thank the Secretary-General for his recent
report (S/2015/716), inter alia, submitting the results of
the global study on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). Nevertheless, we would also like to stress
that some inaccurate references in the global study do
not serve the intended purpose of their inclusion, and
thus we express reservations on those references, which
in fact do not relate to the overall role or influence of
women.

Eliminating conflicts and related violence continues
to be a great challenge on which the international
community is still trying to deliver 70 years after the
United Nations was founded. The severe effects of
conflict on women and girls in various regions of the
world continue to be a significant problem that needs
to be addressed. Furthermore, our world is now facing
the largest humanitarian crisis since the Second World
War, with a growing influx of displaced populations
resulting from protracted conflicts and lack of security
and stability, which causes even further difficulties to
vulnerable groups, including women and girls.
In the face of these threats, a stronger and more
inclusive approach is required. First, strengthening
our political will to achieve gender equality,
empowerment of women and girls and recognition of
their human rights is a necessary step. Secondly, the
horrific acts perpetrated against women and girls by
terrorist organizations such as Daesh and Boko Haram
require a comprehensive counter-terrorism strategy.
Accordingly, eliminating the root causes of conflict is
essential. Thirdly, ensuring a comprehensive approach
to decision-making and policymaking, peace processes,
mediation efforts, peacekeeping and peacebuilding, is
another important step.

The meaningful participation of women in these
processes should be promoted. Therefore, as a case
in point, we welcome the establishment of a technical
committee on gender equality in the context of the
ongoing negotiations in Cyprus. We hope and believe
that this committee will contribute to the efforts of the
two sides, the Turkish Cypriots and Greek Cypriots, to
find a just and comprehensive settlement to the Cyprus
problem without further delay.

Finally, deepening the gender perspective in the
United Nations system's normative and operational
frameworks, entities and practices will enhance the
effectiveness of United Nations action in responding
to the needs of women and girls, particularly in
humanitarian emergencies and protracted crises.

Turkey supports the empowerment and well-being
of women and girls in various emergency, conflict and
post-conflict situations through its comprehensive
development assistance programmes. The projects we
carry out in Afghanistan and Somalia, especially in the
fields of education and health services, are concrete
examples of our efforts to this end. Moreover, Turkey
has been a safe refuge for over 2 million Syrians,
including women and girls, who had to flee Syria
for their lives and has also ensured that cross-border
humanitarian assistance reaches millions of people in
dire need on the Syrian side of the border, in conformity
with its international obligations and in support of the
United Nations. We have offered Syrians fleeing a
brutal conflict and a regime that targets its own people
temporary protection status and enabled them access to
Turkish hospitals. So far, more than 66,000 babies have
been born in the medical facilities inside the temporary
protection centres in Turkey, and more than 200,000
children are enrolled in school.

Turkey makes every effort to provide security
and safety to women and girls who have fled from the
conflict. Within this scope, multiple initiatives and
programmes have been put in place to ensure prevention,
participation, protection and education for women and
girls. The humanitarian aid programme for eliminating
and responding to gender-based violence that we carried
out in collaboration with the United Nations Population
Fund is an example of such initiatives. We strongly
believe that women and children have a tremendously
important role to play in rebuilding Syria.

