Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China appreciates the efforts of Nigeria to convene
today's open debate. I wish to thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his statement. I also listened carefully
to the statements by Madam Bachelet, Executive
Director of UN-Women, Ambassador Kapambwe,
Permanent Representative of Zambia and President of
the Economic and Social Council, and Ms. Nemat of
the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and
Security.

Women are vulnerable in conflict situations and
therefore require special attention. Women can make
unique contributions to the maintenance of
international peace and security, and their potentials
must be further tapped. The Security Council's
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) was important
progress in the efforts of the international community
to protect women's rights and interests. However, there
remains a lot to do in comprehensively implementing
that resolution. I wish to emphasize four points.

First, to avoid and reduce the harm suffered by
women in armed conflict, it is first necessary to
prevent war and reduce conflicts. The Security Council
bears the primary responsibility of maintaining
international peace and security. To safeguard women's
rights and interests, the Council should conduct active
preventive diplomacy and promote the use of means
such as dialogue, consultations and negotiations for the
peaceful settlement of disputes. Council resolutions,
especially its mandate for civilian protection, should be
strictly implemented so as to avoid more casualties
among women and children.

Secondly, ensuring the participation of women in
conflict resolution and prevention and in rehabilitation
and reconstruction is an important part of the efforts to
implement resolution 1325 (2000). China supports a
bigger role for women in good offices and dispute
mediation. We hope the Secretary-General will appoint
more female special representatives and special
envoys, and we hope to see greater participation by
women in United Nations good offices and mediation
concerning major international and regional hotspots.

Thirdly, in conflict resolution and post-conflict
reconstruction, the national ownership of the
government and people concerned must be respected.
The international community can provide constructive
help, but it must adhere to the United Nations Charter
and the principle of non-interference in internal affairs.
In safeguarding the rights and interests of women and
enhancing their role in peace and security, specific
national conditions and historical and cultural
differences must be fully taken into account. A uniform
approach is not desirable.

Fourthly, in advancing the agenda of women,
peace and security, the relevant United Nations organs
should collaborate while working in their respective
spheres of competence. The Council should, in
accordance with its Charter mandate, focus its attention
on situations that threaten international peace and
security. At the same time, the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) also requires organs such as the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and the Human Rights Council to fully play their roles.
China appreciates the leading role of UN-Women and
looks forward to its greater contribution to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

