Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2014/181) and personal
leadership against sexual violence in conflict, and
Special Representative Bangura for her fearlessness.
Both have been instrumental in driving the
unprecedented global commitment we have to ending
conflict-related sexual Violence. But the challenge, as
we know, simply never ceases.

Last week in South Sudan, we witnessed the horror
of radio-broadcast hate speech inciting rape and sexual
violence against women and girls as a brutal weapon
of war. It is very dangerous being a women or a girl
when the rule of law fails and insecurity prevails. I also
thank Ms. Misaka for her briefing, which has been a
good and inspirational reminder of how essential it is
that the entire international community - the Council,
Governments, regional organizations, the United
Nations and non-governmental organizations - work
collaboratively and actively to combat sexual violence.
We support regular briefings to the Council by such
experts.

The international prohibition on sexual violence in
conflict is long-standing, but our plan for combating it
has not previously been laid out. That is why the advances
last year were so important. Those include the adoption
of resolution 2106 (2013), setting out a comprehensive
prevention framework, and the Declaration of
Commitment to End Sexual Violence in Conflict,
signed now by over 140 nations. We congratulate the
United Kingdom and Foreign Secretary Hague on their
efforts on the Preventing Sexual Violence Initiative, in
which Australia's Foreign Minister, Julie Bishop, is an
active champion.

Our challenge, now as always, is implementation-
turning the resolutions into solutions, as Ms. Bangura
has just said. Fundamental to that is timely and
comprehensive information. Unhindered humanitarian
access is essential, as are measures to fight the stigma
and threats of reprisal against survivors, which impede
its reporting. Increasing the numbers of women in
peacekeeping missions and police units can help, and we
must address barriers to their recruitment, deployment
and retention. We must ensure the early deployment of
women protection advisers in United Nations missions.

Commitments on the part of Governments and
parties to conflict to combating sexual Violence are
crucial to change on the ground. We commend Special
Representative Bangura for securing new commitments
with the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Somalia. Reaching armed groups is hard, but we must
try. Ceasefire agreements should always include sexual
violence as a prohibited act.

Specific actions to prevent sexual violence must be
included in security sector reform, rule oflaw initiatives
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes. As resolution 2117 (2013) recognized, the
misuse of small arms and light weapons exacerbates
sexual violence, and we call on all States that have not
yet done so to sign and ratify the Arms Trade Treaty.

There must be situation-specific training for all
peacekeeping personnel, including military and police,
that addresses the full range of sexual violence crimes,
including abductions, forced marriage and sexual
slavery. Particular attention must also be given to the
needs of the most vulnerable populations, including
the marginalized, children, older persons, indigenous
communities, people with disabilities and displaced
persons. The needs of men and boy survivors must also
be considered.

As Ms. Misaka reminded the Council this
morning, it is crucial that survivors have quick access
to comprehensive services, including sexual and
reproductive health services and psychosocial, legal
and livelihood support. We must confront the issue
of pregnancy as a result of rape, particularly where
abortion services are illegal and the health consequences
of unsafe abortion and a lack of maternity care are dire.
Civil society and women's organizations providing
services and giving political voice to women affected
by conflict must also be adequately resourced.

Australian Foreign Minister Bishop announced
in Jordan this week a $20-million contribution to the
United Nations "No lost generation" initiative to support
Syrian refugee children, including child survivors of
sexual violence. Sexual Violence is a persistent and
deliberate feature of the conflict in Syria, brutalizing
civilians and displacing populations, and is a constant
threat in the refugee camps, themselves.

Decisively, we must move beyond just the immediate
or short-term provision of support, vital though it is.
Empowering survivors with their own economic future
can be a transformative way to reconstruct their lives.
Obviously, accountability is centrally important. States
must accept their primary obligation to investigate and
prosecute sexual violence crimes, provide support for
survivors and protect witnesses who testify. Teams of
experts working to support local justice mechanisms
can have lasting impacts. As part of the regional
peacebuilding mission to Solomon Islands, Australia
has mentored female Solomon Islands police to take
victim statements, compile evidence and support
survivors throughout court processes. Such models
are naturally being applied elsewhere and should have
broad application.

Where nationaljurisdictions are unable or unwilling
to prosecute perpetrators, the Council should consider
referrals to the International Criminal Court. Targeted
Council sanctions have a clear role to play - to
expose and circumscribe the perpetrators and create
a powerful deterrent to others. The current events in
South Sudan encapsulate the challenges we face in that
regard. In consultations two days ago, the Security
Council was told the exact times and the content of the
media broadcasts inciting rape and the names of the
individuals who made them. We must ensure that they
are held to account.

To conclude, the Security Council's debate on
sexual violence may only take place once a year, but our
work to end that barbaric practice - that crime - must
be a daily commitment and attract our serious attention
across the whole of our agenda. The Council must take
every opportunity available and use every tool it has
to end that abhorrent crime and provide survivors the
justice and services they need to rebuild their lives.

