Mr. Antonio de Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): I thank
the President for convening today's debate. I would like
to thank Special Representative Zainab Hawa Bangura
for her leadership. I also thank the NGO Working Group
on Women, Peace and Security for its commitment.

Brazil strongly condemns the repugnant use of
sexual violence as a weapon of war. Serious Violations
such as rape, sexual slavery and forced pregnancies, all
of which constitute crimes against humanity, continue
to occur on a massive scale during armed conflicts
around the world. This dire situation is worsened by
the fact that victims are often afraid to expose the
abuses they have endured due to the absence of a
protective environment and a fear of stigmatization and
punishment. We expect this challenge to be at the core
of the Council's upcoming high-level review of women
and peace and security.

As the annual report of the Secretary-General
(S/2015/203) correctly points out, sexual violence can
also be a method of terror. Brazil deplores the fact
that non-State actors with extremist ideologies have
deliberately employed this appalling tactic to subjugate,
humiliate and disseminate fear and distress.

National Governments bear the primary responsibility
for the protection of civilians under their jurisdiction,
including of those who are most vulnerable to sexual
abuse. In this regard, the international community
should encourage and help States to fully exercise
their responsibility. Ensuring justice for all Victims
and accountability for all perpetrators is of great
importance in tackling the menace of sexual violence
in conflict and upholding the tenets of international
humanitarian law. Peace negotiations, mediation
processes and power-sharing agreements should all
embrace the specific legal, medical and psychosocial
needs of victims of sexual abuse. The complementary
jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court may
play a decisive role in this regard.

Above all, the wisest and most effective way to
counter the martial use of sexual violence would be
to redouble our efforts to prevent conflict. Apart from
traditional diplomatic instruments for the peaceful
resolution of disputes, this could be achieved through
more ambitious policies to promote awareness for gender-
based questions at the highest levels of peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding endeavours. Recent
experience suggests that women can play a pivotal role
in overcoming ethnic and sectarian divides in order to
seek peace, justice and tolerance.

The Peacebuilding Commission, which was chaired
by Brazil last year, has acknowledged the link between
the advancement of women and the establishment of
sustainable peace. In the same vein, the Peacebuilding
Fund has financed projects to support Victims of sexual
and gender-based violence in Nepal and Liberia, inter
alia. Through South-South cooperation, Brazil is
also involved in initiatives aimed at assisting Victims
of sexual and gender-based Violence and combating
impunity in countries affected by conflict or instability,
in particular Haiti, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Guinea-Bissau.

Multidimensional peacekeeping missions are also
instrumental in preventing conflict-related sexual
violence and can profoundly impact women's lives on
the ground, not only by providing a secure environment
for women and girls but also by helping law enforcement
bodies to address gender-based crimes and by
facilitating women's participation in decision-making
processes. In this regard, Brazil expects the women and
peace and security agenda to be duly considered in the
discussions and deliberations of the high-level panels
on United Nations peacekeeping operations and on the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture.

Within the sphere of responsibility of the General
Assembly, Brazil will chair the sixtieth session of the
Commission on the Status of Women with the firm
conviction that gender issues are of critical concern.
We believe that every public policy should reflect the
imperatives of respecting, protecting and empowering
women and girls. This cannot be achieved without
fully engaging men and counting on their unwavering
support, which is why the Brazilian Government has
endorsed the HeForShe solidarity campaign launched
by UN-Women.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the fact that
Brazil attaches the utmost priority to the women and
peace and security agenda of the Security Council. We
hope this cross-cutting agenda will inform all major
decisions to be taken by the Organization and that
the international community can recommit to joining
forces to eradicate the scourge of sexual Violence in
conflict.

