Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): I wish to
thank the Russian Federation for organizing this debate.

The historic adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) 16
years ago represented international recognition of the
role played by women in matters of peace and security,
not only as victims but also as agents of change and
essential players in the restoration, maintenance and
building of peace. A number of resolutions followed,
enshrinomg greater political recognition ofthe question
of women and peace and security with precise and
clear provisions regarding the need to ensure the fair
representation of women and men in peace processes
and to improve the physical and legal protection of
women and girls.

Despite signs of progress, we are forced to note
that the overall result is far from being satisfactory.
Evaluations of the achievements of the 15 past years
clearly show that the participation of women in
negotiation processes has remained low. Between
1992 and 2011, only 9 per cent of negotiators were
women. Only 27 per cent of peace agreements signed
between 2000 and 2015 referred to women's gender
equality and the needs of women. Women make up just
3 per cent of the positions of authority throughout the
world. According to the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development, today only 2 per cent
of foreign funds invested in reviving the economies
of post-conflict countries are allocated to promoting
the equality of women, their empowerment or the
satisfaction of their specific needs for a period of time.

And yet, women constitute half of the world's
population. Their involvement in peacebuilding remains
not only a right, but also, given the disproportionate
impact of conflict on their lives, an obligation. They
can make an undeniably valuable contribution to
peace negotiations. It is therefore necessary to change
the paradigm so as to change the status quo and give
women more power so as to shake up the established
order. Indeed, the participation of women in negotiating
processes increases the chances of a settlement of
conflict and the sustainability of peace. That fact was
confirmed by a global study undertaken by UN-Women
in 2015, which revealed that the presence of women
in peace negotiations promoted the sustainability of
peace agreements, and that 35 per cent of agreements
negotiated by women lasted more than 15 years.

Morocco has adopted a voluntary, proactive policy
to entrench the principles of gender equality, which is
now enshrined in my country's Constitution. In addition
to legislative texts, Morocco has committed itself to
significant legal and institutional reforms to promote a
culture of gender equality and the gender perspective.
It is in that context that in 2012 Morocco launched, in
partnership with Spain, an initiative on the promotion
of the role women in the mediation process in the
Mediterranean. That initiative has enabled us to give
mediation training to a number of Mediterranean women
so as to ensure that they are available to the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations.

In addition, on 7 September Morocco organized
an international conference on the topic of women and
peace and security. The conference contributed to the
international debate on the role of women in peace
processes and the implementation of national plans of
action to promote collective action on implementing
resolution 1325 (2000). It was an occasion to reaffirm
the international community's consensus on the need to
strengthen the participation of women in negotiations
and agreements concerning the settlement of conflicts
and peacebuilding, as well as to renew the commitment
of the United Nations to the question of the inclusion
of women and gender equality in all strategies aimed
at restoring peace and preventing conflict. A number
of questions were debated at the conference, including
the role of women in mediation and conflict-prevention
processes, the role of women in deradicalization,
lessons learned and best practices in the prevention of
sexual violence in conflict.

At the conference, my country announced the
creation in Rabat of an independent regional centre
dedicated to studying the role of women in peacekeeping
operations and their contribution to the achievement
of sustainable development. The centre could serve
as a space for reflection, a reservoir of ideas and a
source of independent thought regarding the role and
place of women in peacekeeping operations, as well as
peacebuilding in conflict zones. It is in keeping with
the priorities of the Security Council. in terms of the
promotion and empowerment of women, gender equality,
the building of peace and international security, the
dissemination of the culture of peace, ensuring access
to justice and the protection of civil rights.

An essential element of the women and peace and
security programme is conflict prevention. Women's
perpectives in dealing with social tensions; their
awareness of threats to personal, familial and community
threats; their knowledge of the flow and circulation of
small arms and light weapons, particularly within their
communities; and their interpretation of extremism in
local discourse all contribute to the creation of primary
mechanisms for rapid response, early warning and
intelligence of imminent conflicts that may be rarely
understood or heeded by local security authorities.

