The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Angola.

We thank the Secretary-General for presenting to
the Security Council his report (A/70/229) on special
measures on protection from sexual exploitation and
abuse, which provides an analysis and strategies to
counter this outrageous phenomenon in the United
Nations system. We welcome the holding of this
debate, which affords the members of the Council
an opportunity to renew their political support to the
Secretary-General in implementing the zero-tolerance
policy against sexual exploitation and abuse by
peacekeepers, as well as our resolve in condemning
such actions.

The report of the Secretary-General refers to
an increase in the number of alleged cases in 2015,
following a decrease in 2014, involving a relatively
high proportion of minors and non-consensual relations
involving adults - with cases in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic reaching a peak. Angola
strongly condemns violence against civilians, in
particular sexually related violence - against women,
girls and boys - by United Nations peacekeepers.
We therefore fully support the Secretary-General's
zero-tolerance policy and welcome the continuous
commitment and strengthening of measures aimed at
accountability based on the principles of transparency
and impartiality. We are encouraged by his renewed
commitment to ensure that reported allegations are
fully and promptly investigated, in cooperation with
troop-contributing countries, to ensure that those
responsible are held accountable.

In that regard, we deem predeployment training as
an essential tool to avoid misconduct and ensure that
troops strictly respect the Organization's standards of
conduct. It is important to systematically include the
prevention of conflict-related sexual violence and its
follow-up in the relevant country-specific resolutions
and the mandates of special political and peacekeeping
missions. Furthermore, increasing the number of women
in peacekeeping operations and police units can help
combat stigma and threats of reprisal, which impede
victims from reporting. We welcome the Secretary-
General's plan to develop a community-based complaint
reception mechanism - a measure that I am sure will
help to address the fear among victims that we see today.
We also suppor the proposal that troop-contributing
countries enter into bilateral agreements with the
Office of Internal Oversight Services to authorize it
to investigate alleged cases by members of military
contingents, either independently or in cooperation
with national investigation officers. Other measures,
such as better-calibrated rotation schedules, adequate
provision of welfare programmes and better standards
of living for troops and the regular payment of salaries
to uniformed personnel, are sensible measures capable
of addressing the need for a reduction in such cases.

We have just returned from a Council mission to
Mali, where we saw a peacekeeping mission deployed
under the most challenging circumstances. We pay
special tribute to those heroic peacekeepers, not just in
Mali but in other theatres, in very special circumstances,
who unfortunately see their work being tarnished by
the actions of a few. We should act on this issue very
vigorously.

We took good note of the recommendations by the
external independent panel to review the United Natins
response, and especially ofthe Secretary-General's clear
and forward-looking proposals to strengthen measures
to prevent and protect and to enforce accountability,
management and remedial action in response to sexual
exploitation and abuse.

Finally, we have taken note of the draft resolution
presented by the United States. We are ready to continue
work on it in a constructive spirit in order to achieve a
Council document that is the good product we would
like to see put in place.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to the Secretary-General.

