Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation wishes to thank Nigeria for the
initiative of organizing today's open debate. I wish
to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and Special
Representative Bangura for their briefings. We also
listened carefully to the statement just made by the
representative of the non-governmental organization.

In recent years, thanks to the joint efforts of the
United Nations and the international community,
countries in conflict have achieved substantial progress
in preventing fighting sexual Violence and supporting
the rights of women in conflict. However, in many
armed conflicts in today's world, vulnerable groups,
including women, continue to bear the brunt of the
consequences of war. The practice remains rampant
where the threat of violence has been used as a method
of war. That constitutes not only a serious affront to
the rights and dignity of women, but also flagrant
challenge to the peaceful reconstruction efforts of the
countries concerned and shocks the human conscience;
it therefore should be fought by the international
community in a concerted manner.

China condemns and opposes all violence against
civilians in armed conflict, including sexual violence.
We call for the comprehensive implementation of the
Councils resolutions and urge the parties to conflict
to respect international human rights law and relevant
international law, immediately stop all sexual violence
and take concrete actions to protect the security and
rights of vulnerable groups, including women and
children.

I would now like to stress the following three
points.

First, the fight against sexual violence and armed
conflict should depend mainly on the efforts of the
affected countries. Relevant national Governments
bear the primary responsibility for implementing
Council resolutions and fighting sexual violence in
conflict. The international community, including the
United Nations, should fully respect the sovereignty
and will ofthe affected countries. They should focus on
helping with the capacity-building of those countries
and resolve the financing and technical difficulties they
encounter.

It is important to put into practice the principles
referred to in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2014/181), namely, national ownership, national
leadership and national responsibility. It is also
important to encourage and support the efforts
carried out by the affected countries in prevention and
resolution of issues arising from sexual violence in
armed conflict.

Secondly, in addressing issues involving women
and peace and security, including sexual violence,
the relevant organs of the United Nations should
respect the division of labour and work in a concerted
manner. As the primary organ for the maintenance of
international peace and security, the Security Council
should focus on conflict prevention, peacekeeping and
post-conflict peacebuilding so as to create an enabling
political and security environment for reducing and
eliminating sexual violence in armed conflict. The
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council,
the Human Rights Council and UN-Women should
each leverage its advantage and work closely with the
Council so as to create synergy. The Council should
strictly abide by its relevant mandate in dealing with
sexual violence and avoid stepping into areas of
responsibility enjoyed by other organs. United Nations
missions should also observe Council mandates in
carrying out security sector reform and post-conflict
peacebuilding. It is important to pay special attention
to strengthening communication and cooperation with
the countries concerned.

Thirdly, special attention should be given to
addressing the root causes of sexual violence in
armed conflict. To prevent and curb sexual violence
in armed conflict, punishment and monitoring have to
be strengthened. It is also important to tackle the root
causes that are the breeding ground for conflicts. It is
important to promote the overall economic and social
development of the countries concerned and maintain
political security and stability to enhance the status
of women and achieve women's empowerment. The
international community should scale up its assistance
to women's development in those countries.

