Mrs. Asmady (Indonesia): Let me begin by
expressing my delegation's appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his efforts to establish a system-
wide action plan for the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000), as set out in his report
on women and peace and security (5/2005/636). Not
only will the report ensure better coordination and the
provision of more efficient support to Member States
and other actors in implementing the resolution at the
national and regional levels, but it will also strengthen
the commitment and accountability of the United
Nations at the highest level.

Indonesia agrees that it is important - as
underlined in the 2005 World Summit Outcome - to
integrate a gender perspective into all efforts to
maintain and promote peace and security and to ensure
equal opportunities for women to be fully involved in
peace processes, as well as to increase their role in
decision-making at all levels. In Indonesia, the entry
into force of Law No. 12 of 2003 on general elections
provides a solid foundation for women's participation
in the decision-making process. The law seeks to
guarantee that women make up at least 30 per cent of
those individuals contesting national and regional
parliamentary elections. In doing so, it creates an
awareness of gender equality in power and decision-
making.

As a major contributor to United Nations
peacekeeping missions, Indonesia is of the view that
training, gender-sensitization and capacity-building for
uniformed personnel and civilian police are essential
for effective United Nations peacemaking,
peacebuilding and peacekeeping missions. Law No. 3
of 2002 reaffirmed the need for a new peace paradigm
which will inculcate in the Indonesian army a deep
commitment to democracy, human rights and the
protection of the environment. Those principles have
become an integral part of the basic curriculums of
military schools and other military training activities.

My delegation strongly believes that, together
with the 12 areas of action, gender mainstreaming must
have an impact, at all levels, on those responsible for
the implementation of the action plan. Indonesia
therefore fully agrees that there is a need to strengthen
the commitment of senior and top managers to
institutionalize gender mainstreaming by means of
developing effective monitoring, reporting and
accountability mechanisms. In this connection,
Indonesia welcomes the efforts of the United Nations
specialized agencies that have put in place improved
accountability systems to ensure that senior
management and staff at all levels undertake efforts to
achieve gender mainstreaming in their work.

In order to facilitate implementation, there should
be increased efforts to address serious persistent
challenges, including overlapping activities;
underdeveloped monitoring, reporting and
accountability mechanisms; the inadequate utilization
of gender specialists; and insufficient capacity for
gender analysis. It is my delegation's fervent hope that
the action plan will be used as a tool for better
coordination and the enhancing of synergies within the
United Nations system, so that such challenges can be
properly addressed as soon as possible.

Indonesia also agrees with the Secretary-
General's recommendation to enhance inter-agency
cooperation in the field, including through United
Nations country teams, gender theme groups and
gender advisers and units and to improve cooperation
with national Governments, national machineries for
the advancement of women and the promotion of
gender equality, and civil society. However, such
efforts should focus on the capacity-building of
national machinery, particularly in the area of raising
awareness for gender mainstreaming and equality
through training, advocacy and socialization, targeting
various executive and legislative authorities.

In conclusion, Indonesia is of the view that
establishing time lines for the action plan will improve
the accuracy of and coordination among concerned
United Nations agencies, as well as leading to the
enhancement of accountability. It is Indonesia's keen
hope that significant progress towards the effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) will be
achieved beyond 2007 and that women will be able to
live more secure and productive lives and fully enjoy
their human rights and fundamental freedoms.

