Mr. Manalo (Philippines): Allow me to join
others in commending you, Mr. President, for
convening this important meeting on women and peace
and security, on the basis of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000). In this regard, my delegation
renews its commitment to enhancing the role of women
in resolving and preventing conflicts as well as in
peacekeeping and peace-building efforts.

My delegation also wishes to express its
appreciation of the efforts of the Office of the Special
Adviser on Gender Issues and the Advancement of
Women, which worked in close cooperation with the
Inter-agency Task Force on Women, Peace and
Security in undertaking the study on women, peace and
security.

That study recognizes, among other things, that
after an armed conflict situation, women and girls face
the formidable task of rebuilding their lives, a situation
which is worsened when they also have to deal with
intimidation, physical threats and domestic violence.

It has been two years since Member States
reaffirmed the Beijing Platform for Action, and much
remains to be done in mainstreaming gender in
peacekeeping and disarmament. If progress is to be
made towards a gender perspective in relation to peace
and security, Governments must learn from the
experiences of women and girls during armed conflicts.

Armed conflicts have often led to the perpetration
of rape and sexual violence, and women and girls are
usually the victims. In the process, some have become
infected with HIV/AIDS. Aside from sexual violence,
women and girls have also been victims of abduction,
forced prostitution and trafficking imposed by military,
paramilitary and other groups.

The experiences and sufferings of women and
girls as victims of armed conflict will be helpful in
addressing the root causes of conflict, and it is also
important that their participation in peace processes,
whether formally or informally, be considered as
essential and important.

Adequate measures and mechanisms must also be
taken by United Nations agencies and other relief
organizations assisting in humanitarian operations to
protect women and girls from violence. Basic goods
and services as well as access to social and economic
programmes must be made available to this vulnerable

group.

In the Philippines, the plight of women in conflict
has received greater attention with our 25-year plan for
women. It contains gender-responsive peacekeeping
and peace- building programmes, including gender-
responsive peace education. Specifically, our Plan for
Gender-Responsive Development includes strategies to
integrate women in peace consultations as well as to
institutionalize the participation of women in conflict-
resolution, unification and reconciliation processes.

My Government looks to the Security Council to
provide the momentum for promoting the involvement
of women in finding solutions to armed conflict and in
peacekeeping and peace-building. In the report of the
Secretary-General, concrete recommendations for
practical and workable mechanisms for gender
mainstreaming in peace and security have been put
forth.

Regarding the Secretary-General's recommendations
on reconstruction and rehabilitation, the Philippines
has been working towards mainstreaming women and
children's peace agendas, including socio-economic
reforms in programmes for grass-roots peace
movements. These include sensitizing government to
the gender concerns of women through dialogue,
organizing and strengthening women's organizations
and reviewing gender responsiveness of legislation,
policies and programmes related to peacekeeping and
peace-building. Finally, we hope that the Council will
be able to examine closely the Secretary-General's
recommendations at the earliest opportunity.

