Mr. Antonio (spoke in French): Given the time
allotted to us, I will try to state the essence of my
statement, which has been provided to the Secretariat. I
represent an organization that comprises a quarter of
United Nations Member States, so we do have much to
say.
I would like to apologize on behalf of
Commissioner Ramtane Lamamra, who was unable to
stay on in New York to participate in today's debate. I
would also like to commend the Ugandan presidency
for raising issues that are of great interest to Africa.

I commend the role of the Secretary-General,
who despite being far away was resolved to address us
this morning. I especially commend the United Nations
commitment to Africa. This month, we launched the
African Women's Decade in Nairobi, Kenya. The
United Nations was represented by Deputy Secretary-
General Asha-Rose Migiro, another African sister
serving the Organization. We also commend the
leadership of Ms. Bachelet. Her term has begun well
with this energetic and busy meeting, punctuated for
once by applause. We assure her of the African Union's
cooperation.

I am compelled to begin by stressing the great
interest that Africa attaches to the subject at hand.
Africa is host to 70 per cent of the United Nations
peacekeeping operations, so today's issue is of direct
relevance to its peoples. I would like to thank all the
women of the world for the solidarity they
demonstrated, above all to the women of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, when they marched
this month in Bukavu. In so doing, they manifested
their solidarity with all the women and, by extension,
the peoples ofAfrica.

I would like to offer some background. The
African Union (AU) is about the same age as Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000). I am sure it will be
understood that this historic coincidence or opportunity
has had an impact on the very structure of the African
Union Commission, with its five female and five male
Commissioners. That is a sacrosanct rule of the African
Union. The Constitutive Act of the African Union
incorporates gender elements from the international
bill of human rights, as does the Union's Solemn
Declaration on the Equality of the Sexes. This issue is
clearly of great importance to the African continent and
is reflected in its legal instruments.

(spoke in English)

Regarding the specific topic of today's debate,
the African Union has continued to develop its specific
policy and institutional capacity in this area. In July
2003, following a decision by the Executive Council,
the African Women Committee on Peace and
Development was strengthened to serve as an advisory
body on peace and security matters and on
empowerment and advocacy for gender equality in
general to the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission.

The African Union Gender Policy, launched two
years ago, stresses the need to reinforce good practices
of respect, equality and human dignity between men
and women in the workplace and in society at large,
and to enforce zero tolerance for gender-based
violence, sexual harassment, assault, rape, sexual
favours, gender stereotyping, sexism and abusive
language and actions in the workplace, society and
situations of conflict. It stresses the need ensure severe
sanction and punishment for perpetrators of such acts.
It further calls for the use of the Paris Principles and
Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed Forces
or Armed Groups as the basis for programmatic
interventions in Africa, which should incorporate
measures to prevent sexual abuse and pervasive
discrimination against women and girls as weapons in
armed conflict, and to promote their equal status in
society.

The AU Gender Policy also calls for the
mobilization of women leaders to participate in peace
mediation and related processes and in post-conflict
processes. It also calls for the AU to work jointly with
relevant United Nations bodies on measures to track
violations against women and girls during conflict and
to find lasting solutions to abuses.

The African Union is further committed to
working towards addressing violence against women
perpetrated through human and drug trafficking, and to
articulate the gender perspectives of child labour,
prostitution and abuse. Furthermore, the African Union
has developed a gender training manual for AU
peacekeepers, designed to be a resource for the African
standby force and other hybrid operations, and for
training institutions in troop-contributing countries.

Other important measures taken by the AU
include the adoption of the Protocol to the African
Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights on the Rights of
Women in Africa, the AU Gender Policy and the
launching of the African Women's Development Fund.
The AU has also taken measures in the context of the
Regional Economic Communities in order to give
further impetus to the efforts for overall gender
equality in Africa. As is known, in February 2009, the
Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
African Union declared the period 2010-2020 as the
African Women's Decade, which was just launched, as
I mentioned earlier, in October in Nairobi. We have
also taken further measures in the framework of the
Secretary-General's campaign to end Violence against
women. The AU, jointly with United Nations agencies
in Addis Ababa, launched the Africa UNiTE campaign
on 30 January.

During the African Union's Year of Peace and
Security in Africa, 2010, the Gender Directorate of the
United Nations Economic Commission for Africa also
worked closely with the AU Peace and Security
Department and the Peace and Security Council to
ensure that gender issues were well addressed in this
framework.

I think I have to conclude my statement here.
There are many proposals that are discussed in the
written text that I provided to the Secretariat. But I
would like to thank all the women who have played
leadership roles in resolving conflicts in Africa, from
Mozambique, Angola and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to the ongoing conflicts in Somalia and in
the Sudan.

In conclusion, I would like to join my voice to
those who have called for the adoption of the indicators
to help monitor implementation, address the issue of
fragmentation in global progress in implementation and
provide a basis for monitoring the success of national
action plans in implementation.

(spoke in French)

That is a summary of what we wished to say this
evening. I would like once again to thank the delegation
of Uganda for having brought such a high standard to
Africa's participation in the Security Council.

