The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the United
Kingdom.

I associate myself with the remarks to be
delivered subsequently by the representative of the
Netherlands on behalf of the European Union and I
extend my thanks to all those who are participating in
today's meeting.

Much of today's meeting has looked at how the
United Nations can better ensure sustainable peace by
strengthening efforts to further the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). There is more the Council
must do, too, along with the wider United Nations
membership here in New York, but crucially, resolution
1325 (2000) must also be implemented at the national
level by all United Nations Member States if it is to be
fully effective. The United Kingdom is therefore
currently examining how it can best use the
opportunity of our presidencies of the G-8 and the
European Union next year to ensure wider
implementation of that key resolution.

In London, we are currently developing a
Government-wide action plan for our implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), linking development,
humanitarian, defence and diplomacy work. The
United Kingdom Ministry of Defence has recently
launched action across the armed services to ensure
that the provisions of resolution 1325 (2000) are
implemented systematically in the Ministry's planning,
doctrine and training programmes. The Department of
International Development is acting similarly and
developing case studies of Iraq, Afghanistan, Kosovo,
Sierra Leone and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

But efforts at the national level have to be
complemented by action overseas. Thus, in
Afghanistan, the United Kingdom worked to get
Afghan women to take up their rightful role in the
recent elections, in voter registration and as
campaigners and officials, and to take up their quotas
for representation in Parliament. I think we can all be
pleased that, in Afghanistan, women represented over
40 per cent of the voter turnout recently.

In June, the United Kingdom organized a training
seminar in Cairo to assist Iraqi women in developing
their positive participation. We have also held
workshops in Baghdad and in Basra that have helped
women on the role of democracy and democratic
values, thus combining women's rights with long-term
conflict prevention.

The United Kingdom is funding a local project to
empower Arab women with leadership skills in order
to provide active role models to encourage women to
become future election candidates. In the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, we are working closely with
partners to develop action plans to ensure women's full
participation in the election as voters, potential leaders,
civic educators and election observers, as well as
contributors to the ongoing peace and transition
process in their country. In East Timor, we are funding
training workshops for election candidates and helping
the civil police integrate gender perspectives into their
work.

Equally important, however, is to recognize that,
to support the role that civil society can play is
absolutely crucial in the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). That is why the United Kingdom is
cooperating with non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) in many areas and in many theatres of conflict.
Civil society has played a key role in driving forward
the implementation of that resolution through
advocacy, training and awareness-raising. I would like
to commend the civil society representatives here today
for their dedication and for their work in holding the
United Nations, and the Security Council in particular,
to account for its actions on resolution 1325 (2000).
Their contribution to this process is vital.

I would also like to thank Ms. Agathe Rwankuba
for travelling from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in order to be able to talk to us today. It is
important that the voices of civil society are heard in
the Council, because it is often the NGO community
that really bears witness at the heart of conflict
situations.

Resolution 1325 (2000) explicitly calls on all
parties to armed conflict to take special measures to
protect women and girls from gender-based violence. It
emphasizes that it is the responsibility of all States to
put an end to impunity and to prosecute those
responsible for war crimes, including those crimes
related to sexual and other violence against women and
girls. The Council must assume responsibility for
enforcing those provisions of the resolution. That
means ensuring that those aspects are fully included in
the resolutions that set up peacekeeping operations,
and that they are mainstreamed into the work of all
members of the United Nations family in the field. We,
the United Nations system and Member States, must all
work harder to implement resolution 1325 (2000). I
hope today's meeting will spur us all on to face the
challenges.

But we also have to recognize our responsibility
to improve the situation faced by women in post-
conflict situations. Suffering from sexual violence does
not end with the signing of a peace accord. We know
that we must, on the one hand, do more to prevent
women from becoming victims of conflict; but we also
have to ensure that women are not also victims of the
post-conflict situation. Conflict or the social and
economic uncertainties of the post-conflict
environment often force women into prostitution or
sexual slavery as the only means to survive or to
support themselves and their families.

Our obligation is clear: we have to create a post-
conflict environment that offers hope. Women must be
full and equal participants in the building of peace -
in the development of post-conflict legislative, judicial
and constitutional structures - because that is the only
way that those structures will be fully representative of
the post-conflict society, and therefore fully able to

meet the needs and demands of all. That is sustainable
peace.

We must never allow the sexual exploitation and
abuse of women in any circumstances in post-conflict
situations, regardless of who is responsible for the
exploitation and the abuse. We have to be very clear on
that. United Nations personnel are our representatives
on the ground. They embody our determination to
bring peace, security, justice and equality. If they, of all
people, abuse their position of trust, they are also
abusing the will of the international community.

The United Kingdom hopes that the adoption of
the presidential statement by the Council today will be
the first step in addressing the challenges identified in
the Secretary-General's report. When we next review
progress, we need to demonstrate that we have made
real improvements in implementation. The truth is that,
if we want to do justice to peace, then we have to do
justice to resolution 1325 (2000).

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
In order to optimize the use of our time, I will not
individually invite speakers to take their seats at the
Council table. But when a speaker is taking the floor,
the Conference Officer will seat the next speaker on
the list at the table, in readiness to address the Council.
I thank participants in advance for their cooperation in
that regard.

I would now like to call on the representative of
Canada.

