Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): Liechtenstein aligns
itself with the statement delivered earlier today by the
representative of Switzerland on behalf of the Group of
Friends of the Protection of Civilians. We should like
to add a few additional points without repeating too
much of what has already been said. I shall not reiterate
comments on the various reviews under way, except to
say that this year, as we review peace operations and the
Peacebuilding Commission, we hope that the protection
of civilians will be an unconditional core element of
those reviews. In the public eye, the United Nations is
truly expected to protect civilians in the field. That is a
core task, and we very much hope that the reviews will
focus on it.

As to the topic of today's debate - the protection
challenges and needs faced by women and girls in armed
conflict and post-conflict settings * we appreciate the
focus. At the same time, we want to ensure that women
are not just portrayed as victims during conflict. It is
absolutely crucial that we emphasize the importance
of women being part of the solution as empowered
members of society, with the right to participate at every
level of decision-making. Obviously, that is a long-term
project, and we need to address vulnerabilities well
before conflicts break out. Promoting gender equality,
I believe, can best be done in times of peace and not as
well during times of conflict.

Liechtenstein appreciates the increasing recognition
of women's vital role in preventing and resolving
conflict in peacebuilding, and not just a focus on their
vulnerability. While the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Peacebuilding Commission in
particular have very strongly acknowledged this, we
need to translate those commitments into progress
on the ground. We especially want to emphasize that
implementing those existing commitments is absolutely
key and will require leadership, not just in United
Nations Headquarters, but particularly in the field on
the part of heads of missions, special envoys and so
on. They must lead by example. They must ensure that
an adequate number of gender advisers are deployed
and that there is sufficient focus on including women
in conflict-resolution efforts. In that regard, we should
like to highlight the very positive examples set by
Hilda Johnson in South Sudan and Mary Robinson in
the Great Lakes region. These leaders have insisted on
bringing appropriate gender expertise to their efforts.
For example, one ofthe first things that Mary Robinson
did as part of her conflict-resolution effort was to
convene a women's forum for the Great Lakes region.

I would also like to briefly touch on the issue of
criminal accountability. It is a fact that the United
Nations and the international community have very
limited tools at their disposal to fight violence against
women and girls in conflict. Of course, we have
peacekeepers and we have troops on the ground, but
judicial systems are another hugely important tool not
just to providejustice after crimes have occurred but also
to provide deterrents. Both national and international
justice mechanisms, such as the International Criminal
Court (ICC), are crucial.

We have also seen increasing evidence of the
deterrent effect of the International Criminal Court,
especially with regard to actors who seek some degree
of legitimacy. Deterrence can be very difficult to
measure, but there has been a recent study on the issue
and I think we should seriously look into it further. I
would also like to remind Council members that the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court has
declared the fight against sexual crimes and violence
against women as one of her priorities. Therefore, we
really believe that the ICC is an important ally of the
United Nations in the fight against sexual violence. We
must also emphasize that criminal accountability must
start at the domestic level, when possible. Sometimes
that will require a great degree of capacity-building
and creativity, as evidenced, for example, by the mobile
courts that are under way in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

Finally, I would like to take a brief moment to draw
attention to a slightly different issue that, thankfully,
has already been raised today by the representative of
New Zealand. whom I would like to thank for raising
the absolutely crucial topic - the protection challenges
faced by persons with disabilities in conflict and post-
conflict settings. Persons with disabilities are highly
vulnerable in conflict due to the multitude of challenges
they face. There are three typical barriers that persons
with disabilities face: barriers in the environment,
barriers regarding communication and barriers in the
attitudes of other persons. During conflict, all these
challenges are exacerbated. Persons with disabilities
confront some incredibly practical problems in times
of conflict, such as having difficulty fleeing violence
during attacks on civilians.

The problems faced by persons with disabilities
are numerous. Just because persons with disabilities
are largely invisible in society - including our own
society - does not mean that they are not there. It
is generally estimated that 15 per cent of persons in
the general population have a disability. The rate is
significantly higher in conflict zones, because conflict
is of course a cause of disability. We read about casualty
numbers, persons killed in certain incidents and
persons injured. Those injured persons in many cases
continue their lives as persons with disabilities, and as
I noted, persons with disabilities are disproportionately
affected by conflict.

Even more affected are women and girls with
disabilities. They are at particular risk of violence
and of sexual violence. It may seem hard to believe,
but women and girls with disabilities are at higher risk
because perpetrators often believe that they will get
away with sexual violence against women and girls with
disabilities, because nobody will believe the victim.

This problem has been little studied and requires
the urgent attention of humanitarian actors and the
Security Council. If we compare the level of attention
given to this issue to that given by the Security Council
to the protection of women and girls in conflict, we
find that many policy debates have focused on women
and peace and security and the challenges of protecting
them. It seems that we have actually been struggling
to say new things in such debates. However, the issue
of persons with disabilities in conflict has barely been
discussed in the Council. There appears to be a gaping
hole on the issue. Respectfully, my delegation would
like to call upon the Security Council to start building
a ramp over that gaping hole.

