Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this briefing. We welcome Special
Representative Margot Wallstrom and Assistant
Secretary-General Rachel Mayanja, and thank them
greatly for their important presentations.

In almost 10 years since the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), the international community
has come a long way. We have come to understand
more fully the implications of armed conflict for
women and have also become more aware of their
specific needs and roles in maintaining or restoring
peace and security. Through resolution 1820 (2008),
we have recognized the gravity of sexual violence in
armed conflicts and have enhanced our action against
it.

Resolution 1325 (2000) deals with women as
agents of peace. Such a role comprises many facets,
ranging from conflict prevention to post-conflict
peacebuilding. I would like to briefly touch upon two
such facets.

The first regards institutions. In post-conflict
scenarios, where institutions are rebuilt and gradually
consolidated, there is often a window of opportunity to
surmount historical gender inequalities or
insensitivities. It is precisely when the distribution of
power and roles within a society is being redrawn after
the trauma of war that efforts must be made to ensure
that the concerns and needs of women are duly
contemplated. That is especially applicable to such
processes as constitutional, political and educational
reforms.

The second aspect that I wish to stress relates to
the economic empowerment of women in post-conflict
situations, which is as important as institutional
empowerment. The participation of women in efforts to
rehabilitate and reactivate the economy is of particular
relevance. Given the fundamental role played by
women in key economic sectors, particularly in
agriculture, the impact of development projects can be
enhanced if such projects are focused on women.

Resolutions 1888 (2009) and 1889 (2009) took us
further in our endeavours regarding women, peace and
security, as they helped us to translate a wider
awareness of challenges and opportunities into
effective action. Among the decisions taken by the
Security Council in those resolutions, two are
particularly relevant due to their potential implications
in the mid- and long terms. The first is the request to
the Secretary-General to submit a set of indicators to
track the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
The development of indicators is meant to allow for
more rigorous and results-oriented interventions.

We appreciate the hard work that has gone into
the report before us today. We look forward to the
consultative process that will follow and give all
stakeholders the opportunity to contribute to the further
development of the proposed indicators. In that effort,
we should consider the importance of focusing on
qualitative rather than quantitative ways of measuring
progress and of ensuring flexibility as challenges
facing each country are different and should be
recognized and treated as such. It would be important
to guard against putting additional reporting burdens
on developing States, especially those emerging from
conflict. Collecting and aggregating data and preparing
reports can be challenging tasks. Instead of being a
mechanism for academic analysis, the indicators must
support countries in their practical efforts to improve
the situation of women in post-conflict situations.

The second important decision of the Security
Council in 2009 regarding women, peace and security
was the establishment of the post of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict. It provides the United Nations
system with an authoritative voice empowered to
provide coherent and strategic leadership in the fight
against sexual violence in conflict. It fills a void in
helping different parts of the system to work more
closely and effectively together.

We welcome Ms. Wallstrom's appointment to the
position. We support her two forward-looking
recommendations of continuous attention and of
making prevention a top priority. We also support her
five-point agenda, as it proposes a balanced set of
measures focused both on the past and on the future, on
accountability and on cooperation, on the perpetrators
and on command responsibilities, and adds the very
welcome focus on peer liability.

We commend Mrs. Wallstrom's initiative to visit
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We encourage
and support increased efforts at cooperation with the
Congolese Government in addressing capacity-building
and other needs in the fight against sexual violence. We
also appreciate the measures that have been taken by
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to improve
women's security on the ground.

In concluding, let me also thank the Japanese
delegation for preparing the draft presidential
statement before us, which we fully support.

