Ms. Agladze (Georgia): Let me first express
our gratitude to the French presidency for convening
today's debate on the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda.

Georgia aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union. Let me
add few remarks in my national capacity.

As we approach the seventeenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), we once
again underscore the importance attached to the issue
of gender equality, women's empowerment and the
protection of women's rights. Over the past years,
that landmark resolution has established a complex
agenda for States Members to further empower women
and promote their rights and increased participation
in peace and security efforts. Following the adoption
of the resolution, the importance of women's role has
gradually increased, particularly in conflict prevention
and resolution, and in maintaining peace and security.
However, more has to be done to achieve the full
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda and the relevant resolutions.

We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/861), which underlines the crucial role
of women's increased participation in peace and
decision-making processes at all levels. As stated
in the report, efforts aimed at achieving peace and
security, sustainable development and human rights
must be linked not only in words but also in practice.
It is obvious that the sustainability of peace depends
directly on women's engagement in peace processes,
politics, governance, institution-building, the rule of
law, the security sector and economic recovery, and
that the level of gender equality and the security of
women are among the most reliable indicators of peace.

Georgia adopted a national policy framework and
action plans for the effective implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda early on. At
present, the Government is in the process of drafting
its third national action plan aimed at implementing
resolution 1325 (2000) for the period 2018-2020. The
new action plan, just like previous ones, is being
developed in broad consultation with civil society
together with national partners from line ministries,
State institutions responsible for its implementation and
women's organizations. The whole process is highly
inclusive and transparent.

As an illustration of its strong commitment to
improving and advancing gender equality and ensuring
women's empowerment and the full protection
of women's rights, Georgia recently ratified the
Convention on Preventing and Combating Violence
against Women and Domestic Violence, also known as
the Istanbul Convention, and established an inter-agency
commission for gender equality and ending violence
against women and girls at the executive branch. The
commission represents the domestic coordination and
monitoring mechanism envisaged by article 10 of the
Istanbul Convention, and its work focuses on human
rights, domestic violence, and women and peace
and security.

While underlining the significance of strengthening
protection measures with regard to violence against
women and women's empowerment, our persistent
concern relates to the women living in the occupied
regions of Georgia - Abkhazia and South Ossetia.
Women in the occupied territories continue to suffer
grave violations of their fundamental rights and
freedoms, including but not limited to the freedom of
movement, among many others. The situation in the
occupied territories is particularly alarming, given
the absence of international monitoring missions. As
we seek to achieve the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and deliver on the promise to leave no
one behind, the rights of women living in the occupied
regions of Georgia are of great concern for us.

We support the recommendations contained in the
report of the Secretary-General, and share the view
that existing commitments need to be translated into
practice. In that context, let me once again reiterate
Georgia's readiness to join global efforts aimed
at better implementing the women and peace and
security agenda.

