Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for your
presence here today and for organizing this open
debate. I would also like to thank Special
Representative Wallstrem and Under-Secretary-
General Ladsous for their comprehensive briefings. Of
course, I would like to thank Ms. Megheirbi for her
remarks this morning and for all of her and the
Working Group's efforts to advance the women, peace
and security agenda.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2012/33) on
conflict-related sexual Violence demonstrates the
importance of having a Special Representative on
Sexual Violence in Conflict. In just the past year, she
was able, together with the Team of Experts, to
assemble the evidence available in the report, and to
begin to address some of the horrors it describes. From
the beginning, the United States has supported the
Special Representative and the Team of Experts, both

12-2393]
in advocating their mandates and financing their work.
It is time and money well spent.

The Special Representative has, first of all,
gathered facts. We now know how rape was used to
humiliate and punish during the post-election crisis in
C6te d'Ivoire. We know now that 625 cases of sexual
violence by warring parties were recorded by the
United Nations from December 2010 to November
2011 in the North Kivu, South Kivu and Orientale
provinces of the Democratic Republic of Congo. We
have before us figures, dates, names of perpetrators
and perpetrating forces in those countries, as well as in
Burma, Somalia, the Sudan and South Sudan. We also
now have information, sometimes very extensive
information, about sexual Violence perpetrated in
post-conflict situations and situations of civil unrest, in
the Central African Republic, Syria, Guinea, Nepal and
elsewhere.

The Special Representative and the Team of
Experts have demonstrated the extent of the problem.
Their work is also increasing awareness of the issue
and encouraging best practices. In the reporting period,
more than 150 people in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, from various types of security forces, were
sentenced after trial to punishment for crimes of sexual
violence. A total of 9,534 Congolese survivors of
sexual violence in North Kivu, South Kivu and Ituri
provinces, including at least 1,700 children, received
medical and psychosocial support. Congolese officers
in two conflict-affected provinces are now receiving
training from the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO), to train their own soldiers on
how to prevent sexual violence and deal properly with
witnesses and victims. Those training modules will
become the national standard for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

In C6te d'Ivoire, the Special Representative
received a commitment from the President of the Truth
and Reconciliation Commission that reparations for
victims of sexual violence would be part of the
Commission's mandate. In Liberia and South Sudan,
the Team of Experts has worked with national justice
sectors on sentencing guidelines, the training of police,
constitution-drafting and a host of other initiatives.

That is what the Office of the Special
Representative is for. The Security Council's mandate
is clear and the Special Representative has been

12-2393]
forthright in carrying it out. She deserves our strong
support.

The problem, unfortunately, remains vast. We
have only begun. Impunity is still alarmingly common.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Sheka Ntabo
Ntaberi ran as a candidate for office even as a warrant
was out for his arrest for sexual violence. In Guinea, as
detailed in the Secretary-General's report, two men
connected to the violence of September 2009, which
included sexual violence, have since been given high
Government positions. Such impunity should not be
tolerated.

Apart from keeping a sharp focus on ending
impunity, we need to build our institutional capacity
for early warning. We applaud the efforts of the Special
Representative, of United Nations Action against
Sexual Violence in Conflict, and of UN-Women to
develop an early warning framework.

As Council members, we need to make
combating sexual violence part of our discussions with
briefers so that it becomes an integral part of our
practice. We have recognized for some time that
conflict-related sexual violence is a security issue, but
the Secretary-General's report places that matter
beyond dispute. As is shown quite clearly, it is a
security matter that impacts entire countries, as well as
individual communities, families and individuals.

It is also one that very much affects men and
boys, as well as women and girls. The report shows
that in many places, men are forced to watch as their
wives and daughters are being abused. There are
numerous cases of men and boys being sexually
attacked by other men as a deliberate tactic of conflict.
This is a security issue, not a women's issue. We must
treat it as such and develop the same strategies of early
warning and prevention that we use for other security
threats.

The United States welcomes and supports the
recommendations in the Secretary-General's report,
particularly with regard to the need for all parties to
conflict to make specific and time-bound commitments
to cease acts of sexual violence and bring perpetrators
to justice. We particularly endorse the recommendation
to address conflict-related sexual violence in the
context of security-sector reform initiatives, including
personnel-training and civilian oversight mechanisms.
The Council should continue to consider conflict-
related sexual Violence in authorizing and renewing the
mandates of peacekeeping missions, including with
regard to monitoring, analysis and reporting
arrangements.

The United States will stay engaged with this
issue. As part of our new, National Action Plan on
Women, Peace and Security, the United States is
working to strengthen our efforts to prevent and
combat conflict-related sexual violence as we advance
women's participation in preventing conflict and
keeping peace. Our ultimate objective is to incorporate
women and girls into our diplomatic, security,
humanitarian and development efforts in conflict-
affected countries, not simply as beneficiaries but as
agents of peace, reconciliation, development, growth
and stability.

For example, the United States believes that it is
crucial to increase women's participation in security
forces involved in preventing conflict and building
peace as one way to reduce conflict-related sexual
violence. The United States funds and implements the
Global Peace Operations Initiative, which has
facilitated the training of 2,451 female peacekeepers
worldwide. The Initiative supports instruction on the
prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse. Beginning
last year, we have supported the predeployment
training of Peruvian women peacekeepers focused on
women, peace and security issues, in support of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti. In
Afghanistan, United States and Afghan officers provide
instruction and mentoring to female soldiers in the
Afghan National Army. In 2014, 10 per cent of the
Afghan Military Academy's class will be women.
There are already more than 1,200 women serving in
the Afghan National Police, many of whom serve in
leadership positions.

Preventing and combating conflict-related sexual
violence is central to building lasting peace and
brighter futures for countries undergoing and emerging
from conflict. I cannot stress enough what a critical
concern this is for my Government. Sexual violence
must cease to be used as a tactic of war and
intimidation. For the sake of the vulnerable and for the
honour of nations, we, as the Council, must continue to
support efforts to end this scourge.

