Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): First of all, I
would like to thank France for organizing this debate.
I also commend Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
and his Special Representative Zainab Bangura, as
well as all those who spoke before me, for their very
useful presentations.

Sexual violence in conflict situations is a scourge
from which my country, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, has long suffered. For more than a decade,
my country has experienced especially bloody armed
conflicts in the eastern part of its territory. Those
conflicts, which have caused many human casualties,
are at the source ofthe practice ofusing rape as a weapon
of war. The lives of thousands of girls, women, boys
and men have thus been disrupted. The consequences
of the situation psychologically, economically and in
medical terms are enormous.

This debate affords us an opportunity to once again
touch on the efforts of my country's Government to
combat this situation. The restoration of peace in the
part of the country formerly occupied by rebel armed
groups has brought major change. Enormous progress
has been made both in the fight against sexual violence
and at the level of responding to the needs of victims.
In referring to my country, the report (S/2016/36l) of
the Secretary-General attests to that in mentioning
the appreciable 80 per cent decline in the number of
cases of sexual violence in conflict areas. Among other
things, my Government attributes those results to the
following elements: the appointment of a personal
representative of the President of the Republic in charge
of the fight against sexual violence and the recruitment
of children; the adoption of a plan of action to combat
sexual violence among the armed forces and the
signing ofajoint communique on the issue between the
Government and the United Nations; the adoption of a
zero-tolerance policy; and the signing by the Minister
of National Defence of a decree on the responsibility
of the unit commanders of the Forces armees de la
Republique democratique du Congo for combating
sexual violence.

All of those steps reflect the will of the Government
to end this scourge and honour its international
commitments. Against that backdrop, the Government
is committed to addressing the various problems,
including deliveringjustice in the fight against impunity.
In that connection, 111 cases were decided in 2015 by
the military justice system, without regard for the rank
ofthe accused. We have also established a compensation
fund, while two Senate committees, on sexual violence
and on political, administrative and judicial issues, are

working on a bill proposed by the office of the personal
representative of the Head of State. On preventing
sexual violence, a regional campaign called "Breaking
the Silence" will be launched by September. On
socioeconomic reintegration, with the collaboration of
our national institute for professional training, training
was organized at Kibumba last September in various
economic sectors for survivors and demobilized
fighters. That type of training will continue this year
in Rutshuru in North Kivu and in Bunia and Aru in
Ituri and will train 2,000 people. A $35,000 credit fund
was set up to meet the financial needs of some women
in Bunia. That progress has been made possible thanks
to the Government's own resources, with the technical
support of the international community, including
assistance from Japan via Ms. Bangura's office,
and the United Nations Population Fund and various
other partners.

In conclusion, my country is determined to continue
its efforts to completely eradicate sexual violence. We
highly value the support provided to us in that regard
by the United Nations and the international community.

