Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I wish to
thank Mr. Guehenno for his comprehensive and
informative briefing and also to underscore his
personal interest in and commitment to this issue.

Let me begin by emphasizing a fact mentioned
earlier by other speakers. Regrettably, recent decades
have witnessed a dramatic increase in the number of
women victims of armed conflict. It is estimated that
today approximately 90 per cent of the victims of war
are civilians, most of them women and children, which
was not the case a century ago. It is true that, from the
international standpoint, many measures have been
taken relating to the treatment of crimes against
women. Rape has thus been included in the list of
crimes against humanity under the statutes of the courts
relating to the former Yugoslavia and to Rwanda; the
International Criminal Court has included a gender
perspective in its definition of crimes; and the Beijing
Conference reiterated the commitment of the
international community to eradicate crimes against
women in armed conflict.

Although those developments are a source of
hope, much remains to be done. The decisive role that
women can play in peace processes must also be taken
into account.

My delegation is aware of the fact that, along
with international commitments, a strategy is required
that would ensure women's participation at the national
level in the settlement of disputes and in the promotion
of a culture of peace. However, measures must also be
taken to promote the participation of women in all
conflict-prevention and conflict-resolution processes.

In this connection, my country has expanded

women's participation as observers in electoral
processes throughout the world and as participants in
post-conflict reconstruction processes. Spanish military
contingents participating in peace operations include
increasing numbers of women. Moreover, Spain deems
it particularly important in this respect for the media to
play an important role in pre- and post-conflict periods,
both nationally and internationally.

All of this confirms the fact that, in addition to
the commitment of the international community,
domestic measures must also be adopted so that,
together with Governments, civil society as a whole
and non-governmental organizations can make valuable
contributions to the two key aspects of women's
participation in peace-building: on the one hand, by
protecting women who are the victims of conflict, and,
on the other, by promoting the participation of women
in the building of a culture of peace. This work cannot
be done without the necessary coordination within the
United Nations system to fulfil the important
commitments entered into in resolution 1325 (2000),
adopted three years ago.

