Ms. Flores Herrera (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
I would first like to express our solidarity with the
victims of yesterday's attacks in Germany, Turkey and
Yemen, and to offer our sympathies and condolences to
our colleagues from the Russian Federation.

I would like to welcome Mr. Mariano Rajoy Brey,
President of the Government of Spain, to today's open
debate and to commend his country for its commitment
to bringing to this important forum subjects that are
so pertinent to human rights, particularly the one
under discussion today, trafficking in persons, on
which the Security Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2331 (2016) this morning. We also thank
the Secretary-General and the briefers for their
important contributions and the Special Rapporteur on
trafficking in persons, especially women and children,
for her thematic report (A/71/303), aimed at raising
the international community's awareness of the forms
and nature of trafficking in persons in situations of
conflict and particularly its effects on women and
children. Ms. Nadia Murad Basee Taha, the Goodwill
Ambassador for the Dignity of Survivors of Human
Trafficking, is a living example of that.

Panama fully supports international actions
based on the commitment of the Palermo Protocol
supplementing the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime, which, in defining
trafficking in persons, provides us with a common
basis for preventing it, punishing offenders and taking
measures to protect its victims, with a view to dealing
with the challenges that this particular kind of organized
crime poses for us.

Conscious of its vulnerabilities as a transit route
and migration destination, Panama now has a cross-
cutting national commission against trafficking in
persons that has authority to act in the various different
areas where victims need help. We have also worked to
make the changes needed to update our legislation so
that it can work more effectively to prevent, punish and
eradicate trafficking in persons. In November, President
Varela Rodriguez renewed Panama's firm commitment
to combating what we term modern slavery, which
includes human trafficking, after our ratification of the
2014 Protocol of the Forced Labour Convention. It is
unthinkable that in the twenty-first century more than
20 million people are victims of this scourge - often
double victims, at the mercy of both organized crime
and drug trafficking.

The work of international agencies such as the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
and the International Organization for Migration is
no less important. Their support to States in drafting
legislation, building national strategies and assisting
with resources for implementing them is very valuable
and increasingly necessary. UNODC's Blue Heart
Campaign against Human Trafficking, launched in
March 2009, has made a positive contribution to
raising awareness, encouraging participation and
inspiring action.

One of the significant challenges to prosecuting
and punishing this crime is the collection of data
and evidence, on which we can share best practices
with the goal of defeating this increasingly worrying
reality that connects us across our borders. Our
national commission has reported that in the past two
years Panama has dismantled 13 human trafficking
organizations, rescued 121 victims and detained 20
traffickers. In addition to strengthening institutions in
order to combat trafficking and improving coordination
between Government agencies that deal with trafficking,
Panama has also conducted awareness-raising and
prevention activities, including seminars, workshops
for officials andjournalists and debates with experts.

Panama believes that the UnitedNations has a critical
role to play in the prevention and ultimate elimination
of trafficking. We recommend strengthening the joint
work of the Security Council and the Human Rights
Council, for example, using tools such as the Universal
Periodic Review to monitor the implementation of
the legal framework for the prevention, treatment and
elimination of trafficking in persons in armed conflict.

Finally, it is also timely for us to review preventive

action in keeping with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. Our country is one of the 40 countries
that next year will submit its voluntary national review
in the framework of the High-Level Political Forum on
Sustainable Development, a platform that we consider
essential in reporting not only on human trafficking,
but also on human slavery in conflict and post-
conflict situations affecting women, children and other
minorities.

