Mr. Ademola Ogunnaike (Nigeria): I thank
the delegation of France for organizing today's open
debate on women and peace and security. I would
also like to commend Ms. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti,
Chef de Cabinet of the Secretary-General, for her
briefing. Nigeria welcomes the presence at today's
debate of Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive
Director of UN-Women, and of the representative
of non-governmental organizations. We listened
attentively to all the briefings and have taken note of
the Secretary-General's report (S/2017/861), which
provides an update on the progress that has been made
across all areas of the women and peace and security
agenda, as well as highlighting gaps and challenges.

Undoubtedly, respect for women's rights and
interests, as well as their protection, is not only a mark of
progress in human civilization but is also closely related
to the attainment of world peace and development.
Nigeria therefore welcomes this opportunity to reflect
on the progress made on the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda, 17 years after the
adoption of the landmark resolution 1325 (2000). While
we acknowledge the substantial achievements that have
been made in that endeavour, however, there are still
challenges and significant gaps to be addressed. The
international community should therefore go beyond
protecting women's safety and upholding their rights
and interests in conflict and post-conflict situations,
and dedicate greater collective efforts to ensuring their
active participation in peace processes. We believe that
today's debate can help to determine potential solutions
for addressing the prevailing challenges and gaps, and
offer suggestions for acquiring the resources needed to
advance the role of women within the context of the
global peace and security architecture.

Meeting those challenges will be critical to
making the progress we need on the women and peace
and security agenda. It requires a multi-stakeholder
approach involving all actors at the global, regional,
subregional and national levels. Communities, civil
society and individuals also have crucial roles to play.
In order to promote women so that they can truly take
ownership of their peacekeeping roles and play an
important part in peacebuilding processes, the various
United Nations bodies and entities will need to work in
accordance with their respective mandates, with a clear
division of labour on the one hand, and complementarity
on the other.

We are also convinced that national Governments
have the primary responsibility to protect women's
safety, rights and interests. The international
community should therefore support countries by
providing constructive assistance, with their consent.
However, such support should be consistent with
national priorities and focus on capacity-building.
There is also the urgent need to step up assistance
aimed at supporting the countries concerned with their
specific financial and technical difficulties.

In our region, the African Union has provided
a useful platform for the advancement of the women
and peace and security agenda. It should be noted
that Agenda 2063 of the African Union, which was
adopted by African Heads of State and Government
in Addis Ababa in January 2016, places particular
emphasis on the engagement of women and youth in the
continent's development.

At the subregional level, the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) has been a major
driver of the women and peace and security agenda.
In collaboration with the United Nations Office for
West Africa, ECOWAS developed an integrated plan of
action for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
in September 2010. The plan of action emphasizes the
importance of the role of women in conflict prevention,
conflict resolution, mediation and peacebuilding, as
well as the rebuilding of post-conflict societies.

Consistent with subregional efforts, Nigeria
launched a national action plan to fully implement the
relevant provisions of resolution 1325 (2000). Indeed, the
second national action plan has expanded the concept of
security to cover the use of violent extremism, trauma
and healing, disarmament and demobilization, and
subject them to further localization. The plan reflects
the Federal Government's commitment to ensuring the
security of women and girls during armed conflict and
to enhancing their active and direct participation in
conflict prevention and peacebuilding.

I wish to state that there is ongoing collaboration
with our neighbours Chad, Cameroon, the Niger and
Benin, within the framework of the Multinational Joint
Task Force, to fight Boko Haram, whose activities
have targeted women and girls. Our experience
today is evidence that, with determined international
collaboration, terrorism can be defeated. The sustained
efforts by Nigeria and its international partners
have culminated in the liberation of four territories
previously occupied by Boko Haram.

It should be noted that 80 per cent of the 2 million
internally displaced persons in north-eastern Nigeria
are women. We have taken concrete steps to address
their humanitarian needs and to ensure that the
necessary conditions are established for enabling the
voluntary return ofthe displaced persons to their homes
safely and with dignity. The Nigerian Government is
working around the clock to ensure the release of the
remaining Chibok girls and other persons in Boko
Haram captivity.

We believe that the effective participation of women
is an important foundation for realizing sustainable
peace and social stability. Women should naturally
become important participants in conflict prevention
and mediation. They should enjoy adequate rights
and be allowed to participate in the decision-making
process, making contributions to post-conflict
arrangements, peacebuilding and national development.
Indeed, women's development is the foundation for
truly realizing their empowerment. The international
community should make deliberate efforts to promote
the socioeconomic development of women, thereby
enhancing their capacity to make positive contributions
to the maintenance of international peace and security.

Nigeria remains fully and firmly committed to
the promotion and protection of the rights of women
and girls in conflict and post-conflict situations. We
shall work assiduously to enhance the participation
of women in peace and security initiatives. We are
determined to reinforce and implement the principles
of resolution 1325 (2000) and, within that context, to
address the factors that impact negatively on the lives
of women and girls.

