Ms. Kuret (Slovenia): Let me begin by sincerely
thanking France for organizing this open debate and the
Secretary-General for his annual report (S/2017/861).

Slovenia aligns itself with the statements
delivered by the observer of the European Union
and by representative of Panama on behalf of the
Human Security Network, and would like to make
some additional comments and remarks in its
national capacity.

The review of Slovenia's first national action plan
showed our contribution to the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security
at different levels, especially in the international and
regional organization, and through the participation in
international operations and missions. We have also
helped to promote the implementation of the resolution
in the region of the Western Balkans. More than 20
projects have been carried out in cooperation with civil
society to empower women in Africa, the Middle East
and Afghanistan.

Since we believe that it is imperative to eliminate
barriers to gender equality and to ensure the
meaningful participation of women, we are continuing
to support different projects in that regard, including by
contributing funds to support the NATO/Euro-Atlantic
Partnership Council Policy for the implementation of
United Nations Security Council resolution 1325 (2000)
on Women, Peace and Security. We have, for example,
requested that Slovenia's financial contribution in 2017,
which amounts to €500,000 for the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces, be used for projects that
focus on the advancement of female members in the
Afghan forces.

At the national level, important achievements have
been made in education and training on the women and
peace and security agenda, which were systematically
introduced throughout the Slovene armed forces. In
2015, a permanent position of gender adviser within
the General Staff of the Slovene armed forces was
established, as was a network of gender advisers. We
are happy to report that in 2016, almost 10 per cent
of military staff and more than 20 per cent of police
personnel deployed to international operations and
missions were women. Moreover, this spring, Slovenia
gladly answered to the United Nations call to appoint
women in command positions by contributing the first
woman contingent commander to the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon.

But events in the international community also
demand activities outside of the action plan. In that
regard, Slovenia has gained important experience in
integrating the gender perspective into the management
of migration movements, and shared its knowledge in
the region. Cooperation and partnership with different
stakeholders are crucial to the realization of that
agenda on the ground. Therefore, we gladly participate
in different networks, such as the global Women,
Peace and Security National Focal Points Network
and the recently established Mediterranean Women
Mediators Network.

As we speak of women's equal and meaningful
participation and leadership in peace-related activities,
let me add that the political participation of women
in Slovenia is excellent. Half of the Government is
comprised of women, including both the Minister of
Defence and the Minister of the Interior. I am also
very pleased that yesterday's first released index on
women, peace and security placed Slovenia in fourth
place. That is why we believe that the integration of the
gender perspective into peace and security is not just a
women's issue; it concerns men, too.

Let me conclude by noting that we should also
encourage men's participation and leadership in the
promotion of gender equality. I would like to take
this opportunity to commend the Secretary-General's
action in both regards.

