Mr. Antonio: Since this is the first time that the
African Union (AU) is taking the floor at the Security
Council since the start of the presidency of the Arab
Republic of Egypt, let me join the voice of the African
Union in commending you, Sir, and supporting the
activities of your presidency for the month of August.

Iwould like to sincerely thank the Deputy Secretary-
General, Ms. Amina Mohammed, for her very detailed
briefing on the mission, for her vision, her commitment
and contributions to finding, in concert with the
African Union, sustainable solutions for a peaceful
and stable Africa. The Deputy Secretary-General,
together with the African Union Commission's Special
Envoy on Women, Peace and Security, Ms. Bineta
Diop; the Executive Director of UN-Women and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-
Ngcuka; and the United Nations Special Representative
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila Patten,
played a key role in the realization of the joint United
Nations-AU high-level solidarity mission in Nigeria
and in the Democratic Republic of the Congo that took
place from 19 to 27 July 2017. Ms. Bineta Diop would
have loved to join today's meeting but due to unforeseen
circumstances, she could not be here with us today.

The joint United Nations-African Union (AU)
solidarity mission, which was carried out in the context
of the High-Level Women Leaders Forum for Africa's
Transformation that took place in New York from 31 May
to 2 June, allowed both organizations to better assess
the positive role that women can play to advance peace,
security and development. The joint United Nations-AU
solidarity mission also reinforced our understanding, at
both the policy and operational levels, that it is possible

to have significant and positive impacts on the lives of
vulnerable populations only if and when the African
Union, the United Nations, Governments, civil society
organizations and women and youth all join together in
their efforts. We witnessed that throughout the mission,
joint efforts engendered unprecedented perseverance
for the realization of common objectives.

Africa is a strategic region for the stability of the
world, and women and youth play a pivotal role in the
promotion of peace, security and development. The
African Union Commission remains a key partner
of the United Nations for the implementation at the
continental level of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and Agenda 2063: The Africa We Want.

The African Union is also at the forefront in the
implementation phase of the landmark Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework for Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security, which was signed
in April by Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat. The landmark document
recognizes two strategic points for collaboration
between the AU and the United Nations. The first
point that the document stresses is that "African
peace and security challenges are too complex for any
single organization to adequately address on its own".
Secondly, it notes the need for the African Union and
the United Nations to "work together to identify and
respond to indicators of potential conflict and plan
for prevention"

It is in that spirit of prevention and intensified
collaborative efforts that the Chairperson ofthe African
Union Commission delegated the AU Special Envoy
on Women, Peace and Security to the joint United
Nations-AU solidarity mission, thereby reaffirming his
commitment to the advancement of the role of women
in peace processes across the continent.

The changing nature of conflicts has highlighted
alarming challenges, including the worsening
humanitarian situations to which the Deputy Secretary-
General referred, as well as increased violent extremism.
Dire humanitarian challenges, such as those seen in the
north-east of Nigeria and the East and Kasai regions
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, significantly
impact the well-being of communities, particularly
of women and girls. Furthermore, armed groups such
as Boko Haram are increasingly using young girls as
agents of violence and suicide bombers. Just days before
the visit of the joint United Nations-AU delegation to
Maiduguri, four Boko Haram suicide bombers killed
19 people in a series of attacks. It was later reported
that one of the four suicide bombers was a young
woman. In order to curtail such a worrisome trend and
avoid marginalization that can lead to exclusion and
radicalization, there is a need to support the social and
economic empowerment of women.

To date, there is no solution to the problem of
transnational actors constantly changing their ways of
operating, except by effectively and rapidly adapting to
the changing conflict patterns and dire consequences
of vulnerable populations. In that regard, the African
Union strongly condemns the continued violations of
women's and children's rights, the erosion of their well-
being and all forms ofviolence perpetrated against them
in conflict-affected countries or countries emerging
from conflict.

It is no coincidence that the joint United Nations-
AU solidarity mission was undertaken under the theme,
"Revitalizing women's participation and leadership in
peace, security and development". Both the AU and
the United Nations have recognized the importance of
women's participation and leadership in peace, security
and development initiatives. The mission brought
greater visibility to the role that African women can
play in advancing prevention, peace, security, the 2030
Agenda and Agenda 2063. Additionally, the high-level
delegation offered a unique platform to bring the voices
and experiences of women on the ground to the ears
of those in positions of leadership of their respective
countries, including Heads of State, Foreign Ministers
and Members of Parliament. The delegation was able
to receive first-hand information from women and
young women leaders actively working on the ground,
related to a number of key needs, including reinforcing
ground actions for peace, security and development,
empowering women through quality education and
capacity-building for employment, and offering them
the necessary infrastructures to support their physical
and mental rehabilitation in countries enduring
conflicts or emerging from conflicts.

The African Union continues to support the

rehabilitation and empowerment of internally displaced
persons and survivors of sexual violence. In the context
of the Oslo Humanitarian Conference on Nigeria and the
Lake Chad Basin Region held in February, the AU Peace
and Security Council, in its session on 19 July, called
on the international community to provide necessary
assistance that is commensurate to the needs of affected
people in humanitarian emergencies. It is also necessary
to ensure rapid disbursement of pledges made in order
to alleviate the current humanitarian crisis.

In that spirit, the African Union commends the
new United Nations Humanitarian Fund of over
$10.5 million, which has been allocated to help women,
children and men in need of life-saving humanitarian
assistance, in line with the Nigeria Humanitarian Fund.
We acknowledge that more joint humanitarian efforts
and assistance remain to be delivered in conflict-
affected regions of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo by the international community.
The African Union will continue to work closely
with the United Nations to support conflict-affected
populations, including displaced and host communities,
that are suffering from peace and security crises,
humanitarian emergencies and development deficits,
including the understated risk of famine. In that regard,
the AU commends the unprecedented efforts of its
member States and first responders to refugee and
humanitarian crises, such as the crisis in Uganda.

The joint United Nations-AU solidarity mission
highlighted key recommendations that are essential if
we are to achieve overall sustainable peace, security
and development. First, it is necessary to enhance focus
on enabling the empowerment and return of internally
displaced persons and refugees, particularly women
and children. Secondly, there is a need to facilitate
the stabilization of countries facing challenges related
peace and security by providing them with the necessary
human, financial and expert support, particularly
through enhanced women's participation. Thirdly, we
must enhance access for humanitarian organizations, in
accordance with the African Union Peace and Security
Council's mandate and peace and security architecture.
Finally, it is necessary to enhance women and
youth's effective participation in conflict prevention,
mediation, electoral processes and decision-making in
order to allow them to act as agents of peace.

As the African Union and the United Nations seek
to underline the role of women in peace, security and
development in Africa, I would like to stress that the
joint United Nations-AU solidarity mission also took
place in the spirit of the priority actions set for the
initiative of the African Women Leaders Network, which
was launched by the African Union Commission in
partnership with United Nations Women and Germany.

The African Women Leaders Network aims to
bolster the leadership of women in governance, peace
and security, all in the interest of transforming Africa.
The Network represents an entry point for an enhanced
United Nations and African Union partnership and
a specific contribution to the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), which was introduced by
Namibia in 2000. The tripartite partnership of the
African Union, UN-Women and Germany behind the
African Women Leaders Network has set the goal of
generating sustainable and concrete actions for women
in Africa, in line with African Union and United
Nations commitments to prevention and delivering
tangible solutions on the ground.

The action plan of the African Women Leaders
Network reinforced the need to create a fund within the
platform that can address concrete issues on the ground,
such as the capacity-building of women and young girls
through education and the reinforcement of educational
infrastructure by building schools and support centres.
The need to strengthen educational, physical and
mental support systems proved vital during the fruitful
exchanges of the high-level delegation with women and
young girls on the ground. Education and capacity-
building will offer the necessary platform for women,
girls and communities at large to heighten awareness
on gender-based issues, including on addressing
sexual violence.

Our joint findings on the ground have confirmed
what women and girls affected by conflict and
humanitarian tragedies are able and willing to manage
camp activities, which serve as support systems for
other survivors and assist in the rehabilitation and
reintegration processes through microfund financing
and peer support. The solidarity mission in Nigeria
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo allowed for
the conclusion of discussion on the importance of the
capacity-building of institutions and justice systems
in countries in conflict or emerging from conflict.
The African Union Special Envoy on Women, Peace
and Security will brief the African Union Peace and
Security Council on the specific outcomes of the joint
United Nations-African Union solidarity mission.

In closing, it is recognized that no single
organization can on its own ensure global peace and
security. There is therefore a need for the African
Union and the United Nations to work closely to achieve
peace and security in Africa. Our efforts must continue
to be based on comparative advantage in the pursuit
of strategic objectives. In that regard, the emerging
strategic partnership between the African Union and
the United Nations in the areas of peace and security
need to be reinforced, based on the creative reading
of the provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations, to allow the African Union and its
regional mechanisms to fully play their role as integral
components of collective security.

Lastly, the African Union recognizes the often
ignored drivers of conflict, such as gender-based
violence and gender inequality. It therefore reaffirms
its strong commitment to focus on preventive strategies,
as inscribed in the African Union Charter, which
reinforce the empowerment of women and tackle the
sources of instability but inflict pain and violence on
our continent.
