Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to begin by thanking the Russian presidency for
convening today's open debate. I would also like to
express my gratitude to the Secretary-General and the
Executive Director of UN-Women for their valuable
contributions to our debate on women and peace
and security.
The adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the twentieth anniversary of the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action remind us
of the fact that there is a strong and direct relationship
between sustainable peace and security and sustainable
development, as well as of the fact that women and girls
must be at the forefront of programmes designed to help
us attain sustainable development, peace and security.

Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on
women and peace and security also focuses on the
specific impact of armed conflict on women; the
positive role they can play in conflict prevention and
resolution, peacekeeping and peacebuilding; as well
as the important roles women can play to keep and
strengthen peace and security at local, regional and
international levels.

Current crises and situations, especially in the
Middle East, have taken new and abhorrent forms and
dimensions and constitute unprecedented challenges
to the stability of our region. Women are among the
main victims of these situations, grappling with the
scourge of violent extremism and terrorism. The spread
of violent extremism and takfiri ideology, which have
no respect for women, threatens in an unprecedented
way the life and rights of women and girls in our
region. Women and girls have suffered the most and
been targeted for systematic sexual exploitation and
slavery, rape and other forms of violence by extremists
and terrorists groups, such as Da'esh and Boko Haram.

The international community should make clear
in every instance that there will never be any leniency
for those who subject women and girls to the most
inhumane acts of corporal and mental violence. Iran
strongly condemns the barbaric acts of terrorist and
violent extremists groups, as well as indiscriminate
attacks against civilians, including women and children.
In this regard, we support the Secretary-General's
decision to include women's participation, leadership
and empowerment as keys drivers in his Plan of Action
to Prevent Violent Extremism.

The systematic violations of the legitimate human
rights of the Palestinian people, including Palestinian
women, under the brutal occupation of the Israeli
regime and the atrocious illegal blockade on the Gaza
Strip constitute a massive deprivation of the rights of
Palestinian civilians and women and are certainly the
most blatant form of terrorism against a whole nation
imposed by a regime. It is also very unfortunate that
women and girls have also fallen victim to air strikes in
Yemen. As confirmed reports indicate, the unjustified
invasion of Yemen by a Saudi-led coalition has led to
the death of almost 10,000 people and the injury of
more than 17,000 civilians, including at least 1,677
women and 2,260 children.

In closing, let me stress that my delegation believes
that organizing debates like today's in the Council
should not undermine the work of the most relevant
bodies in considering women-related issues in the
United Nations system, namely, the Commission on the
Status of Women, the Economic and Social Council and
the General Assembly.

