Mr. Rakhmetullin (Kazakhstan): Mr. President,
we thank you for convening this open debate concerning
the grave crimes committed against women.

The bulk of such crimes are perpetrated by
non-State actors, in particular extremist and terrorist
groups, including those intending to establish
quasi-State entities. Atrocities against women,
adolescents and young girls require the attention and
immediate action of the international community.
Massive, unprecedented flows of refugees, internally
displaced persons, and the enforced displacement
of entire populations pose a security threat. The
Security Council, United Nations peacekeeping
operations and political missions must step up their
operating capabilities and strategies to deal not just
with the phenomenon of extreme enmity and hatred,
but also extrajudicial killings and sexual violence,
including rape, sexual slavery, forced prostitution,
forced pregnancy and enforced sterilization, which
have become new weapons of war and tactics of terror.
Those threats call for the greater coordination of the
United Nations system, including entities concerned
with sexual Violence and the protection of women, and
that also work with regional structures in Africa and
the Middle East. The United Nations country teams are
also called on to deliver as one. Hence, the mobilization
of resources to fund enhanced training and a greater
number of qualified personnel is a sine qua non.

Through resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent
resolutions, the role of women in conflict prevention
and resolution, recovery and development is considered
vital. They have to be fully engaged in decision-making
mechanisms and peace agreements, as well as in the
provision of basic survival needs, medical care,
education and economic self-reliance. As such,
enforcing the rule of law and transitional justice,
eliminating gender-based discrimination, and ending
all impunity must remain critical to the economic
and social empowerment of women. Their goals
must be part of comprehensive and multidimensional
peacekeeping efforts in hybrid operations to prevent
serious international crimes against women.

Commissions of inquiry on various conflicts and
UN-Women need to provide regular briefings to the
Council. The Council's mandates on women, peace
and security should be made the focus of at least one
periodic field Visit.

Kazakhstan has become increasingly engaged in
peacekeeping, starting in 2003 with Iraq and Nepal. We
are currently in the Western Sahara, with a deployment
to C6te d'Ivoire planned for May. The protection of
women and girls, and gender-sensitive approaches are
always given attention in the training of my country's
peacekeepers. Kazakhstan considers the protection of
civilians to be one of its key priorities in its bid for
a non-permanent seat on the Security Council for
2017-2018. Over the past decade, my country has
witnessed increased and complex flows of asylum
seekers, refugees, migrants and victims of trafficking
in our region. Those challenges have been addressed by
numerous regional structures and national initiatives.
Kazakhstan initiated the creation of the Kazakhstan
Agency for International Development and the United
Nations regional hub in Almaty to address these threats
and develop resilience.

The stable development of Afghanistan remains
the primary focus of Kazakhstan. We have allocated
more than $70 million to a wide range of support, from
food security and facility, construction to creating
special market conditions for petroleum export. The
broad focus is also on education, especially for Afghan
women and girls. Finally, let me assure the Council that
Kazakhstan is commited to joining the global efforts
to achieve international peace and security, of which
promoting gender equality and empowerment of women
is an inseparable component.
