The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make a
statement in my capacity as the representative of Egypt.

At the outset, I would like to thank the Deputy
Secretary-General, Ms. Amina Mohammed, for her
very comprehensive briefing on her recent visit to
Nigeria and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

I would also like to thank the Permanent Observer
of the African Union to the United Nations, Mr. Te'te
Antonio, for his briefing.

I also take this opportunity to laud the cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union
in efforts to address conflict-related sexual violence.
This is an example ofa partnership between the United
Nations and a regional organization that should be used
as a model to address sexual violence in conflict.

I should now like to highlight the following points.

First, Egypt welcomes the measures taken by the
United Nations to address sexual violence in armed
conflict, including the increase in the number of
women protection advisers on the ground, support to
strengthen national institution capacity and the launch
of the United Nations Action against Sexual Violence.
Egypt also commends the efforts undertaken by
the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict and in particular the support it
gave to strengthen the capacity of States during armed
conflict and post-conflict, in areas such as conducting
inquiries and investigations, judicial prosecutions and
criminal trials, dispensing military justice, legislative
reforms, the protection of witnesses and reparations.

Secondly, Egypt underscores its unwavering
commitment to the United Nations zero-tolerance
policy on sexual exploitation and abuse, championed by
the Secretary-General. Egypt is committed to working
with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
within the framework of the General Assembly, to end
to all forms of violence against women. Incidences
of such violence committed within peacekeeping
operations must be investigated, in line with General
Assembly resolution 71/297. We reiterate that it is
important for Blue Helmets to be properly trained to
handle incidences of sexual violence.

Egypt commends the efforts undertaken by
Nigeria to put an end to the sexual violence committed
by the terrorist group Boko Haram, in north-
eastern Nigeria. Those efforts include rehabilitation
and support programmes for victims, programmes for
the reintegration of women and girls into their local
communities, and for the provision of legal, judicial
and medical services to women who are victims of
sexual violence.

In that regard, the fight against sexual violence
requires synergy and strengthened cooperation between
Nigeria and its neighbouring countries. Moreover, the
international community, for its part, must continue
to lend assistance to Nigeria so that the country can
address the challenges linked to cases of sexual
violence. In that regard, I would like to underscore
that international efforts must be aligned in order to
strengthen the capacity of community and religious
leaders to raise the awareness of local communities about
the importance of putting an end to stereotypes and the
stigmatization that affect victims of sexual violence and
their children. That stigmatization should be borne by
the perpetrators of these crimes and not the victims. We
must also prevent terrorism and extremism and win the
intellectual war, including the fight against attempts by
extremists to make rape permissible in religious terms.
In that regard, we would like to welcome the role of
Al-Azhar in the fight against erroneous fatwas issued
by terrorist organizations pertaining to the situation of
women in conflict.

Egypt welcomes the progress that has been made
by the authorities of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to put an end to sexual violence in conflict. We
acknowledge the measures taken in that vein, including
the establishment of the post of a special adviser to the
President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo on
tackling sexual violence and the recruitment of child
soldiers. We also welcome the efforts to implement the
relevant national strategy, including the appointment
of women judges and their deployment in the various
regions of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. There
have been a variety of measures aimed at ensuring that
victims have access to justice and also that they receive
adequate and appropriate care.

On another note, recent violence has worsened in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in particular
in Kasai and other regions. There have been many
victims of this worsening violence, including the
two United Nations experts of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, who lost their lives. As a result, the civilian
population is faced with growing challenges, including
the risk of sexual violence in conflict. This is a risk
mostly faced by women and girls. In that respect, I
highlight the reports on rapes perpetrated by militia
against boys and girls in Kavumu in southern Kivu.
Such reports underscore the importance of ramping
up our efforts to ensure the implementation of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo national strategy
to combat sexual violence, with the support of the
United Nations, and with a key role to be played by
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We call on
all partners to make their contribution to heed the
humanitarian appeal of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and to make available the necessary resources
to United Nations agencies and to civil society as they
seek to provide humanitarian aid, including to victims
of sexual violence.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Nigeria.

