Ms. Petkevich (Belarus) (spoke in Russian):
There is a wise s traditional Slavic saying that goes:
What the woman wants, the Lord wants. It is
absolutely clear what the mother, the loving wife and
the protector of the domestic hearth wants: safety,
security, calm, stability, health and prosperity.

If one were to take a traditional approach to
today's debate, it would be limited to the topic of
women as potential victims. However, I believe that
the problem needs to be addressed more broadly. Three
equal, and I stress "equal", elements must be
highlighted.

First, priority should be accorded today to
strengthening the role of women in the making and
implementation of decisions at a higher level.
Secondly, of course, one cannot ignore the fact that
women constitute the group most vulnerable to the
consequences of various types of violent conflict.
Third is an element that is usually ignored - here, I
refer to the factors that, on the one hand, turn women
into potential victims of violence who must therefore
be protected, while on the other hand preventing them
from playing a full role in efforts to settle and prevent
conflicts.

Those three components are mutually interlinked,
and there is a need to work on them simultaneously.
Only as a result of comprehensive work on all three
tracks, with the efforts of the whole international
community, will we stand to ensure progress in this
field. The development of our civilization dictates the
need to evolve approaches to each of those three
elements.

I believe that members will agree with me that
until very recently, the highest achievement in gender
equality was access by women to education and to the
right to vote. Today, gender equality means absolute
parity in rights, in opportunities and, no less important,
in the acceptance of that parity as something that is
entirely natural.

It is not enough merely to speak of women's
equality in the political system. It is particularly
important to create a sustainable tradition of
participation by women in the taking of important
Government decisions that is not ornamental, not just a
showcase.

In that respect, I am pleased to state that in the
Republic of Belarus, the role of women is accorded
priority importance. Here is one example. When the
President of our country was asked what kind of
parliament he would like to see, he said, "I would like
to see an able one with a female face". Currently, one
third of members of parliament are women, while in
municipal government bodies, that figure is over 45 per
cent.

With regard to the second element, I would like
to draw attention to the fact that the development of
our civilization is, unfortunately, accompanied by two
entirely contradictory trends: on the one hand, progress
and, on the other hand, degradation. How else can one
assess a world where nature itself has been tamed but
where trafficking in women and girls and the violence
perpetrated against them still flourish? Moreover,
violence is becoming one of the weapons of war. If the
international community averts its eyes, that
degradation can destroy or infect all other areas of a
country's and a people's life.

In that regard, for a number of years, the
Republic of Belarus has championed an initiative to
develop a comprehensive United Nations plan of action
to fight trafficking in persons. During the current
session of the General Assembly, our delegation has
submitted a draft resolution on improving the
coordination of efforts against trafficking in persons
(A/C.3/63/L.9). We associate ourselves with the
proposal of the Secretary-General on the need to
establish a mechanism to monitor violence against
women and girls.

Whatever form violence takes, and regardless of
whether it occurs during armed conflict or not, it must
be prevented or punished. On another important issue
that must not be ignored in that respect, in our view it
would be useful to scrutinize at the national level any
mechanisms for granting amnesty to individuals who
have perpetrated such violence against women, as well
as any other legislative instruments for reducing
sentences, because it is very important that the
punishment actually served be commensurate with the
crimes that have been perpetrated.

Most important, the international community
must not address only the consequences. It is especially
important to eliminate the root causes, the conditions
that give rise to conflict: the primacy of the use of
force, exploitation, poverty, illiteracy, social inequality
and a belief of one people's superiority over any other.

All of those elements are interconnected, and we
are convinced that the global promotion of the
participation of women at the highest level, including
in intergovernmental coordination and peacebuilding,
will undoubtedly have a positive impact on preventing
the violation of the rights of women and girls.

By way of conclusion, I have one final remark. I
would change one word in the title of today's debate:
"Women are peace and security". I am sure that
members will concur with me that such a small word
significantly enhances clarity.

