Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Madam President, I would first like to wish you every
success during your month as President of the Council.
I would also like to thank South Africa for its successful
presidency last month.

I commend and thank the Deputy Secretary-General
and the African Union Special Envoy on Women, Peace
and Security for their useful briefings on their recent
joint mission in the Horn of Africa.

Just a few days ago, Belgium welcomed Ms. Alaa
Salah, Sudanese civil society representative, to the
Council (see S/PV.8649). The role played by women in
the recent developments in the Sudan is crucial and was
recognized as such in the announcement that women
were to be included in the transitional Government.
The developments in the Sudan also effectively
demonstrate, as our two briefers have illustrated, the
role of the African Union in finding an African solution
to an African crisis. For all of those reasons, Belgium
warmly welcomes the initiative of the joint missions
with the African Union and particularly appreciates
their broad focus, which includes peace and security,
development and humanitarian issues. We are keen
supporters of increased cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union and of an integrated
approach to countries in crisis and in transition.

In the space of a year, the Horn of Africa region
has seen positive developments, although the outcomes
are fragile. The meaningful participation of women in
political processes is essential to consolidating those
outcomes. Some first steps have been taken, such as
the appointment of women ministers and the adoption
of legislation on gender equality. President Sahle-Work
Zewde is not only Ethiopia's first woman President,
but also the only woman Head of State in office in
Africa. She is also a strong advocate for women in her
country and on the African continent. It is necessary
to continue along this same path and to implement the
decisions that have been made. Electoral deadlines are
opportunities to ensure the meaningful participation of
women. We will be focusing on that area, especially
with regard to the first elections in decades to be held
next year in Somalia.

The United Nations can and must lead by example
by working towards real parity in its missions and
representation. We also call on troop-contributing
countries to redouble their efforts in that direction. If
we are humble in our approach, all of us in the Chamber
will be able to evaluate our own shortcomings. It is by
keeping this issue on its agenda that the Council will
be able to make a difference. I would be interested to
learn from the Deputy Secretary-General what follow-
up will be given to this joint solidarity mission and
what support the Security Council could provide in
order to encourage our partners in the region to pursue
their commitments.

