Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain): I have the honour of
delivering this statement on behalf of the 24 States
members of the Group of Friends United against
Trafficking in Persons.

We would like to thank the Spanish presidency
for organizing this important open debate and for the
opportunity to have a genuine and productive dialogue
with Member States. We would like to express our
particular gratitude to His Excellency Mr. Mariano
Rajoy Brey, President of the Government of Spain,
for presiding over this meeting. We also welcome the
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC), Mr. Yury Fedotov. We
commend the work of many United Nations entities,
including the leading role played by UNODC, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and the International Labour Organization,
as well as the work of other international bodies,
including the International Organization for Migration,
whose work has clearly revealed the methodology and
motivation of traffickers and the demographics of those
who are vulnerable to trafficking. They also gave us an
indication of the scale and location of this most serious
current problem.

All those present today are united in the conviction
that trafficking in persons in armed conflicts is an evil
that must be faced and overcome through effective
international cooperation. Recent years have made
very clear how armed conflicts not only create flows
of vulnerable people who are at risk of trafficking, but
also spawns terrorist and criminal groups that view
people in such situations as resources to exploit and
traffic in, so as to bring in revenue and gain power.

The peaceful settlement of armed conflicts is
necessary in order to create the proper environment
for addressing human rights violations and restoring
the physical integrity of the victims of trafficking.
That should also be a cornerstone of the mandate of
peacekeeping operations. It should be one of the
pivotal prerequisites for protecting civilians and
combating human trafficking. The Group of Friends
United against Trafficking in Persons encourages the
strengthening of cooperation between the Inter-Agency
Coordination Group against Trafficking in Persons and
other international organizations, as well as among
Member States. The Group of Friends does that through,
inter alia, its role in coordinating and cooperating
with the Global Programme against Trafficking in
Human Beings.

The Group of Friends believes that stronger
cooperation between Member States and the relevant
agencies would result in more effective and rapid
responses to the evolving challenges relating to
trafficking in persons. By working together and
implementing and improving the global strategy for
collecting, analysing and sharing data, we can make it
easier for countries, non-governmental organizations
and international agencies to share accurate information
on a timely basis. That would enable all parties
concerned to target resources more effectively in their
responses to trafficking - in terms of increasing
awareness, investigations and prosecutions and victim
identification and support. In that regard, the Group of
Friends also encourages the international community,
especially donor countries and international financial
institutions, to provide the necessary financial resources
to the UNODC Voluntary Trust Fund for Victims of
Human Trafficking in order to help it continue with
its operations.

The Group of Friends is committed to working
together with its partners around the world to eliminate
the scourge of human trafficking. We are convinced
that the upcoming review of the United Nations Global
Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons, which
will take place in 2017, represents a critical moment in
analysing and improving shared international efforts.
The international community can be assured of the full
support and cooperation of the Group of Friends for an
effective review of the Global Plan of Action. We hope
that resolution 2331 (2016), adopted today, will provide
a strong impetus for establishing counter-trafficking
measures in situations of armed conflict, especially
the trafficking in persons that is being carried out by
terrorist groups.

Despite the important role that the Security Council
can play in countering trafficking in persons in armed
conflict, we still believe in the leading role of the
General Assembly in all matters related to trafficking
in persons.

In conclusion, we affirm the commitment of the
members of the group to the obligations under the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and Protocol to Prevent, Suppress
and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime.

