Mr. Montafio (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico would like to thank Azerbaijan for its work
in coordinating this debate. We are also grateful to
the Secretary-General for presenting his recent report
on the subject (S/2013/525), and we welcome the
participation of the Executive Director of UN Women
and civil society in today's dialogue.

My delegation commends the adoption today of
resolution 2122 (2013), which continues building the
institutional framework begun in 2000 with the historic
resolution 1325 (2000).

The Secretary-General's report provides a road
map for the action that all relevant stakeholders must
take in order to continue to effectively include women
in peace, development and in strengthening the state
of development we all live in. Mexico welcomes the
Secretary-General's recommendation to move up
the holding of a high-level meeting in 2015 with the
aim of reviewing the progress made regionally and
nationally in implementing resolution 1325 (2000). We
believe that from a preventive perspective of shared
responsibility in the face of threats to international
peace and security, the provisions of resolution 1325
(2000) continue to apply and to have relevance for the
community of nations.

My country is currently moving forward with a
review process of our legal and institutional framework
with the aim of ensuring its confirmity with a plan
of action for comprehensive implementation of the
resolution. The process seeks to systematize some of
the activities that are already being developed at the
internal level, such as educating the armed forces on
women's rights. In order to do so, we are in regular
contact with various partners so as to learn the best
practices already being used for similar action plans.
Concerning political rights, our executive authorities
recently proposed an initiative to the legislature aimed
at ensuring women's equitable representation in the
Chamber of Deputies and the Senate. With regard to
the United Nations mandate, we are striving to increase
the number of women on the lists of candidates for
high-level posts, particularly those having to do with
political operations and, of course, peacekeeping.

Mexico welcomes the adoption of the Declaration
of Commitment to End Sexual Violence in Conflict,
and commends the initiative taken to formulate
an international protocol for investigating and
documenting sexual violence in conflict. We assure the
Council that we will continue to support such efforts.
Similarly, we consider it vital to continue to push for
women's participation in mediation processes and
peace agreement and ceasefire negotiations so as to
encourage national reconciliation, based on respect for
and enjoyment of the human, social and civil rights of
the most vulnerable groups. We believe it essential to
support national reconciliation and dialogue processes
with judicial change that ensures that justice is
impartially meted out, and including programmes for
repairing and reconstructing the social fabric.

Strengthening inclusive and solid societies must
be an essential part in re-establishing the rule of law,
both in societies living with armed conflict and those
that are undergoing the process of reconstruction and
reconciliation. There can be no lasting peace without
justice, and it is therefore vital to ensure that national
dialogue and reconciliation processes contribute
effectively to fighting impunity and ensuring not only
that women take part in the processes of reform of the
security and justice systems but that they are also full
participants in those systems once they are reformed.

In that regard, we note the Declaration facilitated
by Mexico and Denmark and adopted at the High-level
Meeting of the General Assembly on the Rule of Law
at the National and International Levels in September
2012. The text enshrines "the importance of ensuring
that women...fully enjoy the benefits of the rule of
law" (General Assembly resolution 67/1, para. 16), and
we committed to ensuring their full participation in
institutions of governance and the judicial system.

For my country, persistence continues to be the
linchpin for decision-making and implementing action
on the agenda for women and peace and security.

