Mr. Deghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President, and the
Spanish presidency of the Council for convening this
open debate. I would also like to express my gratitude
to the Secretary-General and to UN-Women for their
valuable contributions to the discussion of women and
peace and security.

Fifteen years ago, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1325 (2000), focusing on the specific effects
of armed conflict on women, the positive role that
women can play in conflict prevention and resolution,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, and the indissoluble
links between the empowerment of women and
international peace and security.

Women are a key resource for promoting peace and
stability. Research has shown that women's participation
and inclusion make humanitarian assistance more
effective, strengthen the protection of civilians,
contribute to the political settlement of disputes and
the maintenance of sustainable peace, and accelerate
economic recovery. Today, we find ourselves at a turning
point in the cause of women and girls. The adoption of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/ 1), the twentieth anniversary of
the adoption of the Beijing Declaration and Platform
of Action and the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, all remind us that there is a strong, direct
relationship between sustainable peace and security
and sustainable development, and that women and girls
must be at the forefront of programmes designed to
encourage development, peace and security.

Conflicts in recent years, especially in the Middle
East, have assumed new and abhorrent forms and
dimensions, and constitute an unprecedented challenge
to stability in our region. In some parts of the region,
women are grappling with the scourge of terrorism and
extremist violence. The spread of violent extremism
and takfiri ideology threatens the lives and rights of
women and girls in our region in an unprecedented way.
News accounts and other reports in the past few years
have shown that women and girls have suffered the
most at the hands of extremists and terrorists and have
been targets for systematic sexual violence, slavery
and rape. The international community should make it
clear at every step of the way that there will never be
leniency for those who subject women and girls to such
inhumane acts of violence, physical and mental.

At the same time, it is already evident that this
dangerous ideology and its consequences cannot
be contained in a single region and in one way or
another can easily affect other regions near and far.
It is very unfortunate that women and girls have also
been disproportionately victimized by bombings in
Yemen and violence in Syria and elsewhere. Iran
strongly condemns the barbaric acts of terrorist and
violent extremist groups and indiscriminate attacks on
civilians, including women and children. We support
the Secretary-General's commitment to preparing and
presenting his promised plan of action to prevent violent
extremism and his intention to cite the participation,
leadership and empowerment of women as key factors
in addressing the drivers of extremist violence.

In closing, I would like to stress that my delegation
believes that organizing a debate such as this in the
Council should not undermine the work of the United
Nations bodies that are most relevant to the consideration
ofwomen-related issues, that is, the Commission on the
Status of Women, the Economic and Social Council and
the General Assembly.

