Mr. Al Mazrui (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I wish to thank France for having
convening this open debate on women and peace and
security. We join others in thanking the Secretary-
General's Chef de Cabinet and the Executive Director
of UN-Women. We pledge our continued support to
UN-Women for its role in advancing this agenda.

Two years have passed since we marked the
15-year anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000). The
Security Council also unanimously adopted resolution
2242 (2015), which was co-sponsored by the United
Arab Emirates. As a sponsor of the resolution and a
strong advocate of the women and peace and security
agenda, the United Arab Emirates is committed to
building a strong framework for action to realize the
full implementation of this agenda.
Since 2015, the United Nations has taken important
steps to implement this agenda. The Security Council
established the Informal Expert Group on Women
and Peace and Security and launched the Women,
Peace and Security National Focal Points Network,
of which the United Arab Emirates is a founding
member. The Network is responsible for coordinating
and implementing the women and peace and
security agenda at the national level. However, such
implementation remains a challenge owing to a number
of threats, including the rise of terrorism and violent
extremism and the targeting of women and girls in
conflict zones, as well as the protracted nature of the
displacement crisis.

The United Arab Emirates recognizes the range
of challenges that prevent the full implementation of
this agenda, and we are doing our part in preventing
conflict and promoting sustainable peace, which are
critical to the implementation of Agenda 2030.

We have focused on the protection and empowerment
as women as one of the three key pillars of our external
assistance strategy. Respect for the rights of women and
girls underpins every aspect of our country's approach
to this global response. The United Arab Emirates
considers its partnership with UN-Women a key part
of its strategy to implement the women and peace
and security agenda. Accordingly, the United Arab
Emirates has supported UN-Women since its inception.
In this regard, I would like to announce that we have
contributed $15 million to support its critical work over
the next three years.

As a result of this strong partnership and under
the leadership of Her Highness Sheikha Fatima bint
Mubarak, Chairwoman of the General Women's Union,
Supreme Chairwoman of the Family Development
Foundation and President of the Supreme Council for
Motherhood and Childhood, the United Arab Emirates
and UN-Women launched a liaison office in Abu Dhabi
that will enhance and strengthen collaboration so as
to advance gender equality and the empowerment of
women and girls as a core part of the women and peace
and security agenda in the region.

The UAE also recognizes that a strong research
base is required so that our policies can be data-driven
and effective. That is why our country contributes to
this research base by supporting UN-Women's global
programme on women and peace and security in
order to promote conflict-resilient societies through
prevention efforts. This global programme has
furthered gender-sensitive research and data collection
and revealed the drivers of extremism and the impact
of counter-terrorism strategies on women's rights and
women's organizations.

The United Arab Emirates is aware of the need
to strengthen the capacity of Governments to address
accountability for conflict-related sexual violence. That
is why the United Arab Emirates has supported the Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict in the development and implementation of an
action plan on conflict-related sexual violence as well
as in the establishment of prevention and response
mechanisms in Somalia, of which accountability is a
central element.

In closing, the United Arab Emirates recognizes
that the international community will achieve
sustainable peace only by placing women's participation
at the core of our global peace and security efforts.
We will continue to advocate for the full, effective
and meaningful participation of women in all aspects
of senior leadership and decision-making, and we
will work towards the effective implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda.

