Mrs. Pobee (Ghana): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the 61 members of the Group
of Friends of the African Women Leaders Network to
the United Nations.

The Group of Friends expresses its appreciation
to the Bolivian presidency of the Security Council
for convening this debate on the important agenda on
women and peace and security. The Group also thanks
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2018/900)
on this issue, which captures the challenges as well
as the opportunities presented to Member States
and stakeholders in the global effort to prevent
conflict and sustain peace from an enhanced gender-
sensitive perspective.

The briefings provided by the Executive Director
of UN-Women, Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, and
Randa Siniora Atallah are also deeply appreciated.
The African Women Leaders Network was launched
in New York in June 2017 with a view to bolstering
women's leadership for transformative change in
Africa. The vision of the Network is inspired by the
women and peace and security agenda, and seeks to
increase women's access to decision-making processes
and leadership positions in view of their exceptional
contributions to sustaining peace and development
in Africa.

The Network counts more than 300 women leaders,
operationalizing key strategic instruments for the
implementation of the peace, security and development
agenda. In a bid to support this ground-breaking
effort, a cross-regional Group of Friends of the African
Women Leaders Network was established last February
under the leadership of the Permanent Missions of
Ghana and Germany to serve as a strategic platform
and provide political support for the Network at United
Nations Headquarters and beyond. We are committed to
making the message of women's political and economic
empowerment a central theme in the maintenance of
international peace and security, conflict prevention
and peacebuilding.

We wish to focus our statement on three main areas.

First, we support the renewed efforts made in the
past year to include practical actions for improved
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda, and we welcome in that regard the convening
of meetings of the Informal Expert Group on Women
and Peace and Security to explore gender dimensions
in major conflict areas around the world, particularly
in Mali and the Sahel, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the Lake Chad basin and the Central
African Republic.

The Group commends in that regard the pioneering
leadership of Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed; the Executive Director of UN-Women;
and the Special Envoy of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission on Women, Peace and Security,
who took the practical step of embarking on joint
African Union-United Nations fact-finding missions to
the Democratic Republic of Congo and Nigeria in 2017,
and subsequently to Chad, the Niger and South Sudan
this year. The invaluable exchanges with women in
communities during the course of those joint missions
represent an innovation that will intensify efforts
towards the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda and significantly bring to the fore the
voices ofwomen and girls silenced by the consequences
of conflicts and war. We also commend the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Sweden, Ms. Margot Wallstrom,
who joined the Chad and Niger legs of the mission.

Secondly, the Group of Friends reiterates its full
support for efforts by the Secretary-General to increase
women's participation in peacekeeping and United
Nations peace operations, including political missions
in Africa. Member States must support and complement
those efforts to prevent stagnation and a possible
decrease in the level of representation of women in
those missions. The Group adopted a strategic plan of
action last September to support women's leadership
and participation in peace processes on the ground.
The plan includes training and support for women as
mediators and chiefs of operations in order to ensure
a qualitative increase in the number of women in
police and military contingents of United Nations
peacekeeping missions.

Thirdly, we believe that it is essential to develop
closer partnerships in support of the women and peace
and security agenda at the local, national and regional
levels. The Group of Friends firmly believes that the
African Women Leaders Network provides an excellent
framework for developing such viable relationships,
which will bolster the implementation of peace efforts,
especially at the local level. The women belonging
to the Network have already demonstrated their
ability and potential to create and to foster innovative
mechanisms to boost efforts to achieve durable peace
and development. Consequently, they must be fully
supported in assuming their rightful place as co-drivers
of the peace, security, development, governance
and economic structures established during and
after conflicts.

The African Women Leaders Network is working
towards women's participation in decision-making
processes at the local level through the establishment
of national chapters. I am pleased to inform the Council
that national chapters in the Central African Republic,
C6te d'Ivoire and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
have been established with the support and collaboration
of the African Union and UN-Women. We recognize
that women are already engaged and are ready to play
their role in building and sustaining peace. We need
more of them at the decision-making table. We need
more women participating in prevention and mediation
and on negotiating teams. It is our responsibility to
make that happen in the shortest possible time through
our continued engagement and support.

I now have the honour to make the following brief
remarks in my national capacity.

Ghana continues to take the necessary measures
to address structural barriers that impede women's
political participation, economic empowerment and role
in decision-making. Recent achievements in that regard
include the appointment of women to key positions in
Cabinet, the military and law enforcement agencies
and justice institutions, as well as peacebuilding and
conflict-prevention institutions.

We are also one ofthe 23 African countries that have
developed national action plans for the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). The Government is currently
in the process of formulating our national action
plan in collaboration with the relevant stakeholders.
In so doing, it is addressing the challenges and gaps
experienced in the first action plan, such as the lack
of adequate funding, effective localization, monitoring
and evaluation.

Within the framework of the Economic Community
of West African States regional action plan, Ghana
continues to contribute to subregional efforts in favour
of the women and peace and security agenda. The
Women, Peace and Security Institute at the Kofi Annan
International Peacekeeping Training Centre is very
instrumental in those efforts. Prior to the elections in
Liberia, the Institute conducted election observation
training for 25 female staff of the Liberia Peacebuilding
Office, as well as capacity-building for selected eminent
women in conflict analysis, mediation and negotiation.

We share the view that the low levels of political
participation of women prior to conflict, coupled with
poverty, food insecurity, disparity and deprivation,
remain critical factors that impede women's political
participation and role in conflict prevention and post-
conflict peacebuilding. We must therefore address
the various dimensions of women's empowerment,
which include economic, social, psychological and
political empowerment.

In conclusion, we wish to state that much has been
achieved but much more remains to be done. It is our
hope that Member States will continue to demonstrate
their commitment to the women and peace and security
agenda in concrete terms, especially in conflict-prone
regions ofthe world, including Africa, where significant
challenges persist.

