Ms. Jovel Polanco (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
It is a privilege to participate as Minister for Foreign
Affairs in today's debate on such an important topic,
and it is a happy coincidence that I am here today. I am
the second woman to have been Minister for Foreign
Affairs in the history of the Ministry for Foreign
Affairs, which illustrates how things are changing
in Guatemala.

In recent years, we have seen that the significant
participation of women quantifiably strengthens
protection efforts, accelerates economic recovery,
furthers peacebuilding efforts and leads to sustainable
peace. That is why, every year, the Security Council
continues to pave the way for reducing the vulnerability
of women and girls. All of that is based on the core
premise of resolution 1325 (2000), which once again
convinces us that, without security for women and
girls, we cannot achieve lasting peace. Today, through
this debate, we are providing added value to ensure
the full implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda.

Guatemala fully supports the importance that the
Secretary-General assigns to conflict prevention and
early warning, which is the stage to which we must pay
particular attention in order to prevent human rights
violations of the most vulnerable - women, girls,
children and adolescents.

Ofparticular concern is the fact that sexual violence
continues to be used as an instrument of war to terrorize
populations. We cannot allow it to be used to generate
income through trafficking and sexual slavery, much
less allow women and girls to be used as objects. We
therefore strongly condemn all of those heinous acts,
because, apart from constituting a clear violation of
international law and international humanitarian law, it
is a denial of human dignity. For that reason, we believe
that it is of paramount importance to make progress in
the fight against impunity, improve women's access
to justice and strengthen the institutions of the justice
system in the light ofthose atrocious crimes, both at the
national and international levels.

Resolution 1325 (2000) has brought about important
changes in the world, which has allowed us to recognize
that the equality and empowerment of women and
girls are critical for international peace and security.
Together with the other seven resolutions that have been
adopted by the Security Council on women and peace,
they constitute powerful tools for the full exercise of
women's rights, their access to justice and their equal
participation in all decision-making, both in conflict
and post-conflict situations and peaceful scenarios,
which has led to substantive changes for consolidating
the rule of law.

National action plans for implementing resolution
1325 (2000) constitute a powerful tool for advancing
women's rights. In order to initiate, monitor and
comply with international commitments for the search
of international peace and security in gender issues,
Guatemala has had a national action plan in place since
July, which is one more achievement for the country
in protecting the rights of women in conflict and post-
conflict situations.

Another important aspect is the role that women play
in peacekeeping operations. Guatemala participates by
deploying contingents in areas of armed conflicts, and
therefore acknowledges the contribution of resolution
1325 (2000) in laying the foundations to incorporate a
gender perspective into field missions.

Finally, my delegation believes it is necessary
that joint efforts continue among States and the
United Nations to support measures that increase the
participation of women in peace processes, including in
the contexts of peacekeeping and peace consolidation
at all levels. Nowadays, inclusive processes should be
the rule, not the exception.

