Mr. Safaei (Islamic Republic of Iran): First of
all, I would like to thank Chile for organizing today's
open debate. I think the broad participation of Member
States in the debate is an indication of the success of
Chile's initiative. I would also like to thank the briefers
for their excellent input to the discussion.

My delegation asked for the floor just to react to
the allegations made by the representative of the Israeli
regime during this meeting. I would like to state the
following.

What the representative of that regime said in
today's meeting was totally irrelevant to the subject
of the debate. It is absurd that the representative of a
regime with the darkest record on the protection of
civilians in recent history allows himself to fabricate
baseless allegations against others.

I do not need to repeat the facts about war crimes
committed by that regime during its recent aggression
and invasion of Gaza or the fact that more than 80 per
cent of the victims during that invasion were civilians,
including children, women and the elderly. I believe
that nothing other than the blood of these innocent
civilians on the streets, hospitals and schools, including
those belonging to the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, can
show the nature of the regime. It is an interesting
tactic. If you fail to defend your acts, then choose to
attack others. The representative of the regime, as
usual, embarked on attempts to divert attention from
its own heinous and repeated acts of aggression against
and occupation of civilians and the violations of the
territorial integrity of other States in the region.

It is indeed very ironic that a regime famous
for its atrocities and apartheid policies, which are
well documented by the United Nations, its repeated
violations of internationally recognized borders, war
crimes, crimes against humanity, attacks or threat of use
of force against civilians, its neighbours and beyond,
a regime with a well-known record of developing,
producing and stockpiling different kinds of inhumane
weapons, including weapons of mass destruction, tries
to preach to others on the protection of civilians and
purports to be the voice of victims.

