Ms. King (Special Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of Women): There were a couple of
questions from France about how my office and the
Division for the Advancement of Women could help
women in Afghanistan and in other areas. Following
the Council's great interest in restructuring and
revitalizing peace operations - and I particularly refer
to the Brahimi Report - there was a gender specialist
on the first integrated management task force from my
office. Strangely enough, as it turned out, the same
individual is now the gender advisor in the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
working directly with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General (SRSG). She works very closely
also with the agency gender specialist, including the
United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM), the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), and all the
others. Furthermore, she is putting together an
integrated framework plan for the implementation of
gender-sensitive policies in Afghanistan. She also
works together with the inter-agency network within
the Ministry of Women's Affairs and with government
officials.

There are other ways, including workshops on
conflict prevention, which have been held in several
regions, Morocco, Ghana, Addis Ababa, and elsewhere.
This is just relating to my office. But there are several
other conflict-resolution and capacity-building
mechanisms working throughout the system. The
United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and others
have had similar workshops. There are also workshops
on building national machinery for women, which have
been very useful, and on the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against
Women (CEDAW), legal literacy, and the rights of
women under peacekeeping operations.

We also celebrated the International Women's
Day, which was devoted for the very first time this year
to the women of Afghanistan. The representative of
Mexico raised the issue of the Special Representatives
of the Secretary-General (SRSG), and I just want to
point out that whereas there has been considerable
progress since the passage of resolution 1325 (2000),
we still have only one female SRSG out of about 46,
and three female deputy SRSG's out of about 12. The
figures may be not exact, but that is roughly the
estimate. So we have quite a long way to go.

We are, moreover, particularly looking at the
missions in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(DRC) and in Georgia, because there we feel that there
is a critical mass of women. In Georgia, not only is the
SRSG a woman, as Mr. Guehenno said, but so is her
deputy. And in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
there is a deputy who is a woman, there is a general
advisor at the senior level, there is also going to be
shortly a woman as the head of the humanitarian pillar.
The latter is a very gender-sensitive woman, and not all
women are gender-sensitive. There is also a Junior
Professional Officer (JPO), who is coming out of the
office of the focal point for women in New York.

So it is interesting for the Council to also look at
those missions where we are witnessing the beginning
of critical masses of women at the top, to see if that
makes a difference ultimately.

Mr. President, I want to say that I thank you very
much, along with the Members of this Council, for the
very interesting and rich debate we have had and for
the suggestions. I wish also to thank you on behalf of
the Inter-agency Task Force for rounding out and
refining many of the recommendations that have been
put to you, and for giving us clear guidance on where
you wish us to go.

I would also like to thank the representative of
China, who mentioned the inter-agency action plan for
the follow-up of resolution 1325 (2000), and we
certainly hope that by October we will be getting back
to you on how that inter-agency action plan has been
implemented.

I would just like to close by asking you to look at
two areas. One is, how do you get the good intentions
and the wonderful things that have been said here today
to operate at ground level? And I want to bring to your
attention a case in Liberia of gender perspectives on
early warning. Some women saw some very unusual
night activity going on in a particular part of Liberia.
Because their men folk were away, they went to look to
see what was going on. They witnessed the stockpiling
of weapons. They immediately reported this to the
Minister for Women's Affairs, who happened to be a
woman. She brought the incident to the attention of the
Cabinet. She was immediately silenced and told that it
was none of her concern. In fact, they asked to know
what were those women doing at that time of night.
They concluded that these were obviously prostitutes.
That was the end of the lesson, but in fact there was a
weapons build-up that led to conflict.

The second area that I would really like to bring
to your attention - and we have had some wonderful
inclinations or premonitions from members of this
Council that this would be the case - is that we have
heard from Cameroon that there is a full intention in
October to deal with gender issues. We have heard also
from Colombia that in December gender issues will be
looked at. We would like each and every one, Mr.
President, of the members of this Council to follow
your good example, and others before you who have

seen fit to deal with gender issues in the months under
your review.

