Archbishop Auza (Holy See): The Holy See thanks
the presidency ofthe United Kingdom for raising today's
topic to the level of open debate in this Chamber.

In his words and actions, Pope Francis has made
it very clear from his very first days as Pope that the
fight against trafficking in persons would be one of the
defining priorities of his papacy. He has not hesitated

in defining it as a form of slavery, a crime against
humanity, a shameful and grave violation of human
rights, an atrocious scourge that is present throughout
the world on a broad scale, including as it relates
to tourism.
The flood of trafficking victims is the result of
many tributaries. Among them are extreme poverty,
underdevelopment and exclusion, especially when
combined with a lack of access to education or
scarce, even non-existent, employment opportunities.
Human traffickers have no qualms about exploiting
very vulnerable people escaping economic privation
and natural disasters. In our day, however, wars and
conflicts have become the prime driver of trafficking
in persons. They provide an enabling environment
in which traffickers can operate, as persons fleeing
persecutions and conflicts are particularly vulnerable
to being trafficked. Conflicts have created conditions
in which terrorists, armed groups and transnational
organized-crime networks can thrive by exploiting
individuals and populations reduced to extreme
vulnerability through persecution and multiple forms
of violence.

In that context, my delegation once again expresses
profound concern for the ancient Christian communities,
the Yazidis and other religious and ethnic minority
groups in Mesopotamia, who have been enslaved, sold,
killed, trafficked and subjected to extreme forms of
humiliation. The apparent lack ofserious efforts to bring
to justice the perpetrators of such acts of genocide and
massive violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law leaves many people perplexed and
wondering how many more atrocities can be tolerated
before the victims obtain rescue, protection and justice.

Once more, the Holy See would like to underline
its constant and firm condemnation of the relative ease
with which arms, even weapons of mass destruction,
get into the hands ofterrorists and armed groups, giving
them the means to continue, with equal ease, to traffic
and enslave individuals and even entire communities.
The proliferation of arms, whether they are weapons of
mass destruction or merely conventional, facilitates and
prolongs violent conflicts that make people extremely
vulnerable to traffickers and smugglers. As long as
wars and conflicts rage, the trafficking in persons for
sexual exploitation, forced labour and similar crimes
will continue to flourish.

The Holy See therefore strongly appeals to States
not to supply arms to groups or regimes that would most
likely use them against their very own people, but to
implement arms-related treaties strictly and to use the
full force ofthe law in the fight against arms trafficking.
Moreover, the criminalization of undocumented and
irregular migrants exacerbates their vulnerabilities,
drives them closer to the embrace of traffickers and to
more extreme forms of exploitation, and renders them
less likely to collaborate with the law-enforcement
authorities to catch and punish the traffickers.

The challenge that trafficking in persons poses is
immense and requires a commensurate response. Today,
unfortunately, that response is still far from being equal
to the challenge. As Pope Francis has noted several
times, even though the international community has
adopted numerous agreements and individual countries
have adopted laws aimed at ending slavery in all its
forms, even though various strategies to combat that
phenomenon have been launched at both the national
and the international levels, much more still needs
to be done on the level of raising public awareness
and effecting a better coordination of efforts by
Governments, the judiciary, law-enforcement officials
and social workers to save the millions of children,
women and men who are still deprived of freedom and
are forced to live in slave-like conditions.

In a special way, the Holy See urges the Security
Council to play a greater and more active role in the
fight against the scourge of trafficking in persons,
primarily through its responsibility to prevent and end
armed conflicts and to help in the consolidation of
peace and development.

