Ms. Vasquez Munoz (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, Mr. President, I wish to express our
gratitude to Germany for having convened this debate
and for giving such high priority to the women and
peace and security agenda during your presidency.

Women and girls make up more than half of the
world's population, and their vital contribution to
inclusive societies is very important and means that
they have a real role to play in conflict prevention and
in peacekeeping and peacebuilding.

The absence of women in peace processes and
negotiations has exacerbated economic, social and
gender inequalities, as well as the political and social
discrimination that already exist in post-conflict
societies. That can no longer be tolerated. It is fitting
that the Security Council reaffirm the important role
that women play in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts and peacebuilding and that it emphasize
repeatedly the importance of their equal participation
and full involvement in all initiatives for maintaining
and promoting peace and security.

Almost 20 years after the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), we have strengthened a relevant legal and
political framework in the form of the women and peace
and security agenda. It is nevertheless necessary to make
greater efforts to ensure the effective, coherent and
cross-cutting implementation of the gender perspective
throughout the United Nations system and to address
the practical and political marginalization that persists
with regard to the meaningful participation of women in
all areas and at all levels of decision-making, including
the maintenance of international peace and security.

The number of women participating in peace
operations continues to remain at unacceptably low
levels - they account for only 4 per cent of military
personnel and 10 per cent of police personnel. We
therefore commend the efforts of the Secretary-General
to implement his gender parity strategy throughout the
United Nations system, as well as the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations, which Mexico endorses, so as to increase
the number of civilian and uniformed women at all
levels and in key positions in peacekeeping and to
integrate the gender perspective into all phases of
analysis, planning, implementation and reporting.

We hope that the revised strategy to increase the
participation of women in peace operations, to be
presented by the Secretary-General for the Security
Council's consideration pursuant to resolution 2436
(2018), will be able contribute to the full, meaningful
and effective participation of women in all aspects of
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and sustainable peace.

Mexico supports and encourages the full
participation ofwomen in all areas ofpublic life. Gender
equality and the empowerment of women and girls
is one of the guiding principles of the transformative
multilateral foreign policy of the new Government
of Mexico. In that regard, I am pleased to announce
that, since the resumption of its participation in United
Nations peace operations in 2015, Mexico has deployed
a total of nine women from its armed forces to peace
missions in Colombia, Western Sahara and Mali.

In addition, we have succeeded in meeting
the target of 15 per cent of women participating
in peacekeeping missions required of contributing
countries in those operations by the United Nations. As
we recently announced at the 29 March United Nations
Peacekeeping Ministerial on uniformed capabilities,
performance and protection, Mexico will deploy a
greater number of women in peace operations. They
will be trained in accordance with United Nations
standards in fulfilment of Mexico's commitment to
ensuring the Organization's efforts to strengthen the
meaningful participation of women in such operations.
Similarly, earlier this month, the first course on gender
and the women and peace and security agenda for
female personnel began as part of the predeployment
training that the Joint Training Centre for Peacekeeping
Operations of Mexico has been providing since 2018.

In conclusion, we must continue to question how
we perceive the use of force, conflicts, weapons and
their relation to the social constructs ofmasculinity and
femininity. Only in that way will we be able to continue
advancing the women and peace and security agenda
and achieve gender equality.

