Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): Allow me the opportunity
to commend you, Madam President, for convening
this open debate on the issue of women and peace and
security, which is the third open debate held under your
presidency.

Malaysia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Viet Nam on behalf
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.

The escalation of crises in the Middle East, Africa
and Europe has thrown into sharp relief how much
work remains to be done, particularly with regard to the
protection of millions of women and children displaced
by such conflicts. The focus of today's open debate is
therefore timely and critical. Our discussion casts a
much-needed spotlight on the urgent plight of women
and girls forced to flee their homes due to insecure
political, economic and social conditions arising from
war.

The rampant incidence of sexual and gender-based
violence in situations of conflict, especially affecting
displaced women and girls, is deeply troubling.
Displaced women and girls already suffer the trauma
of leaving their homes and livelihood behind. For them
to also fall victim to abhorrent acts of sexual violence
in the places where they seek sanctuary is deplorable.
Malaysia calls upon all parties to respect and uphold
international law and ensure the physical security,
safety and protection of the rights of women and girls.
Ending the prevailing culture of impunity and
replacing it with one that promotes the rule of law,
justice and accountability is crucial in efforts to ensure
the protection and prevention of violence against
women. In that regard, Malaysia supports the continued
efforts of the international community towards that end,
including through the building ofjustice institutions, the
deployment of mobile court systems, the establishment
of transitional justice mechanisms, and the prioritizing
of women's access to justice.

Malaysia places strong emphasis on the importance
of women's economic empowerment, as outlined in
the declaration on women's economic empowerment
for peacebuilding, adopted by the Peacebuilding
Commission in 2013. We also stress the importance
of access to education and health care services for
displaced women and girls, and call for increased
support for initiatives put forward by Member States,
the United Nations and civil society in that regard.

The international community must remain vigilant
against the forces of violent extremism that have led
to much of the recent mass displacement. Malaysia
condemns the violence wrought by militant extremism,
resulting in untold suffering and gross violations
of human rights, especially towards women and
children. We believe that a key strategy in combating
such extremist ideology is promoting moderation and
inclusivity. That requires ensuring that all stakeholders
in society, especially women, are empowered and given
a voice.

Malaysia reiterates its belief that the equal, full
and active participation of women is key to conflict
prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. In that
regard we are encouraged by the increasing trend of
women's participation in United Nations-supported
peace negotiations and the inclusion of content specific
to the women and peace and security agenda in peace
agreements. We echo calls for enhanced attention to
the role of women in early warning, mediation and
prevention initiatives at the community level as well as
the engagement of women in efforts to address the root
causes of conflicts.

Malaysia is determined to ensure that the plight
of women and girls in situations of armed conflict
continues to receive the sustained attention of the
Security Council. We support all efforts to continue
mainstreaming the issue of women and peace and
security in the work of the Council. In that regard, my
delegation also wishes to express its appreciation for
efforts to improve the implementation of arrangements
for monitoring, analysis and reporting to the Council,
including providing gender-sensitive conflict analysis
throughout the reporting chain.

The commitment of the international community
to the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
subsequent, related resolutions, including resolutions
2106 (2013) and 2122 (2013), is today being tested in our
response to the dire situation of displaced women and
girls worldwide. For the sake of millions of innocent
women and children, it is a test that we cannot afford
to fail.

