Ms. Al Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Security Council under
the presidency of Bolivia for convening today's open
debate on women and peace and security. I also thank
the Secretary-General and the Executive Director
of United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and
the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) for their
briefings, leadership and efforts aimed at enhancing the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda. I also welcome the participation of Ms. Randa
Siniora Atallah, General Director of the Women's
Centre for Legal Aid and Counselling. I would like to
touch on four main points in my statement.

First, with regard to the enhancement of transitional
justice for women, there is increasing evidence that,
since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), impunity
for sexual and gender-based violence in conflicts is
considered a prerequisite to sustainable peace. The State
of Qatar has therefore supported efforts to facilitate
the establishment of the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011. The State of
Qatar has been committed to providing it with financial
support. Given the obstacles to finding alternative ways
to establish accountability for crimes, the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism plays an
important role in supporting investigations on sexual and
gender-based violence impartially and independently.
It supports the prosecution of perpetrators by taking
into consideration the importance of this step towards
achieving transitional justice for women in Syria. The
State of Qatar is helping in every possible way to ensure
its success.

Secondly, I would like to express how pleased we
are that the 2018 Nobel Peace Prize was awarded to
Dr. Denis Mukwege and Ms. Nadia Murad, the United
Nations Goodwill Ambassador for the Dignity of
Survivors of Human Trafficking, in acknowledgement
oftheir efforts to put an end to the use of sexual violence
as a weapon of war in armed conflicts. That recognition
stresses the importance of continuing to condemn
impunity for sexual crimes committed in conflict. It is
an appeal to States and the international community to
redouble their efforts to end the use of sexual violence
against women as a strategy and weapon of war, as well
as to achieve justice.

The State of Qatar, as one of the main donors to
the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for Victims
of Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children, takes pride in supporting the work and
programmes that ensure the provision of support for
women who have been subjected to trafficking, as well
as the necessary assistance and protection to ensure
their physical, psychological, social and economic
recovery and their reintegration.

Thirdly, with regard to young women's participation
in peace processes, we are all aware of the vital role of
young people in efforts leading to peacebuilding and
sustainable peace. However, young women frequently
continue to be excluded from peacebuilding efforts.
In that respect, we would like to highlight the timely
initiative taken by the State of Qatar, Finland and
Colombia, in collaboration with the United Nations
Special Envoy on Youth and a number of United
Nations relevant agencies, which will include the
holding in Helsinki, from 5 to 7 March 2019, of the
first international conference on youth participation in
peace, in which some 80 key stakeholders in the area of
youth engagement in peace will take part. It will be an
opportunity to engage in an open discussion on youth
participation in peace, bridge gaps for women activists
in peacebuilding and enhance our tools for sharing best
practices in that area.

Fourthly, while in recent years women have
taken on many different roles - as negotiators,
mediators, soldiers and police officers - their stories,
accomplishments and lessons learned have not been
shared or documented. The State of Qatar, together
with Colombia, has therefore recently published a book
entitled HERstory: Celebrating Women Leaders in the
United Nations, which highlights the accomplishments
of women leaders in the area of peace and security
throughout the history of the United Nations. In his
foreword to the book, the Secretary-General writes,
"Their accomplishments remind us of what we miss
when the role of women is absent". We must emphasize
that many of those women are still here with us today.
However, what we need to do is not just celebrate them
but make them part of our daily life. As the book says,
women come with a perspective, an approach and a
collection of essential skills and expertise for enhancing
international peace and security and the women and
peace and security agenda.

