Mr. Garcia Gonzalez (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to express my delegation's thanks
for your timely initiative, Mr. President, to convene
this open Security Council debate to commemorate the
tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000) on women and peace and security. This
initiative under Uganda's presidency this month
accurately reflects the relevance of this question for
developing countries. I take this opportunity to
welcome the presence of Under-Secretary-General
Michelle Bachelet here today and reiterate our
congratulations for her appointment as the head of UN
Women. We wish her every success in her work and
assure her of our cooperation in fulfilling her mandate.

The Government of El Salvador acknowledges
and values the progress made thus far, both by the
international community as a whole and by Member
States in particular, in reaffirming the important role of
women in conflict prevention and resolution and in
peacebuilding. These efforts also reaffirm the need for
women to participate on an equal footing and to be
fully involved in all initiatives aimed at maintaining
and promoting peace and security, as well as the
importance of increasing their participation in
decision-making processes for conflict prevention and
resolution.

El Salvador welcomes the evolution of this
historic resolution and the subsequent adoption by the
Council of resolutions 1820 (2008) and 1882 (2009) on
the prevention and response to sexual violence in
conflicts and resolution 1888 (2009) on the
participation of women in peacebuilding. We see those
resolutions as crucial elements for confronting the
challenges and obstacles to the full participation of
women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts as
well as in public life after conflict.

El Salvador acknowledges and welcomes the
important contribution made by the Peacebuilding
Commission to efforts to promote and strengthen the
participation of women in peacebuilding following
conflict. We also welcome the efforts made on a daily
basis by civil society organizations, especially
women's movements, aimed at incorporating the
gender perspective in peacekeeping operations. We
hope for an increase in women's representation at all
levels of institutional decision-making, as well as in
national, regional and international mechanisms, to
prevent, manage and resolve conflicts through a
renewed effort aimed at encouraging concrete action
that promotes a more strategic and systematic approach
to this important question.

El Salvador, as a troop-contributing country, is
making a significant contribution, relatively speaking,
to peacekeeping operations in terms of members of its
armed forces and the national civil police force. At the
same time, we are also endeavouring to promote the
gender perspective and the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) within those national
institutions.
In addition, through the El Salvador Institute for
the Advancement of Women, we are promoting a
strategic re-alignment, as of 1 June 2009, to bring
about a society with full gender equality by reducing
the gender gap and by combating all forms of violence
against women. In that regard, we have drawn up and
are implementing the second national policy for
women, which includes the priorities of the five-year
development plan and the lessons learned from the
implementation of the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action in the framework of our previous
national policy for women.

To conclude, allow me to share the following
thoughts with Council members. In our view, the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000)
presents a valuable opportunity to establish a bridge
between the Security Council and the General
Assembly in terms of the participation and inclusion of
women in conflict prevention and resolution and in
peacebuilding. It is now time for comprehensive
cooperation between these main bodies of the United
Nations on this question, for the benefit of women,
girls and all the peoples of the world.

