Mr. Cevik (Turkey): At the outset, I would like to
congratulate you, Sir, on Azerbaijan's accession to the
presidency of the Security Council this month. Turkey
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2122 (2013) on
women, peace and security by the Council earlier today.
I would like to commend the United Nations team of
experts on the rule of law and sexual violence for their
valuable work.

Sexual Violence in armed conflicts, from the early
stages of conflict to its aftermath, is one of the gravest
human rights abuses committed against women and
girls. In situations of conflict, sexual Violence is often
used as a weapon of war - a strategy to deprive human
beings of their most basic rights, their safety, security
and dignity. Sexual Violence can exacerbate and prolong
armed conflicts and may impede the restoration of
international peace and security, as posited in many
relevant Security Council resolutions to date.

We welcome the fact that the international
community has been paying increasing attention to
the crime of sexual Violence in conflict. The Security
Council has hosted many debates on the issue and
addressed the crucial issues of transitional justice,
capacity-building and the rule of law. International and
regional organizations are devoting more attention to
this topic.

The draft decision of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Ministerial Council
on the OSCE action plan on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), which Turkey is sponsoring
together with Austria, Finland and Kazakhstan, is a
recent example of this. Turkey was also glad to join in
the launch of the Declaration of Commitment to End
Sexual Violence in Conflict at the ministerial level on
the sidelines of the General Assembly's general debate.

However, despite all those efforts, sexual violence
in armed conflict remains one of the most neglected
crimes. Sadly, the situation in Syria, just across our
border, is a vivid example of that. Turkey echoes the
condemnation voiced very recently by the Council of
the acts of sexual and gender-based Violence and abuse
taking place in Syria. However, as we most regretfully
know, a culture of impunity tends to prevail in conflicts
and in post-conflict situations. Violators are not
adequately punished, if punished at all. Victims lack
sufficient access to justice, physical and psychological
treatment or support. Those suffering sexual Violence
often find it difficult to speak out, especially in
situations of prolonged conflict.

Today's debate serves to highlight the strong will
power of the international community to combat sexual
Violence in conflict. Now is time to focus on the ways
and means to do so by sharing best practices and talking

about specific measures that can be adopted. In that
sense, we find the focus of today's debate on the rule of
law and transitionaljustice in conflict and post-conflict
situations extremely useful, and would like to thank the
Azerbaijani presidency for convening it.

The elimination of the root causes of conflict is
the best way to prevent sexual violence and to address
impunity. Combating impunity is possible only by
building transparent, effective, non-discriminatory and
functioning institutions and justice systems. It is vital
to ensure that women and girls have access to judicial
institutions and proper representation. We in the
international community should pursue our efforts to
support gender-sensitive judicial reform and capacity-
building. It is important to provide gender expertise in
peacekeeping operations and peacebuilding efforts, as
well as to ensure the participation of women in those
efforts.

The health sector is another area that should be
strengthened to deal with sexual violence in armed
conflict. Rehabilitation to address the mental, physical
and psychological trauma suffered by women and girls
should not be delayed, so that they can move on and
rebuild their lives.

Combating sexual Violence is an issue that should
also be dealt with on a broader societal scale. As
individuals and groups from all sectors of society raise
their voices higher against this atrocity, we will all be
able to stand stronger in our struggle. That requires a
need for stronger interaction with civil society, grass-
roots institutions and women's organizations, as well as
the private sector and the media.

A significant number ofpeace agreements fail within
the first five years of signature. Among the various
reasons for this outcome, the lack of inclusiveness is
evident. The full, equal and meaningful participation
of women at the decision-making level is crucial
for assuring that the political, social and economic
outcomes of peace talks and mediation efforts address
their specific issues and concerns.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the Security
Council, member States and all relevant United Nations
bodies, in addition to all relevant stakeholders at the
local, national, regional and global levels that have
made the issue of sexual Violence against women in
conflict a priority.

Our special thanks goes to the Special
Representative Bangura, whose exemplary dedication
in fighting against sexual violence in conflicts,
including combating impunity, we continue to admire
and strongly support.

