Mr. Roman-Morey (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
am grateful for the initiative to hold an open debate in
the Security Council on the role of women with regard
to peace and security.

Resolution 1325 (2000) was a fundamental
milestone in international law. Since it was adopted,
the issue of women's role with regard to peace and
security has had an important place on the Council's
agenda, and therefore has a significant and crucial role
in achieving the Council's goals.

The resolution was a starting point for subsequent
developments on the issue in the Security Council
aimed at ensuring women's participation in
maintaining and strengthening peace and in combating
all forms of violence against women and girls,
especially sexual and gender-based violence. Along

with international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820
(2008), 1888 (2009), 1889 (2009) and 1960 (2010)
provide the international community with the legal
framework to address the needs and rights of women in
conflict and post-conflict situations.

Women are clearly decisive actors at every stage
of the peacebuilding process in the long term. It is
therefore necessary to promote their full participation
as an integral part of efforts to establish, maintain and
strengthen peace. We therefore welcome the trend to
systematically incorporate the gender perspective in
the Security Council's work, especially in mission
mandates, as well as the involvement of women in
conflict resolution processes.

My country has a long history of sending women
military observers to various peacekeeping operations.
I am pleased to announce that, last November, Peru
deployed its first female personnel to peacekeeping
operations. Their numbers will continue to increase in
future operations.

We must in no way allow violence against women
and sexual violence to be seen as an inevitable part of
armed conflicts. In that regard, we are pleased that the
Secretary-General has implemented a zero-tolerance
policy in peacekeeping operations for all forms of
violence against women, gender violence and in
particular violence and sexual abuse. We also welcome
his recent report on the issue that recognizes the
important work that has been done jointly by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, UN-Women
and various actors of the United Nations system with
regard to the development and implementation of a
comprehensive strategy to combat this scourge, which
is essential in order to respond in a timely and adequate
manner to situations of sexual violence.

My country also supports the work of
UN-Women, and we encourage it to continue to
contribute decisively to the implementation of
resolutions relating to peace and security. Peru also
welcomes the work of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict on aspects linked to
women, peace and security, especially relating to the
prevention of sexual violence.

The fight against impunity for all forms of gender
violence is essential to peacebuilding processes. It is
therefore necessary that States strengthen their judicial
systems so that such cases can be duly and promptly
brought to trial, including, whenever possible, women
in those systems. It will also be important in that
respect to continue to promote the ratification of the
Statute of the International Criminal Court.

We agree with the Secretary-General that women
are decisive players in the context of the three pillars
required for lasting peace: economic recovery, social
cohesion and political legitimacy. In that context, in
post-conflict stages it is vital that stress be put on
strengthening the rule of law as well as the social,
economic and political empowerment of women,
without any discrimination, ensuring their full
integration into the community and their full political
participation.

Peru believes that the high-level consideration of
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) proposed
for 2015 would be an opportunity to consider, in a
comprehensive manner, the progress made by the
United Nations system and the measures promoted and
adopted by Member States in priority prevention areas,
which are participation, protection, assistance and
recovery, and to consider the establishment of a
working group charged with following up that
resolution.

Since resolution 1325 (2000) was adopted, we
have made progress in recognizing the importance of
women's participation in peace and security. However,
many challenges remain to which we must respond,
and we must work jointly to ensure that women and
girls can fully and without discrimination exercise their
personal, employment, economic and social rights,
which are recognized in international instruments,
including their right to live without fear, without
violence, with respect and with equal opportunities.

