Mr. Michel (Belgium) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by joining with those who have welcomed
the initiative to hold this debate in the Security
Council. I think it is both fundamental and urgent to
speak out to express our indignation, to speak out to
express our disgust at these tragedies within tragedies.
The stories that we are hearing show that we are going
beyond the borders of humanity. It is behaviour that is
more bestial in nature than anything else. Like others
here, I have had the opportunity to meet with
victims - women, small girls - who have been
affected by those atrocities.

It is a question of peace and security, Madam
President, as you yourself rightly said at the outset. It
is our conviction that this issue also involves our
concept both of the human being and of humanity; our
joint responsibility through a debate of this kind is to
conduct our fight at the highest political level to deal
with the unacceptable phenomenon of sexual violence
in armed conflict.

I should like to divide my comments into three
points: prevention; assistance to victims; and the fight
against impunity.
08-39069

Others have already referred to prevention.
Obviously, war and a lack of security create horror and
dread. Above all, we are fighting war against war. That
is key in preventing this kind of violence and in
mobilizing our will. We need to engage in enormous
prevention work and awareness-raising work in areas
at risk, the conflict areas. That is indispensable. Also, it
can be seen in the field that there is a danger of such
violence becoming viewed as commonplace, and then
being exported beyond the areas that are directly
affected by conflicts, into post-conflict situations. We
have to be alert to that.

The second element is assistance to victims.
Behind the statistics printed on glossy paper, there are
tens of thousands of women, tens of thousands of
young girls, whose lives have been affected in their
very flesh and in their minds for the rest of their lives.
There are families who have been dismantled, torn
apart, torn to pieces by those horrific events. We have
the responsibility to act to meet the medical needs, the
social and psychological needs and the need for legal
assistance, and to provide assistance to families and
others to those near them. We must commit ourselves
to reintegrating them into society, into economic life.
Reports from the field lead me to believe that the
extreme urgency of radically improving the
coordination of international aid is a determining
factor. We have to get closer to the victims in the field.
We cannot simply content ourselves with a
humanitarian presence in a few major centres. I believe
that this is a very specific and important issue.

The last point, and probably the most important,
is the fight against impunity. To punish the perpetrators
is the task of the justice system. This fight requires the
rejection of inevitability, the condemnation of letting
these crimes become commonplace and the
rehabilitation of the victims. That is the best way to
engage in prevention. Every combatant, every fighter,
every potential perpetrator needs to know that one day
he will be called to account and will pay the price for
his infamous crimes.

To be sure, the task is immense and complex.
There are several aspects to our response. We must
strengthen national judicial capacity. We must therefore
have the commitment of national Governments to
assume their responsibilities. Punishments must be
decided upon, and they must be carried out. Recently,
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, prisoners
were able to escape shortly after their sentencing. That
is not acceptable. We must have strengthened
cooperation in that area. We also need to support an
international response in the judicial sphere. Belgium
is gratified at having been able, together with others, to
set up the International Criminal Court, whose statute
is unequivocal about the nature of these crimes.

In conclusion, I would like to argue on two
particular elements. First of all, we have to mobilize
our efforts to make the International Criminal Court
more accessible to victims. I would like to draw
attention to the strengthened role that could and should
be played by the Trust Fund for Victims. It must be
effective and must meet the needs of victims where
other initiatives are lacking. In that context, I would
like to encourage the Executive Director and the Board
of Directors of the Fund not to hesitate to appeal for
specific contributions where the situation so justifies.

The second element - and this perhaps
complements the Secretary-General's initiative to
designate a messenger for peace, of which he spoke
earlier - relates to documenting the magnitude of this
phenomenon, its roots, its evolution and the
preparations for the work that must be done by the
courts, whether national or international. Here, I would
like to suggest that the Secretary-General might
appoint a woman special investigator on sexual
violence in armed conflict to carry out the systematic
collection of information and to gather all the material
that is already available in the field, whether from
peacekeeping operations, the United Nations agencies
or others operating in the field. All of this should lead
us towards zero impunity, and we must clearly affirm
the United Nations commitment to peace and security.
That must be translated into efforts to tirelessly and
determinedly hunt down the perpetrators of these
crimes so that those monsters will never again be able
to sleep in peace.

