Mr. Cornado (Italy): Italy fully aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the representative of
Sweden as President of the European Union. I will
therefore limit myself to a few additional remarks.

I would like first to commend you, Mr. President,
for having convened this important debate. The
adoption of resolution 1820 (2008) a little more than
year ago was a historic achievement of this Council,
clearly stating that sexual violence, when used as a
weapon of war, not only is a heinous violation of
human rights, and possibly a war crime or a crime
against humanity, but also endangers international
peace and security.
Italy is proud of having been one of the sponsors
of resolution 1820 (2008) and of having substantially
contributed to its drafting. For us, its implementation,
as well as that of resolution 1325 (2000) on women and
peace and security, is a key priority in the foreign and
security policies of my country. For that reason, my
Government has started the process of drafting a
national action plan for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and is constantly and actively
engaged in all United Nations forums that deal with the
advancement of women.

Italy is also organizing, in the framework of its
G-8 presidency, an international conference on
violence against women that will take place in Rome
on 9 and 10 September 2009. The conference will
tackle all aspects of gender-based violence, including
sexual violence in armed conflict, with the aim of
focusing the attention of the international community
on a global issue that affects all countries of the world.
The event will see the participation of representatives
of several Governments from all over the world,
international organizations and civil society, and
intellectuals and global advocates.

Today's debate shows once again the commitment
of the international community and the Security
Council to putting an end to those unspeakable crimes.
We are on the right track. The adoption last Tuesday of
resolution 1882 (2009), extending to rape and sexual
violence the criteria for the inclusion of parties to
armed conflict in the annexes of the reports of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict, is
yet another concrete step in the right direction. Italy
co-sponsored that resolution, and commends Mexico
and the other Council members for that important
achievement, which will allow the Council to protect
children affected by armed conflict.

Yet, it is clear to all of us that more needs to be
done and that the measure of our success will be the
difference that we can make on the ground by
effectively protecting women and girls from sexual
violence, holding accountable those responsible for
those crimes, putting an end to impunity, helping the
victims and empowering women within their societies.

In that framework, we read with attention the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/362) pursuant
to resolution 1820 (2008), which is a useful first step to
increase the capacities of Member States and of the
10
United Nations to respond to sexual violence in armed
conflicts.

We support the Secretary-General's
recommendations. We believe that our first priority
must be to ensure accountability. The establishment of
a commission of inquiry to investigate and report on
human rights and humanitarian Violations leading to
sexual violence in Chad, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Sudan and to recommend to the
Council the most effective mechanisms to fight
impunity in those situations is undoubtedly a proposal
that could lead to tangible progress on the ground.

Still, as resolution 1820 (2008) points out and as
clearly emerged from today's debate, the challenge
before us is global in scope and not limited to certain
situations. We must provide ourselves with the
appropriate tools to face the challenge both in single-
priority situations and at the general, more global level.

We therefore support the proposal that the
Secretary-General issue an annual report on this topic,
and we hope that future reports will include detailed
and verified information, publicly listing those parties
to armed conflicts responsible for acts of rape and
sexual violence in violation of international law.

The progress obtained through the annual report
on children and armed conflict shows that information
is the first step towards real accountability within the
international community. We realize that it will not be
an easy task and that the United Nations system, and
particularly its missions on the ground, will need more
resources, stronger capacities and better coordination.
Still, we are convinced that this is something that needs
to be done without delay and, equally, that the Council
will then need to act upon the information that it
receives with all its instruments, including sanctions
committees.

Finally, we are convinced that it is now time to
have a global advocate for the implementation of
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008), acting as a
focal point both of the United Nations system and of
Member States. We would therefore favour the
appointment of a special representative of the
Secretary-General for women and peace and security.

