Ms. Dunlop (Brazil): I thank you, Mr. President,
for holding this open debate on women and peace and
security. The gravity of the challenge posed by sexual
violence against civilians in situations of armed
conflict requires involving the whole membership in
the discussion on ways to address the problem. I also
thank the Secretary-General for his presence and his
briefing.

The report before us today (S/2009/362) is deeply
disturbing. The persistence of widespread or systematic
rape and other forms of sexual abuse of civilians in
armed conflict is simply unacceptable. As noted in that
document, sexual violence is dehumanizing, inflicts
intense mental and physical trauma, and is often
accompanied by fear, shame and stigma. It can prolong
conflict by creating a cycle of attack and counterattack,
as also indicated in the report. This is all the more
deplorable when perpetrators are officials, who must
lead by example and fulfil clear legal and moral
obligations.

Our collective indignation must go beyond
statements and translate into concerted action by the
international community. The several parts of the
United Nations system must come together to address a
problem that, although simple in its cruelty, is complex
in its root causes and therefore demands a multisectoral
approach.

The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women, the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action, the agreed
conclusions of the Commission on the Status of
Women and the Declaration on the Protection of
Women and Children in Emergency and Armed
Conflict provide a clear framework for effective action.
The General Assembly, the Commission on the Status
of Women, the Division for the Advancement of
Women, the United Nations Development Fund for
Women and the International Research and Training
Institute for the Advancement of Women together have
done a lot and should continue their valuable work in a
manner that is as coordinated as possible.

The principle of national ownership and the need
for the active participation of civil society in this
process cannot be overemphasized. In situations of
armed conflict, where sexual violence is used or
commissioned as a tactic of war in order to deliberately
target civilians or as part of a widespread or systematic
attack against civilian populations, the Security
Council has an important role to play.

The recommendations made by the Secretary-
General in his report deserve careful consideration, as
they may help to prevent, monitor, report on and
remedy instances of sexual violence. It is crucial that
the proposed measures fully respect the functions and
powers of the Security Council under the Charter and
conform to the scope of resolutions 1325 (2000) and
1820 (2008). In other words, the object of those
measures must be widespread or systematic sexual
violence in situations of armed conflict. In all other
cases, the fight against this atrocity should be led by
the relevant actors within the United Nations system.

Nevertheless, we must actively seek synergies
and stimulate cooperation among all stakeholders.
Information-gathering is a good example. My
delegation supports the enhanced collection of data by
peacekeeping missions on widespread or systematic
sexual violence in situations of armed conflict. Such
data should be shared with other relevant principal
organs, the Committee on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women and the Commission
on the Status of Women as appropriate, since it would
help to ensure that international action is not merely
punitive but transformative as well.

Widespread or systematic sexual violence in
armed conflict should not be fought only by means of
vigorous law enforcement, prosecution, military
discipline or sanctions. If these measures are to be
effective in the long run, they should be accompanied
by serious efforts to address some of the causes of the
problem, such as discrimination, prejudice, poor
education, institutional fragility and lack of resources.
We trust that, together, national Governments, the
competent parts of the United Nations system and
donors can achieve a lot in this area.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Brazil's
political and practical commitment to international
efforts to combat all forms of violence against women,
especially sexual violence against women and girls. We
also support the Council in its implementation of
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008). My
delegation hopes that this debate will lead to improved
action by Member States and the United Nations as a
whole.

