Mr. Spatafora (Italy): I have the honour of
taking the floor on behalf of the European Union (EU).
The acceding countries Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland,
Slovakia and Slovenia and the associated countries
Bulgaria, Romania and Turkey declare that they align
themselves with this statement.

The European Union welcomes the opportunity to
highlight the importance of Security Council resolution
1325 (2000). In discussions in the Council last year, the
European Union put forward a number of proposals to
make the resolution more operational: to revise
guidelines and operational procedures; to look into
organization and training; to provide gender officers to
field missions; and to mainstream gender into all peace
mandates, mission planning and staffing.

The deliberations of last October confirmed the
Council's commitment to gender. I am pleased to
inform the Council that the European Union has
recently discussed a new initiative that builds on
resolution 1325 (2000) and that can serve as a basis for
setting up a road map for strengthening a gender
perspective in European Union conflict management.

Resolution 1325 (2000) represents one of the
most important milestones of gender mainstreaming at
the United Nations. Since October 2000, that important
tool has allowed all United Nations bodies and
agencies, through the Inter-Agency Task Force on
Women, Peace and Security, to work together on issues
related to women and peace and security. It has
provided the mandate for the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO), the Department for
Disarmament Affairs and the Department of Political
Affairs to actively include gender issues on their
agendas. It has also encouraged Member States to do
the same in their work in the Security Council. Along
these lines the European Union, during the Athens
Forum on "Gender, Peace and Foreign Policy: the
European Union Perspective", held in May 2003,
called on Member States to ensure, in a systematic
manner, that women in conflict and post-conflict
situations were fully empowered.

Peace is inextricably linked to equality between
women and men. The growing targeting of civilians,
particularly women and girls, exacerbates violations of
the human rights of women. As shown by the 2002
study on women, peace and security overseen by the
Office of the Special Adviser on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women, women are not only victims
of armed conflict, they are also active agents and often
direct participants in conflict. Women also play an
active role in informal peace processes before, during,
and after conflicts, although they are frequently
excluded from formal peace processes, including
negotiations and the drafting of peace accords and
reconstruction plans.

Last year, on the second anniversary of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000), the Secretary-General
presented a 21-point programme based on the findings
of the aforementioned study (see S/2002/ 1154), with a
View to ensuring the Security Council's action towards
the full implementation of the resolution. On that
occasion, the European Union welcomed the system-
wide implementation action plan developed by the
Inter-Agency Task Force on Women, Peace and
Security. The plan covered all areas pertaining to the
mandates of United Nations entities identified in the
resolution, including gender mainstreaming, training,
humanitarian assistance, post-conflict cooperation and
development, disarmament, gender-sensitive training,
protection of women and girls in armed conflict,
constitutional and political issues and reproductive
health.

The European Union believes that the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) can be
achieved only through an increased recognition of the
crucial role of women in all the cited areas. One of the
most important issues still remaining to be addressed
with regard to women and armed conflict is women's
participation in conflict resolution and in the
negotiation of peace agreements at national and
international levels.

The European Union welcomes the creation last
spring of a gender focal point position in DPKO, which
it considers to be an important factor for
mainstreaming gender in peacekeeping operations. In
that respect, we would like to express our greatest
appreciation to Mr. Guehenno, whom we heard this
morning, for his readiness to implement the relevant
Security Council recommendations. Our full support is
with him.
The European Union also encourages the
Secretary-General to intensify efforts to appoint more
women as special representatives and envoys,
especially in matters related to peacekeeping, peace-
building and preventive diplomacy. The strengthening
of the full participation of women in constitutional and
electoral processes in post-conflict countries is also of
utmost importance. The European Union believes that
the increased involvement of women in all those areas
would contribute to the achievement of the overall goal
of gender equality in relation to peace and security.
That goal is still, three years after the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), far from achieved. As the
outcome document of the twenty-third special session
of the General Assembly (General Assembly resolution S-23/3) recognized, the lack of gender-awareness in
those areas presents serious obstacles for the countries
currently in a conflict or post-conflict situation.

In today's conflicts, women and girls are more
and more often directly targeted, and rape and sexual
violence continue to be used as weapons of war.
Clearly, this differential impact on women and girls
calls for more effective responses from the
international community. Much more needs to be done
to make those involved in conflicts aware of relevant
international laws and to prosecute and punish those
who violate those laws. In that respect, the European
Union calls upon all States to ratify and implement the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court and
actively to cooperate with the Court, which has a vital
role in ensuring justice for all and in fighting impunity.

The European Union is also strongly committed
to the adoption of all international measures and
instruments, including the Palermo Protocol, aimed at
supporting the fight against trafficking of human
beings, in particular women and children, and the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW). The
European Union calls upon other States to do the same.

The European Union strongly believes that the
international community must continue to focus its
attention and advocacy on the situation of women in
conflicts throughout the world, to ensure the
incorporation of a gender perspective during
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
rehabilitation, reconstruction, repatriation, resettlement
and development programmes and the active and equal
participation of women in those processes.

