Ms. Stiglic (Slovenia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The candidate
countries Turkey, Croatia and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia, as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align
themselves with this statement.

In the interest of time, I will limit myself to an
abbreviated version of our statement. The complete and
official statement on behalf of the European Union is
being distributed in the room.

I would like to begin by commending the United
States presidency on the initiative to convene this
thematic debate. The presence of the United States
Secretary of State today, as well as that of other high-
level representatives, shows that the international
community understands the urgency of this important
issue and stands ready to take it forward. We hope this
timely and topical debate will help us do just that.

I would like to recall a remark made by Major
General Patrick Cammaert in his statement at today's
debate, that it is more dangerous to be a woman that to
be a soldier right now in armed conflict. Women have
always been particularly vulnerable victims during
armed conflicts, but in modern history sexual violence
has developed into a method of warfare.

Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), linking
gender equality to global security and acknowledging
the importance of women's voices in building lasting
peace, represents a milestone on the road to more
gender-sensitive peace processes and security policies.
We must considerably strengthen our efforts to
guarantee the protection of women and girls in
conflict-affected societies and to ensure their full and
equal participation in peace processes at all levels,
including negotiations and decision-making, insisting
that women be fully engaged in all humanitarian,
reconstruction and development programmes.

The European Union believes that the best way to
promote women's rights and women's empowerment
and to respond to the needs of women is through a
gender-sensitive approach. Human rights and gender
issues are being mainstreamed in our development
cooperation policies. Through the European Initiative
for Democracy and Human Rights, we have supported
women's participation in peace processes in Colombia,
Kenya, Ethiopia, Eritrea and Somalia. Furthermore, the
EU Initiative for Peacebuilding will be exploring ways
to ensure the effective implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) by the international community,
Governments and local civil society organizations. We
also have a strong commitment to mainstream gender
equality in the European Security and Defence Policy.

Sexual and gender-based violence is an area of
particular concern to women and girls in armed
conflict situations, although we know now that also
boys and men may be subjected to such violence and to
sexual torture. Violence against women and girls,
including rape and sexual slavery, is often used as a
weapon of war in order to demoralize women
themselves or the community to which they belong.
Importantly, high levels of sexual and gender-based
violence also rarely cease at the end of hostilities and
continue well into the post-conflict phase.
Examples from the recent past and, unfortunately,
at this present moment show the extensiveness and
severity of sexual violence against women in armed
conflict. Today, armed groups in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are using sexual violence as a
weapon of war to terrorize the population. In Darfur
too, women and girls continue to be affected by high
levels of gender-based violence and sexual crimes
including rape, while impunity remains a serious
problem.

The short- and long-term costs of sexual and
gender-based violence were largely underestimated or
ignored in the past and there still remains a lack of
coordinated and effective action. Such violence is
surrounded by a culture of silence and impunity, and
the range and complexity of the underlying causes
make it a difficult issue to address, particularly in
conflict-affected situations, where judicial and security
institutions are weak.

Impunity for perpetrators and an insufficient
response to the needs of survivors are unacceptable.
Grave violations of women's human rights through
massive rape and other sexual violence require the
immediate attention of the International Criminal Court
and other relevant tribunals.

There is a strong need to develop and promote
innovative approaches that turn women from victims of
rape into rape survivors. Such approaches should
ensure their safety and support their access to justice,
and should actively support their economic
empowerment through income-generating activities.
Furthermore, they should also ensure adequate care,
recognizing women's sexual and reproductive health
needs.

On this occasion, the European Union reiterates
its strong commitment to the zero-tolerance policy, in
the firm belief that under no circumstances can gender-
based violence be condoned in peacekeeping or other
United Nations-led operations. There should be no
impunity for gender-based violence in the United
Nations.

Every United Nations peacekeeping mission
should include, as a priority, the protection of women
and the safeguarding of women peacebuilders and
should include information about sexual and gender-
based violence in its regular reports to the Security
Council. Furthermore, it is essential that all military
and civilian personnel serving on United Nations
peacekeeping missions receive training on the
protection and rights of women.

In conclusion, the European Union looks forward
to the adoption of a strong and action-oriented draft
resolution, with a broad sponsor base as an outcome of
this thematic debate. We express our support for
developing an effective and comprehensive system-
wide approach for addressing the issue of sexual
violence in situations of armed conflict with clear
monitoring and accountability mechanisms.

