Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand
welcomes the presence of Foreign Secretary Hague,
and the attention paid to this important issue by the
Group of Eight and the United Kingdom in particular.
We also welcome the presence ofthe Secretary-General
and Special Representative Bangura, who has been a
fearless advocate on sexual violence in conflict. We
applaud the passion that they and many others have
brought to this discussion.

As my delegation said in the April debate on sexual
violence in conflict during the Rwandan presidency
(see S/PV.6948), it is vitally important that the Council
send a clear message on the issue of sexual violence
to the entire international community and that it does
so through, inter alia, the strong statements made in
debates like this. We welcome the United Kingdom's
concept note (S/2013/335, annex) and the Secretary-
General's most recent report on sexual violence in
conflict (S/2013/l49), both of which correctly highlight
that national Governments have primary legal and moral
responsibility for the protection of civilian populations,
including from sexual violence in conflict.

Indeed, as the Secretary-General's report identifies,
the lack at the national level of capacity to investigate
and prosecute is one of the principal impediments to
ensuring accountability for conflict-related sexual
violence. We agree with Portugal and others that the
United Nations, across its relevant divisions such as the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the United
Nations Development Programme and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, must
continue its efforts to focus on supporting national
efforts.

We have received excellent information and
recommendations from today's briefers and from
Member State interventions, often, as I have said, with
considerable passion. Against that background, I wish
to make a few specific points.

The Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and
Sexual Violence in Conflict provides important
technical assistance to national authorities attempting
to bolster national civil and military justice systems.
Building national capacity remains one of the best and
most comprehensive ways to address sexual violence
in conflict, so we very strongly support the assistance
regarding national capacities being provided to various
Governments by the Team of Experts. Indeed, to
underscore its importance, we encourage continued
further reference to the work of the Team of Experts in
relevant Council outputs.

Next, accountability for sexual violence does
not lend itself to a one-size-fits-all approach.
The Council must be agile, inclusive and open to
considering alternative courses of action. Presidential
and public statements from the Council give voice to
the international community's abhorrence for sexual
Violence and send a very strong signal that it will not
be tolerated. But words alone are not enough, and, in
appropriate circumstances, where national authorities
are unwilling or unable to act, the Council should
consider referrals to the International Criminal Court.
Similarly, the Council should also consider the use of
mixed tribunals and truth and reconciliation processes,
and any judicial measures should be clearly victim-
focused.

We also encourage the Council to include this topic
in its annual consultations with the African Union's
Peace and Security Council. The perspectives and
expertise of regional organizations are valuable in
developing comprehensive strategies for addressing
accountability for sexual violence in conflict.

We also highlight the important role that
non-governmental organizations and civil society
groups can play in drawing attention to some of the
worst abuses, and their related role as an important part
of the accountability landscape - sometimes, as the
representative of Germany has pointed out, by putting
themselves at considerable special risk.

New Zealand welcomes the Council's consideration
of this specific aspect of the women, peace and
security agenda, and we urge that it give consideration
to the specific issues we have raised and that it also
remain seized of the wider agenda, including women's
participation in political processes.

