Mr. Tenya Hasegawa (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, the delegation ofPeru expresses its strongest
condemnation of the attacks that took place yesterday in
Ankara and Berlin, while also offering its solidarity to
the peoples and Governments of Russia and Germany.

Peru commends the Government of Spain on the
welcome initiative to organize this open debate and for
the submission of resolution 2331 (2016) calling on us
to strongly condemn and combat trafficking in persons
in conflict situations.

As a democratic State, Peru is respectful of human
rights and thus of the supreme value of human life and
liberty. That is why, for Peru, human trafficking or
slavery in the twenty-first century is a horrendous crime

in all circumstances, such as conflict situations. To
that end, we must on the one hand prevent such crimes
while addressing the ongoing situation by dismantling
transnational organized gangs and punishing criminals
severely; and on the other, support the physical and
emotional rehabilitation of persons affected and restore
their freedom, integrity and dignity, with a special
focus on the most vulnerable groups, such as children,
girl children, adolescents and women.

In that spirit, Peru has been implementing its
regulatory framework and public policy to address
this crime through, inter alia, a law against trafficking
in persons and the illicit migrant trafficking, which
criminalizes the practice in its penal code and establishes
responsibilities; the National Plan of Action against
Trafficking in Persons, which constitutes a public
policy instrument; and the National Policy against
Trafficking in Persons and All Forms of Exploitation,
which has four main pillars: implementation targeted
and customized to the local and regional realities of the
country; attention to the social and cultural factors that
lead to trafficking in persons and the exploitation of
individuals; the efficient prosecution and punishment
of the crime; and care, protection and comprehensive
rehabilitation for the victims.
Nevertheless, we are of the view that any national
effort will have limited results if States do not cooperate
with one another. Because it is a transnational crime,
we believe that prudent, coordinated and integrated
approaches among neighbouring States, in particular.
As stipulated in paragraph 17 of resolution 2331 (2016),
one way to do that is by sharing useful and timely
information in order to achieve the desired results.
Another approach to international cooperation that
could be considered is the one that we refer to as building
legal safety belts, based on a set ofbilateral agreements.
Peru's Foreign Ministry has been employing that
approach with our neighbours; to date we have reached
agreements with Colombia, Bolivia and Ecuador and
we are currently in talks with Argentina, Brazil, Chile
and Paraguay.

By the same token, we believe that that cooperation
must be a corollary to the relations that States could
develop with the different entities of the United Nations
system. In that regard, we highlight the important role
played by the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and we hope that that cooperation will continue
and extended if possible, in particular in the areas where
there have been requests for this crime to be combated.

Peru reaffirms its commitment to combating human
trafficking and, in that regard, we have co-sponsored
trafficking in persons in conflict situation presented
by the Spanish Government as a way to continue to
support the various efforts and initiatives to address
that important issue.

