The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Argentina,
Austria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium, Botswana,
Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, the
Czech Republic, Egypt, Estonia, Germany, Indonesia,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Jordan, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Mexico,
Montenegro, Myanmar, Namibia, Nigeria, Norway,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Portugal, Qatar, Slovakia, Slovenia,
South Africa, Spain, the Sudan, Switzerland, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Turkey, Ukraine, the United Arab
Emirates and Uruguay to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Pramila
Patten, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and Ms. Razia Sultana,
Senior Researcher of Kaladan Press.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following to participate in this meeting: Mr. Gerton
van den Akker, Charge d'affaires ad interim of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations; Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations;
and Ms. Clare Hutchinson, Special Representative for
Women, Peace and Security of the Secretary-General
of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/250, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual violence.

I also wish to also draw the attention of Council
members to document 8/2018/311, which contains the
text of a letter dated 2 April 2018 from the Permanent
Representative of Peru to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note
on the item under consideration.

I wish to warmly welcome Her Excellency Deputy
Secretary-General Amina Mohammed, to whom I now
give the floor.

