Mr. Hahn Choonghee (Republic of Korea): First
of all, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening today's open debate on the critical issue of
women and peace and security. Since the high-level
review of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
last year, we have seen some meaningful progress in
many areas. The Republic of Korea would like to take
this opportunity to express its appreciation to Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon, his Special Envoys and UN-
Women for their tireless dedication to those advances.

However, despite the progress we have achieved,
we still face daunting challenges. There remains a wide
gap between our expectations and the reality on the
ground. Civilians, especially women and girls, continue
to be caught up in armed conflicts around the world.
Acts of sexual violence committed by non-State actors
are particularly alarming. Bearing in mind our shared
concerns, I would like to make a few observations,
among others, on this important issue.

First, we must continue our efforts to integrate
gender perspectives as we develop strategies for all
stages of the conflict-solution process. In that vein, we
recognize the increased number of female mediators
and delegates in peace agreement negotiations, which
has led to an increase in the number of agreements
with gender-specific provisions. In fact, seven out of 10
peace agreements signed in 2015 had such provisions.

We also encourage the ongoing efforts to increase
the number of women among military and police
personnel deployed to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. The increased participation of women in the
field, coupled with more gender advisers deployed to
support related Secretariat efforts, will further promote
a gender-responsive environment in peacekeeping.
At the same time, it is also noteworthy that the
Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) met the target of allocating
at least 15 per cent of its resources to projects designed
to advance gender equality and the empower women.

Secondly, we need to further pursue accountability,
which is key to the protection of women and girls in
armed conflict. We commend the Team of Experts
on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict,
which has continued to assist many Governments in
strengthening the capacity of national justice systems,
including in the areas of criminal investigations,
prosecution and reparations for survivors.

We also welcome the Secretary-General's
appointment of a Special Coordinator on Improving
United Nations Response to Sexual Exploitation and
Abuse, as well as the additional measures taken to
strengthen accountability and assist victims. We believe
that more determined actions need to be taken.

Thirdly, we would like to emphasize the
indispensable role of national Governments in upholding
the women and peace and security agenda. We welcome
the fact that more countries are implementing national
action plans, which contribute to strengthening national
ability to implement the women and peace and security
agenda by enhancing societal awareness of the issue.
We must pay more attention to building the capacity
and awareness of national Governments in conflict
and post-conflict settings in order to pursue women's
equality and active participation through an enhanced
partnership with all stakeholders.

In conclusion, the Republic of Korea, as a strong
supporter of this agenda, reaffirms its commitment to
international efforts to accelerate the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda.

