Mr. Christian (Ghana): I would like to commend
China for organizing this open debate on women and
peace and security. We thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2008/622). We are also grateful to the
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Gender
Issues and Advancement of Women and to the other
officials who addressed the Council this morning.

Women and girls who have played little or no part
in creating armed conflict continue to be victims of
grave forms of sexual violence and assault and to
suffer the worst forms of hardships and displacement
during warfare. Notwithstanding those abuses, women
contribute meaningfully to efforts aimed at mediation,
reconciliation, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and the rebuilding of national institutions.
We recognize that some commendable efforts have
been made on policy, norm setting and reforms, and
institutional development. But we still have not arrived
at a situation in which the equality and empowerment
of women can be ensured.

One of the crucial objectives of resolution 1325
(2000) is gender mainstreaming in all aspects of peace
and security. Its realization calls for deliberate,
08-57549
purposeful and sustained interventions, especially on
the part of Member States, with the active
collaboration and support of the United Nations and
other relevant actors.

In order to develop long-term strategies to
increase women's participation, we should focus
considerable attention on the following fundamental
issues.

Member States and the United Nations have to
include targeted gender-related activities in strategies
and programmes on peace and security by, for
example, increasing the number of women considered
for United Nations peacekeeping operations. It is
indeed beyond doubt that the deployment of female
military and police personnel facilitates outreach to
women in local communities.

Ghana participates in nine United Nations
peacekeeping operations and currently is the highest
contributor of women to military peacekeeping
operations, contributing approximately 12 per cent of
the total number of female military personnel. We
believe in the beneficial effect of women peacekeepers
in post-conflict countries and will therefore strive to
deploy more women police and military personnel. In
order to ensure that peacekeepers are better informed
and resourced to address gender-specific challenges
facing women in the post-conflict period, our national
strategy also underlines the importance of
pre-deployment training on gender for peacekeepers.

Linkages should be established between the
activities carried out by the United Nations system and
the efforts of Member States to implement resolution
1325 (2000), particularly in conflict and post-conflict
situations. We must also ensure the creation of
effective institutional arrangements that will not only
guarantee the protection of women and girls, but also
enhance their full and equal participation in peace
processes, including negotiations and decision-making.

Civil society ought to be mobilized and actively
involved in the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), because its members have important roles to
play as advocates, activists and programme
implementers in building the political will necessary to
bring about real change. Effective monitoring and
accountability mechanisms should be engaged to
ensure the sustainability of positive changes in the
situation and role of women in conflict and post-
conflict countries.
3

The critical role of Member States in the full and
effective implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
cannot be overstated, as national ownership is a
prerequisite for the success of gender mainstreaming
activities over the longer term. National ownership also
enhances prospects for mobilizing the support of civil
society groups while enhancing the impact of
international assistance. We must take responsibility
for that resolution and all that it asks of us. It is easy to
request the United Nations to act, but as Member
States, we should also acknowledge what is required of
us to ensure the effective implementation of resolution
1325 (2000).

