Ms. Bassols Delgado (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I
want to begin by thanking the German presidency for
having organized this extremely timely open debate.

For Spain, the women and peace and security
agenda is not a routine matter in the work of the Council.
It is quite the opposite. Ensuring the full participation
of women in peace operations is a collective, complex
and multidimensional responsibility that concerns the
entire international community.

Spain is one ofthe countries most firmly committed
to the women and peace and security agenda. It was
under our presidency of the Council that resolution 2242
(2015), updating the historic resolution 1325 (2000) was
adopted. We are pleased to see that the recommendations
that we made to the Secretariat - such as the
deployment of gender advisers in all the missions, better
coordination between the Secretariat and UN-Women
and the holding of regular consultations between those
responsible for the various missions and women's civil
society organizations - have been implemented.

Since then, Spain has continued to make progress
with respect to the agenda. In 2016, we established, in
collaboration with the United Kingdom, an informal
group of experts of the Security Council to follow-up
on the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda in every peacekeeping operation. We
were the third country in the world to draft a national
plan of action for the implementation of the agenda,
and we are successfully implementing a zero-tolerance
policy on sexual abuse and exploitation, supplemented
by a policy of specialized training in this area.

Spain has firmly incorporated the women and
peace and security agenda into its foreign policy, and
we continue to promote the participation of women in
peace missions within the scope of the United Nations,
the European Union, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and NATO. Women began to
gain access to military careers in Spain in 1988, more
than 30 years ago. Since then, the gender perspective
has been gradually integrated into our armed forces
until formal equality was reached in 1999 and full
equal equality in 2007.

There are some experiences and good practices
that I would like to share with the Council. The Spanish
system envisages the access of women to combat
positions, in total equality with men. Our system
is fully egalitarian and advanced because it allows
women to choose any position, level and destination,
without quotas or ceilings of any kind. We also have
a permanent body in the Ministry of Defence - the
Gender Equality Observatory - that continuously
monitors the situation within the Spanish armed forces.

We actively participate in various initiatives to
promote gender issues and their mainstreaming in the
area of peace missions. I would like to mention two
examples. We are participating in the Spanish-Dutch
initiative to provide courses to civil and military
personnel for the training of gender advisers. We also
participate in the European Union project in leadership,
discipline and military training in the area of gender
Within the framework of that project, Spain has
assumed European leadership for training activities and
discipline for military personnel deployed in missions
outside of the European Union.

There is still much to do. Although the number of
women in our armies and in the navy is higher than the
European average, it is still low. It also remains below
the percentage of women deployed in peacekeeping
operations in which Spain participates. Although
there are almost 15,000 women in our armed forces,
they represent only 12.7 per cent of all troops. The
percentage is slightly lower for our participation in
missions abroad; only 8 per cent of the 2,835 soldiers
that Spain deploys outside its borders today are women.

We are aware that the women and peace and
security agenda is not a question of quotas or numbers.
It is a question of presence, participation and level of
responsibility. Those factors have as much, or more,
importance as the figures. In any event, we are aware
that we must continue working towards improving that
aspect of our public policies.

Our commitment to the women and peace and
security agenda ensures in law the full equality of
access and treatment of women in the armed forces.
Even so, obstacles persist. They are not of a political
or legal dimension; many are within the social realm.
The earliest inclusions of women in the armed forces
and peacekeeping operations required a gradual
transformation. That progressive adaptation must also
occur now in order to continue suppressing sociological,
educational or financial barriers. Only in that way
will we be able to overcome inertia and allow the full
participation of women in peacekeeping operations at
all levels, including in decision-making. To that end, we
must continue responding to some specific challenges,
for example, taking the realities and particular needs
of women into account, adapting rotation periods and
respecting the personal, work and life balance.

To conclude, this is a medium- and long-term effort.
When we updated resolution 1325 (2000) in 2015, we
realized that we had a very rich body of knowledge,
but we also saw that, in practice, we had made little
progress. It has been four years since then. The
necessary and timely reform of the peace and security
pillar must put into practice the Secretary-General's
vision of a more efficient peacekeeping action. We
fully support its implementation and its approach. That
framework provides us with an exceptional opportunity
to give renewed impetus to the full participation of
women in peace missions. I reaffirm that this will
continue to be the objective of my Government, both
nationally and internationally.

