Mr. Al-Qahtani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic):
Permit me at the outset to thank you, Mr. President,
and the Permanent Mission of Japan for the efforts and
skill with which you have prepared for this open
debate.

We congratulate ourselves and the international
community on the progress made in implementing
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000). However,
much work remains to be done to fully realize the
objectives and purposes of that resolution.

The State of Qatar will continue to play a major
role in promoting the role of women at the national,
regional and international levels and in all areas of life.
We strongly believe in a number of principles aimed at
promoting the role of women, including ensuring
women's participation at every stage of efforts to
maintain and promote international peace and security;
protecting women and girls from human rights abuses
and violations of international humanitarian law during
armed conflict; strict enforcement of measures against
the perpetrators of sexual violence and attacks against
women and girls in areas of armed conflict -
regardless of whether those perpetrators are parties to
the conflict or others who work in United Nations
peacekeeping missions - and putting an end to
impunity for such crimes; and promoting best practices
and effective laws to guarantee effective participation
by women in all aspects of peacekeeping and security
missions.

Recognizing and embracing those major
principles require that we view this issue with
transparency and objectivity and that we avoid double
standards and political opportunism. Failure to uphold
them will not only weaken the role of women in the
maintenance of peace and security, but will also
hamper our quest for lasting peace and reconciliation.

We cannot merely depend on women's courage
and resolve to participate in every stage of peace and
security processes; we must also establish programmes
and promulgate effective legislation and social policies
that are in keeping with the new social traditions of
various societies and seek to protect the dignity and
status of women in those societies.
Identifying ways and means to empower women,
including sharing sound practices and promoting
women's roles in decision-making at all levels, is
essential for the effective implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). In accordance with the mandate set out in
that resolution and the relevant Security Council
presidential statements, the United Nations System-
wide Action Plan for the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) - which covers a number of priority
areas - has been established. While the Action Plan
has made a positive contribution to the implementation
of the resolution, we look forward to a revised action
plan that includes more detailed information about the
framework of conflict analysis resulting from early
warning indicators that are sensitive to gender and to
geographic activities. Here, it is essential to take into
account the organic relation between the relevant
United Nations organs and national and regional
organizations and to focus on improving the
coordination among the relevant agencies and the
technical cooperation at our disposal to promote
national peacemaking and peacebuilding capacities and
to promote practical guidelines on the basis of lessons
learned from the advancement of women and their
active and full participation in civil society institutions.

The key to the full implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) lies in our commitment and accountability
in assessing progress at all levels, helping States to
establish national action plans and promoting the
participation of regional commissions in the
establishment and assessment of national policies,
strategies and programmes to attain the major
objectives of those plans.

We wish to encourage networks of participation
between United Nations Member States and non-
governmental organizations, as well as accountability
at the highest levels of the United Nations system. It is
essential that Member States have strong and sustained
political will so that we can coordinate our efforts to
ensure the full implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). Let us shoulder our responsibilities to that end.

