The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Austria, Brazil, Canada and
Singapore, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Jean-Marie
Guehenno, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Guehenno to take a seat at the
Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in the
Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule
39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His Royal
Highness Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein, Adviser to
the Secretary-General on Sexual Exploitation and Abuse
by United Nations Peacekeeping Personnel.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite His Royal Highness Prince Zeid Ra'ad
Zeid Al-Hussein to take a seat at the Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
2
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

At this meeting the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, and by
His Royal Highness Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-
Hussein, Adviser to the Secretary-General on Sexual
Exploitation and Abuse by United Nations
Peacekeeping Personnel.

I now give the floor to Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno.


