Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, we would like to commend you, Madam
President, for participating in today's important
meeting. We also welcome Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed and the African Union Special
Envoy for Women, Peace and Security, Ms. Bineta
Diop, and thank them for their very valuable briefings.

We have heard briefings today on the joint visit
conducted by the United Nations and the African
Union to the Sahel, in particular the south of the
region - Chad and the Niger - in which you, Madam
President, participated. We welcome this initiative.

Undoubtedly, the Sahel region faces various
challenges, which pose a threat to peace and security,
including environmental issues that lead to tensions
and food insecurity, in addition to economic problems,
such as unemployment and other terrorism-related
challenges. Such challenges all have an adverse impact
on the people in that region. However, women and girls
are particularly vulnerable to them.

We commend the efforts of the United Nations
to promote the role of women in achieving peace and
security in the Sahel, which is one of the priorities of
the Secretary-General as he seeks to achieve gender
parity at the various United Nations bodies. We
welcome the fact that women account for 22 per cent of
the contingent of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali. The
participation of women should be further encouraged
throughout peacekeeping missions at all levels - at
the administrative level, as members of peacekeeping
forces and at the leadership level.

The State of Kuwait condemns in the strongest terms
the terrorist attacks targeting the Sahel, which seek to
undermine the stability and security of its peoples. We
condemn in particular the terrorist activities of Boko
Haram and the terrorist group Da'esh and its terrorist
cells, which still exist even after its defeat. We support
the efforts of the national Governments as they seek
to withstand economic challenges, as stipulated in
resolution 2349 (2017). Women and girls are the group
most targeted by these terrorist operations because they
are vulnerable to terrorist acts. African women and
their children are often recruited by those terrorist and
extremist groups. That is why we must promote the role
of women in the fight against extremism and terrorism
at all social levels, in particular at the regional and
international levels.

We recall resolution 2242 (2015), which calls for
the integration of the women and peace and security
agenda while boosting the role of women to counter
trafficking of light weapons. We reiterate our support
for the countries of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel so that they can meet their national
needs and address the common challenges faced in the
Sahel region. We commend the participation of the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel in
supporting and developing national plans related to the
issues of women and peace and security.
We recall that the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel has the empowerment of women
as one of its six prioritie, and seeks to promote the
role of women in achieving peace in the Sahel region.
This can be done through the effective participation of
women in the elections and other political processes,
as well as the participation of women in peacekeeping
operations. Strategies for fighting terrorism and violent
extremism should be developed and implemented in line
the relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolutions 1325 (2000), 1889 (2009) and 2242 (2015),
along with relevant international, regional and national
mechanisms and action plans.

We commend the efforts and endeavours to deal
with issues of peace and security in the continent.
African solutions should be related to African problems
while maintaining their national ownership. We stress
that the countries of the African continent must be
conflict-free. The African Union and its competent
organs, such as its Peace and Security Council, are
models for other regional organizations responsible
for maintaining peace and security in the States of
the continent. They work for the development and
prosperity of the societies in the member states of the
African Union. We note the important role played by
the African Union in steering certain peace operations
that have become very important means to address the
African conflicts and crises. We believe that there is an
opportunity to strengthen the role of African women
and their contribution to achieving sustainable peace in
accordance with the regional action plan to implement
resolution 1325 (2000).

It is appropriate here to mention resolution 2320
(2016), which underscored that partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union Peace
and Security Council should be based on bilateral
consultations andjoint strategies as needed. They must
come together through a process of consultation to take
joint decisions, with burden-sharing, joint analysis,
transparency and accountability, in order to address the
common security challenges in Africa.

We reiterate the importance of following up on the
implementation of the Security Council resolutions
and statements, particularly those linked to Africa,
cooperation with the African Union and ways to ensure
effective partnership.

It is evident that we have a good normative
framework for involving women in achieving peace and
security around the world, particularly in Africa and
the Sahel. We call for intensive efforts to implement the
relevant United Nations and African Union resolutions
and mechanisms, and for the involvement of women and
youth with all other segments of the society to achieve
peace and security.

To conclude, the State of Kuwait wishes to reiterate
its support for cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union as they seek jointly to achieve
peace, security and stability in the African continent,
and to promote peace and security throughout the world.

