Mr. Diarra (Mali) (spoke in French): The
delegation of the Republic of Mali associates itself
with the statement made by Canada on behalf of the
member countries of the Human Security Network.

The measures adopted four years ago in this body
with respect to the relationship between women and
peace and security are part and parcel of a more
comprehensive approach whose ultimate goal is to give
women their rightful place in our societies. This
approach involves equal treatment for women in terms
of rights and responsibilities.

The experience of the past decade has shown that,
in conflict situations, women and young girls are the
principal victims of abduction and of gender-based
violence, in particular rape and other forms of
violence. Sometimes they take an active part in
conflicts - as armed-group sympathizers, combatants,
companions of combatants or as individuals dependent
on combatants.

The criminal practice of the forced recruitment of
women remains widespread despite the existence of the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, which has become
almost universal since its adoption in 1979.

It was in order to prevent the use of such
practices, which are often used as a weapon of war,
that the Security Council adopted resolution 1325
(2000). Since then its contents have been translated
into 60 languages - a clear demonstration of the
importance of the subject and the interest it has
generated. Resolution 1325 (2000) has been
implemented by Member States, the United Nations
system and regional organizations such as the African
Union, as well as by civil society.

Its implementation involves, first and foremost,
the conflict prevention and early warning. Here the
goal is to strengthen the capacity and the role of
women in the context of the decision-making process
in order to prevent conflicts. To that end, reliable
indicators such as a database on women experts are
gradually being set up.

The implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
also concerns the gender-based management of conflict
situations. In that respect, initiatives aimed at settling
crises should address the particular needs of women in
the peacekeeping, humanitarian assistance and post-
conflict reconstruction phases. Women should be
actively involved in determining those needs. Women's
associations and groups could also contribute to that
process.

The outcome of the Conference on Gender Justice
in Post-Conflict Situations, organized jointly by the
United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM) and the International Legal Assistance
Consortium and held in September 2004, has yielded
new ideas as to what steps might be undertaken.
That approach commits States, the United
Nations, regional organizations and civil society to
draw up strategies and plans of action, with a
timetable, to see to it that the question of gender parity
is an integral part of peacekeeping operations,
humanitarian operations and peace-building in
countries in post-conflict situations.

My delegation is pleased that such measures are
gradually being established within United Nations
peacekeeping operations. We appreciate the fact that 10
full-time gender advisers have already been appointed
in 17 peacekeeping operations. We welcome the
systematic participation of human rights specialists in
new peacekeeping operations whose role is to monitor
and identify cases of gender-based violence.

My delegation welcomes the inclusion of training
programmes on the gender-specific management of
issues related to peacekeeping operations. Furthermore,
my delegation hopes that the Secretary-General's
bulletin on the implementation of the resolution within
the United Nations system will lead to a genuine
revolution in thought and in deed. Finally, the Rome
Statute, which established the International Criminal
Court, strengthens the international legal arsenal,
punishing rape and other forms of gender-based
violence as war crimes and crimes against humanity.

A movement is emerging in the African Union
(AU) to advance and protect the rights of women.
Indeed, in July 2003, by its decision 19 the Union
adopted the Protocol to the African Charter on Human
and Peoples' Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa.
In that framework, a campaign was launched
throughout the continent to combat Violence against
women. Moreover, with the establishment of the
Women, Gender and Development Directorate, the AU
is attempting to elaborate an effective strategy to
integrate a gender perspective in the activities of the
Commission of the African Union, as well as in those
of its member States. A framework for implementation
and coordination will be adopted and indicators to
identify, supervise and evaluate progress will also be
established. The ultimate goal is to promote the
emancipation of African women by ensuring their
participation on an equal footing, without restrictions,
in development and other processes that elaborate and
define their work and living conditions. As proof of its
commitment, the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the African Union elected five women
to the post of Commissioner out of the total of 10 posts
that make up the Union's Commission.
In conclusion, Africa will better succeed in
protecting women and young girls by strengthening the
legal arsenal against gender-based violence and by
ensuring their economic independence through
capacity-building in that area. We must gradually
involve women in the decision-making processes that
affect their living conditions by fostering access to
quality education for young girls. Finally, best
practices in combating social prejudice against women
should be increased.

