Mr. Park In-kook (Republic of Korea): First of
all, Mr. President, I would like to say how very much I
appreciate your timely initiative to convene this
meeting.

As stated in the concept paper, recent reports
indicate that brutal and systematic rape is becoming
increasingly commonplace in some conflict and post-
conflict situations. In fact, sexual violence in situations
of armed conflict has occurred throughout history,
including sexual slavery during the Second World War.
It is our firm belief that the adoption of the noble
Charter of the United Nations is a clear manifestation
of our strong commitment to preventing the recurrence
of such a brutal and categorical denial of the human
rights of women. However, contrary to our call for
consciousness and commitment, we have witnessed the
horrifying intensity and severity of sexual violence in
armed conflict, which has been exercised as a weapon
of war, in particular in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and in Darfur.

My delegation would like to make clear its
position on key issues for today's deliberations. First,
with respect to the link between sexual violence and
peace and security, the Republic of Korea fully
recognizes that sexual violence is a security issue as
well as a fundamental human rights issue.
Secondly, based on the recognition of the direct
link between sexual violence and peace and security,
mandates for peacekeeping operations regarding sexual
Violence should be further strengthened and clarified.
At the same time, my delegation believes that efforts
should be intensified to implement the zero-tolerance
policy for sexual exploitation and abuse in
peacekeeping operations.

Thirdly, on the reporting mechanism, our
delegation is of the view that the Security Council must
institutionalize and systematize its consideration of
sexual violence in armed conflict. For that purpose, an
action plan of the Secretary-General is recommended,
with priority accorded to establishing a mechanism to
collect information and to reporting periodically to the
Council on such situations.

Last but not least is the issue of impunity. My
delegation reaffirms its support for any efforts to end
impunity, recognizing that accountability is a crucial
component in the process of ending the cycle of
systematic sexual violence against women. We believe
that referring cases to the International Criminal Court
or to the tribunals will send a strong and effective
message to the perpetrators, as ending impunity is a
critical element of a comprehensive approach to the
quest for sustainable peace, justice, truth and national
reconciliation. Furthermore, amnesty should not be
granted to the perpetrators of sexual violence. We are
also of the view that, in addition to ensuring, by
putting an end to impunity, that individuals are held
responsible, the responsibility of the State for the
situation and for the protection of victims should also
be further enhanced.

Before concluding my statement, I would like to
draw the attention of the Council to the issue of
children in armed conflict, given the daunting reality
that a large percentage of victims of sexual violence in
armed conflicts are children. I would like to recall that
the Security Council adopted a presidential statement
on children in armed conflict, expressing its readiness
to review the relevant provisions of resolution 1612
(2005) with a View to further increasing the efficiency
of its action for the protection of children from sexual
Violence in armed conflict. We look forward to
substantive progress in that regard.

My delegation fully supports and is pleased to
co-sponsor the draft resolution to be adopted today.
