Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar): I have the honour of
delivering this statement on behalf of 51 members of
the Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect,
co-chaired this year by Denmark and the State of Qatar.

The Group would like to thank Germany for
organizing today's important open debate. I would
also like to extend our gratitude to Nobel Peace Prize
laureates Dr. Denis Mukwege and Ms. Nadia Murad
for their informative briefings and persistent efforts to
end the use of sexual violence as a tactic of war and
armed conflict.

As the Secretary-General noted, sexual violence in
conflict is a historically hidden crime that requires early
warning and swift responses. Sexual violence, including
rape, is not just a by-product of war but is increasingly
employed as a deliberate strategy by State and non- State
actors to retaliate against, terrorize, intimidate, control
and displace civilians. Such acts may amount to crimes
against humanity, war crimes or genocide. Further,
sexual violence in conflict significantly exacerbates
and prolongs situations of armed conflict, destroys the
social fabric ofcommunities and impedes peacebuilding
and reconciliation efforts.

Sexual violence is a pervasive facet of many
conflicts today that claims thousands of Victims
every year. In South Sudan, sexual violence in
conflict remains rampant and is often used as a form
of collective retribution against ethnic rivals. The
United Nations Mission in South Sudan reported 1,157
cases of sexual violence during 2018 - and those are
only the reported cases in a context of notoriously
underreported incidents.

Similarly, as Ms. Murad has attested, the so-called
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant has systematically
committed rape and sexual violence against Yazidi
women and girls, practices which the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic has characterized as war crimes, crimes
against humanity and genocide.

As it is the primary responsibility of Member States
to protect their populations against genocide, crimes
against humanity, war crimes and ethnic cleansing,
including those involving rape and sexual violence, the
Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect would
like to stress the following points.

First, strengthening the capacity of national
institutions is critical to ensure accountability for
such crimes perpetrated in the past and to prevent and
deter the perpetration of such crimes in the future. It
is of utmost importance that States put in place and
enforce legislative and institutional procedures to
comprehensively address sexual Violence in conflict
and prevent its occurrence.

Despite the increased awareness of the issue, most
incidents ofmass rape continue to be met with impunity.
States have the primary responsibility for investigating
and prosecuting crimes committed within their
jurisdiction and national accountability efforts should
be encouraged and supported, including through the
strengthening of judicial cooperation between States.
Fact-finding missions, investigative mechanisms,
commissions of inquiry and hybrid and international
courts and tribunals provide complementary avenues
for accountability when and where options under
domestic law prove insufficient.

Secondly, there is an urgent need for a survivor-
centred approach to support the needs of victims
of sexual and gender-based violence before, during
and after situations of conflict. The international
community should support the provision of appropriate
medical, psychosocial and socioeconomic reintegration
assistance and services to survivors in order to prevent
their revictimization and restore the social fabric of
societies after conflict.

Thirdly, at the heart of sexual violence lies a
disregard for human rights, as well as the perpetuation
of gender inequality and systematic discrimination.
Sexual violence in conflict must be addressed with the
active and equal participation of women in identifying
prevention mechanisms and holistic, rights-based
solutions that address their needs. It is equally important
to continue to engage men and community leaders to
play a positive role in addressing gender stereotypes
and societal exclusion mechanisms.

Fourthly, the Security Council could and should
make better use of targeted sanctions to prevent and
halt sexual violence, including through basing listing
criteria on the involvement in the perpetration of sexual
violence. In that context, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
and the Panels of Experts should consistently brief and
give information on individuals or entities responsible
for perpetrating sexual violence to sanctions
committees, encourage Member States to list them and
recommend targeted sanctions.

Lastly, training on gender issues, preventing
sexual exploitation and abuse and addressing sexual
violence in conflict should be a mandatory component
of national military and police training, as well as
predeployment and in-mission training of all United
Nations peacekeeping and civilian personnel. In that
regard, we support the United Nations zero-tolerance
policy on sexual exploitation and abuse and welcome
the Secretary-General's initiative on the voluntary
compact between the United Nations and Member
States to prevent and eliminate sexual exploitation
and abuse.

Sexual violence in conflict need not be an inevitable
side effect of armed conflict - it can be prevented and
stopped. While significant normative progress has been
achieved in recent years, it is also clear that words on
paper are not yet matched by facts on the ground. In
that regard, it is imperative that the members of the
Security Council take timely and decisive action to end
and prevent sexual violence in conflict, if and when
they may amount to atrocity crimes.

In closing, the Group of Friends of the Responsibility
to Protect would like to recognize and pay tribute again
to the important work accomplished by Dr. Mukwege
and Ms. Murad, including providing critical medical,
psychosocial and socioeconomic reintegration support
to the survivors of sexual violence in conflict and
addressing impunity for those heinous crimes. We
would like to ask - how can we, as members of the
responsibility to protect community, more efficiently
integrate gender considerations and the prevention of
sexual violence into our work?

