Mr. Widodo (Indonesia): I have the honour to
address the Security Council in the debate on the issue
of women and peace and security. Allow me first to
express my appreciation to you, Sir, for your initiative
on this issue as President of the Security Council for
the month of October.

I would like to welcome the statements delivered
earlier by the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan; by
the Assistant Secretary-General and Special Adviser on
Gender Issues and Advancement of Women, Ms.
Angela King; and by the Executive Director of the
United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM), Ms. Noeleen Heyzer.

The issue of women and peace and security is
among the paramount items on the global agenda and,
in fact, has been addressed over several decades. At the
international conferences on women, the issue of
women and peace was taken up as early as the Nairobi
World Conference to Review and Appraise the
Achievements of the United Nations Decade for
Women and has since been more than adequately
considered in United Nations forums, such as in the
annual meetings of the Commission on the Status of
Women and of the Third Committee of the General
Assembly, and also by various United Nations bodies,
such as UNIFEM. and the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO).

At the Fourth World Conference on Women in
Beijing in 1995, it was clearly recognized that the
larger goals of equality, development and peace could
not be achieved without the incorporation of the
women's perspective at all levels of decision-making.
One of the important steps taken on that occasion was
to stress that women's involvement in decision-making
was not only a question of quotas for women, but a
process that also entails increased gender sensitivity in
general, requiring appropriate training and more
research on gender issues.

My delegation would also like to draw attention
to the efforts that have been made at the regional level
to address this issue. We commend the work that has
been accomplished under the auspices of the Economic
and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific
(ESCAP), especially in convening the regional
preparatory meeting for the follow-up of the Beijing
Conference on Women in June 2000, which, inter alia,
highlights peace processes with action to encourage the
full participation of women at all levels of decision-
making in conflict resolution, peacekeeping,
peacemaking and preventive diplomacy.

We also welcome the initiative of ESCAP and
UNESCO to convene a Regional Conference on Asian
Women for a Culture of Peace, to be held in Hanoi in
December this year. The plan of action to be adopted at
that Conference is expected to promote equal
participation in peacekeeping, peacemaking and
preventive diplomacy. Moreover, it will outline the
contribution of women to a culture of peace and
sustainable development in Asia. We are confident that
this forum will provide a comprehensive assessment of
Asian women's political, social and economic
empowerment and the educational requirements needed
to strengthen their capacities to transform societies
towards a culture of peace.

Let me underscore that violence against women
should remain at the forefront of all agendas
concerning the situation of women and should be
regarded as a criminal offence. In that regard, I would
note that Indonesia has adopted a "zero tolerance"
policy on Violence against women, and we are working
with national women's groups, law enforcement and
legislators to comprehensively address this serious
problem. In fact, the State Minister for Women's
Empowerment officially announced a joint State and
community proclamation to eliminate Violence against
women, involving the Vice President, all Cabinet
ministers and parliamentarians, including
representatives of national and regional groups. The
international community and regional and national
groups should no longer accept the committing of acts
against women with impunity. My delegation
underlines the importance of such national efforts to
address violence against women receiving the full
support of the international community.

My delegation underlines that this issue should be
addressed not only from the perspective of treating
women as victims of armed conflicts, but also as
makers of peace. Although historically women have
maintained the family structure under the most difficult
of circumstances and have very often assumed the role
of head of household, there is still a lack of
participation of women in the peace process. The
burden is disproportionately borne by women when
peace breaks down, and seldom are women given a
visible role in the decision-making process for making
and maintaining peace.

I would like to note that one of the strategic
objectives of the Beijing Fourth World Conference on
Women is to increase the participation of women in
conflict resolution at decision-making levels and to
protect women living in situations of armed conflict
and other conflicts or under foreign occupation. While
this goal must be pursued at the national level, it is
important also to pursue it within the United Nations
itself, with the appointment of women to senior posts
and with equal participation in peace processes and
conflict resolution. Indonesia therefore joins all those
who call for a concerted effort by the international
community to increase the participation of women in
negotiations on conflict resolution and in decision-
making positions at both national and international
levels.

The Security Council itself could consider the
importance of injecting the gender dimension into its
decisions on conflict resolution and of its resolutions
providing for a clear mandate on gender
mainstreaming. With regard to fact-finding missions,
the Council could include gender issues in their terms
of reference. Likewise, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations could provide gender-
sensitivity training for peacekeepers in the field and
foster an awareness of the traumatic circumstances
faced by women.

In considering the issue of women and peace and
armed conflict we must not lose sight of the need to
also address the root causes of conflicts and the link
between social and economic development and peace
and stability - especially so given the fact that women
are disproportionately burdened by poverty. There is a
need to develop and strengthen strategies and
initiatives to reduce women's poverty levels and to
protect women from the rapid changes inherent in
globalization.

In addressing the overall issue of women and
peace and security, Indonesia would agree that
measures for that purpose could be developed through
close cooperation between the Security Council, the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council, noting that none of these organs is equipped
to exclusively and comprehensively deal with these
issues.

In concluding, while we support the initiative of
the United Nations to deliberate on any areas relating
to peace and security, we do hope that its activities will
not duplicate those of other intergovernmental bodies,
but rather will serve to complement those efforts.

