Mr. Kim Sam-hoon (Republic of Korea): I thank
you, Ambassador Negroponte, for organizing this open
debate on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000). Allow me to begin by
commending you, Sir, on the most appropriate manner
in which you have chosen to steer the debate to mark
the third anniversary of that historic resolution. The
focus on implementation, I believe, is both timely and
necessary. Since the adoption of the resolution, the
Security Council has held a number of open debates to
reaffirm its commitment to charting a definitive place
for gender perspectives on its ongoing agenda. Thanks
to that commitment, it is now widely accepted that the
concerns of women and girls must be actively
addressed in matters of conflict resolution and peace-
building.

Marking the second anniversary of the resolution
last year, the Secretary-General's report (S/2002/ 1154)
offered a comprehensive set of recommendations for
doing so, and the Council adopted a presidential
statement (S/PRST/2002/32) incorporating many of the
recommendations into a call for action on the part of
the Council, the Secretary-General and Member States.
The task now is to ensure their full and continuing
implementation.

In this regard, I am grateful for the presentation
made by Under-Secretary-General Guehenno on the
work undertaken by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations to implement Security Council resolution
1325 (2000) and that of Ms. Amy Smythe on her
experiences in the field as Senior Gender Adviser to
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. They have clearly
outlined the progress made thus far as well as the
challenges that remain in implementation.

The Republic of Korea welcomes the progress
made by the Secretariat at Headquarters and in the
field. We are encouraged that gender specialists are
now assigned to 10 United Nations peacekeeping
missions and are backed up and coordinated by a
Gender Adviser at the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO). We also commend the progress
made to provide gender perspectives training to staff in
peacekeeping operations. We know and appreciate that
much of the push for the progress was provided by the
Office of the Special Adviser on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women, led by Ms. Angela King.

We encourage the Secretariat to keep up the
efforts towards the full completion of these measures.
We also see that references to gender issues are
included in DPKO reports to the Council. We would
have liked to see great detail and elaboration in those
references. We hope the substance will be provided in
future reports of missions as well as when the
Secretary-General presents his next report on the issue
to the Council in 2004.

In the meantime, we strongly encourage the
collection of data related to peace operations,
desegregated by gender and age. For policies to be
effective, they must accurately reflect the situation on
the ground, where the experience of conflict and peace-
building remains very different for men than for
women and for different ages.

We also note the lack of progress in other areas.
There has been no meaningful increase in the number
of women appointed as special representatives and
envoys of the Secretary-General. In any case, the
appointment of women to high-profile tasks and gender
specialists to peace missions would be just the
beginning. Security Council resolution 1325 (2000)
calls for the full integration of gender perspectives and
the increased participation of women in peace
processes, peacekeeping, humanitarian operations and
rehabilitation and reconstruction programmes, and,
further, in disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration.

The Republic of Korea hopes that the investment
of personnel, expertise and training by the United
Nations will serve as a catalyst in getting all actors on
board, including parties to armed conflicts, for
materializing the full vision of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2005). In the process, the continuing
willingness of the Council to incorporate a gender
perspective into peacekeeping operations will be
instrumental as it compliments and reinforces the work
of other bodies of the United Nations in strengthening
the role of women as active agents of change in times
of both peace and conflict.

