The Secretary-General: I thank Germany and
His Excellency the Foreign Minister, Mr. Heiko Maas,
for hosting this important debate. I welcome Nobel
Peace Prize laureates Ms. Nadia Murad and Dr. Denis
Mukwege and thank them for their extraordinary work.
Their advocacy highlights two vital elements of our
response to the crime of sexual violence in conflict: the
call for justice and the need for support and assistance
to victims. While their efforts originate in Iraq and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, they have a global
impact. The United Nations is proud to work with
victims and survivors to support the movements that
they have started. I also welcome Ms. Inas Miloud and
Ms. Amal Clooney and thank them for their activism
and advocacy.

It is 10 years since the establishment ofthe mandate
and the Office of the Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict. Over the course of the decade, there
has been a paradigm shift in the understanding of the
crime of conflict-related sexual violence, its impact on
international peace and security, the response required
to prevent and end it, and the full range of services
required by survivors. That is the result of advocacy and
action by individuals, Governments, non-governmental
organizations and institutions. I commend all those
involved, including the Council, which has established
a robust normative framework to address the issue.
An increasing number of Governments have shown a
willingness to pursue justice and provide services for
survivors. Advocacy groups have demonstrated beyond
doubt that sexual violence is deliberately used as a tactic
of war to terrorize people, dehumanize communities
and destabilize societies so that they struggle to recover
for years or even decades.

Local civil society organizations, many of them
women's organizations, are at the forefront of our
efforts to prevent this crime and to provide redress for
it, and they deserve our strong and consistent support.
Individual heroes, including those with us today, have
shown great courage in speaking out on the enormous
and lasting damage done by the crime, which is most
often perpetrated against women and girls.

The United Nations system has stepped up by
taking action to implement the resolutions passed by
the Council on women and peace and security. To give
just a few examples, United Nations peacekeepers now
receive consistent training to prevent and to respond
to sexual violence in conflict. We have strengthened
our ability to investigate crimes of sexual and gender-
based violence, deploying dedicated investigators
to United Nations commissions of inquiry and to
national and international courts. We have improved
our data and analysis of such crimes - an essential
basis for successful prevention. And we are supporting
Governments to improve their response and services
for survivors.

Despite all those efforts, the reality on the ground
has not changed. Sexual violence continues to be a
horrific feature of conflicts around the world.

Throughout my career, I have heard first-hand
accounts of sexual violence in war zones, from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to the former
Yugoslavia. In Bangladesh last year, Rohingya refugees
told me of the gang rape of women and girls in their
homes before they fled Myanmar. That is why the
President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, Peter Maurer, and I pledged earlier this year to
step up efforts to prevent and end such crimes and to
put victims and survivors at the centre of our response.
At the same time, we urged Governments to do more to
address the issue and to support survivors.

We must recognize that sexual violence in conflict
largely affects women and girls because it is closely
linked to broader issues of gender inequality and
discrimination. Prevention must therefore be based on
promoting women's rights and gender equality in all
areas before, during and after conflict. That must include
women's full and effective participation in political,
economic and social life and ensuring accessible and
responsive justice and security institutions.

We must also recognize that there are links between
sexual violence in conflict, gender inequality and
discrimination and violent extremism and terrorism.
Extremists and terrorists often build their ideologies
around the subjugation of women and girls and use
sexual violence in various ways, from forced marriage
to virtual enslavement. Sexual violence continues to
fuel conflict and severely impacts the prospects for
lasting peace.

My report (S/2019/280) outlines a series of
recommendations that are intended to provide a
comprehensive approach to conflict-related sexual
violence. Prevention is a strong theme running through
the recommendations. I encourage the Council to
include the prevention of conflict-related sexual
violence in all its country-specific resolutions and in
the mandates of peace operations. I also encourage
the Council to integrate the issue of conflict-related
sexual violence fully into the work of its sanctions
committees and to include measures to prevent these
crimes in its initiatives on security sector and justice
reform. Strengthening prevention in the context of the
Council's peacemaking efforts is also critical.

Where women are part of peacekeeping missions,
we know that reporting on and protection from sexual
violence increase. When women are at the peace table,
there is greater likelihood of accountability for these
crimes. When women are part of ceasefire monitoring,
they can ensure that gender-based crimes are monitored
and reported.
My recommendations also stress the need to
strengthen justice and accountability. Despite a handful
of high-profile convictions, there is widespread
impunity for sexual violence in conflict. Most of these
crimes are never reported or investigated, much less
prosecuted. My recommendations include increasing
support to national authorities as they reform laws,
improve their capacities to investigate and prosecute
these crimes and protect survivors who testify from
stigma and fear of reprisal. They also emphasize the
need for greater support for survivors and their families,
including health care, reparations and other assistance.

I commend the efforts of Dr. Mukwege to create a
global fund to support victims and call on all Member
States to contribute so that the fund can transform the
lives ofthose affected and provide a measure ofredress.

I thank the members of the Council for their
leadership over the past decade. This agenda has
benefitted from both the commitment and the consensus
of Council members, and I encourage Council members
to continue working together to reconcile differences.
The global response to these crimes must ensure the
punishment of the perpetrators and comprehensive
support to survivors, in full respect for their human
rights. Together, we can and must replace impunity
with justice and indifference with action.

