Monsignor Urbanczyk (Holy See): My delegation
wishes to congratulate Chile on its presidency of the
Security Council and for convening this important
debate. Today's discussion provides a much-needed
opportunity to focus on the impact of violence on
women and girls in conflict settings and to identify
the initiatives that must be undertaken to eradicate this
scourge that continues to escalate.

The Holy See firmly opposes recourse to armed
conflict as a means of solving disputes and recognizes
that women and girls suffer disproportionately from the
ravages of conflict. In conflict settings women and girls
are more vulnerable as a result of inequality and are
directly targeted as part of fear tactics and deliberate
assaults on their rights.

The belief in the sanctity of human life and the
inherent dignity of the human person is the foundation
of the principles of Catholic social teaching. All
persons, women and men, girls and boys, by virtue of
their human dignity are free and equal. Violence in all
its forms is an affront to human dignity and, moreover,
sexual violence against women tears at the very fabric
of society.

That was pointed out by His Holiness Pope Francis
when he emphasized that we must not overlook the
fact that wars involve another horrendous crime, the
crime of rape. That is a most grave offence against the
dignity of women, who are not only violated in body
but also in spirit, resulting in a trauma hard to erase and
with effects on society as well. Sadly, even apart from
situations of war, even today all too many women are
victims of violence.

My delegation remains concerned about the
continued lack of attention and priority to the protection
of women and girls who are targeted and attacked
purely because of the faith they profess. The lack of
focus and priority for protecting them is troubling
when Christians face extinction in some regions of the
world and in other regions Christian schools for girls
are targeted and attacked. That is a shared reality of
members of all faiths, and therefore requires the shared
commitment of members of all faiths and Governments
strongly to condemn and confront such violence.
The Catholic Church, through its institutions and
agencies throughout the world, is providing assistance,
care and support to thousands of survivors of sexual
violence in situations of armed conflict. Those
institutions and their courageous individuals sacrifice
themselves on a daily basis, and many of them have
paid dearly for their endeavours. Because of that
permanent local presence in the world's most disaster-
prone areas, this network of Catholic institutions and
agencies responds rapidly and effectively to address the
consequences of violence in armed conflict.

In conclusion, as Pope Francis recently noted in
his address to the diplomatic corps accredited to the
Holy See, we must reject the culture of enslavement,
which is incapable of doing good or pursuing peace and
accepts as inevitable the spread of war and violence. We
must redouble our efforts to replace this culture with
a culture of life and peace in which Governments and
the international community fulfil their fundamental
responsibility to protect all people.

