Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): We convey our
appreciation to the Russian presidency for convening
this open debate.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women and Peace
and Security.

Having played a catalytic role in the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000) during Bangladesh's
membership in the Security Council in 2000-2001,
it has been particularly encouraging for us to see the
unprecedented level of interest generated in the global
study on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
last year. In the aftermath of the adoption of resolution
2242 (2015), the issue of developing a national action
plan has once again featured prominently in our
policy discourse. Following preliminary discussions
with UN-Women and other international partners,
our Government is now exploring the opportunity to
convene dialogues with a cross section of women and
their representative organizations. We have agreed to
join the Spanish initiative to establish the network of
national focal points.

As part of our contribution to United Nations
peacekeeping, we remain committed to enhancing
the role and participation of women, including in our
national contingents. So far, Bangladesh has had 1,047
women peacekeepers participating in various missions,
including 774 police personnel. We are currently in
the process of detailing two female military observers,
and look forward to deploying women contingent
commanders in the near future. We remain confident
that we will be able to deploy a female military
contingent by 2021.
Our peacekeepers know that they must take decisive
action to prevent and combat sexual and gender-based
violence, as part of their broader mandate on the
protection of civilians. We unequivocally condemn
sexual exploitation and abuse by peacekeepers, and have
demonstrated our resolve to cooperate in implementing
the comprehensive measures outlined in the Secretary
General's enhanced programme of action to combat
these scourges.

Bangladesh welcomes the adoption of the gender
strategy by the Peacebuilding Commission, and has
been particularly supportive of further strengthening
women's participation and leadership in this year's
resolutions on peacebuilding architecture and
mediation. We are relieved to learn about the mediated
release and rescue of a number of women and girls held
hostage by certain international and regional terrorist
groups. We urge the Council to continue efforts to
secure the freedom of the remaining women and girls,
as their continued captivity and degrading treatment
are an affront to us all.

We acknowledge the recent trend of increased
women's representation in various peace negotiations,
and in increasing gender-specific provisions in peace
agreements. In our national context, in the aftermath
of a peace accord signed with a local insurgent group
in 1997, we saw how women played a critical role in
advancing the accord's implementation, preventing
relapse into conflict, and building awareness and
resilience against gender-based violence.

In recognition of the differential impact of armed
conflicts and proliferation of small arms on women and
girls, Bangladesh has decided this year to co-sponsor
a draft resolution entitled "Women, disarmament,
non-proliferation and arms control".

Our Government has made it a priority to
further mainstream women's participation in our
multidimensional efforts to combat terrorism and
prevent violent extremism. Our Prime Minister, Sheikh
Hasina, has made an appeal to mothers to work as
sentinels within their families and has urged female
teachers, elected representatives and women working
at the grass-roots level to actively contribute towards
a whole-of-society response against violent extremism
and radicalization. We remain determined to forge
ahead with our women's development and empowerment
efforts to defeat the violent extremists and terrorists in
one of their fundamental pursuits.

The inherent resilience of our women gives us the
conviction that women themselves have the capacity to
act as agents of change in the face of the humanitarian
consequences from which they disproportionately
suffer in different situations. We feel encouraged to
see that notion gaining traction in the humanitarian
discourse. The mandate of the Global Acceleration
Instrument for Women and Peace and Security and
Humanitarian Action has the potential to support a
further demonstration to that effect in response to
specific needs in conflict and post-conflict settings.

To conclude, Bangladesh underscores the
importance of the increased, sustained and coordinated
mobilization offinances, including through earmarking,
for giving real effect to the women and peace and
security agenda in its various dimensions.

