Mr. Nhleko (Swaziland): I thank you, Sir, for
organizing this meeting and for the opportunity to
participate in these important deliberations focusing on
women's equal participation and full involvement in all
efforts to maintain peace and security.

At the outset, my delegation wishes to align itself
with the statement delivered by the representative of
the Republic of South Africa on behalf of the Southern
African Development Community (SADC). We further
thank the Secretary-General for his report, contained in
document S/2008/622, and we take note of its
references to and assessment of measures to implement
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008).

This year marks the eighth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), which examines
issues relating to women, peace and security in peace
negotiations, decision-making, refugee camps, mine
clearance and sanctions. One of the main objectives of
resolution 1325 (2000) is gender mainstreaming in all
aspects of peace and security. It advocates major
changes in procedure, delivery, attitudes and habits of
the international community that are necessary to
integrate women's issues into disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration. The resolution has
played a key role in changing approaches and attitudes
towards women. The critical role of Member States in
the full and effective implementation of the resolution
therefore cannot be overemphasized.

The Kingdom of Swaziland embraces a vision of
harmonizing the interplay between development, peace
and security. In the same spirit, we recognize the
importance of ensuring respect for the equal rights of
women in the security sector of our country and the
subregion. We attach great importance to the
participation of women in peace processes and
decision-making.

We are a signatory to the 2008 SADC Protocol on
Gender and Development. The Protocol represents the
beginning of the road towards ensuring that States
parties put in place measures to ensure that women
have equal representation and participation in key
decision-making positions in conflict resolution and
peacebuilding processes by 2015.

We have also established the Royal Swaziland
Police Gender Network, which was launched on

10 April 2008. The Network is in line with the
Women's Network Committee of the Southern African
Regional Police Chief Council Organization. The main
objective of the Network is to promote and implement
SADC and other international instruments related to
the elimination of all forms of discrimination and
violence against women. The Network Committee will
enhance the efforts of our gender coordinating unit and
other relevant stakeholders. It is also my Government's
desire to train a women's service corps that will be able
to participate in regional peace support initiatives. In
that respect, we urge our international partners to assist
us in achieving that objective within our security
sector.

Despite notable progress made towards the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), regrettably
violence against women persists in conflict zones
throughout the world. Women and girls are still targets
in such deplorable acts as rape and other forms of
sexual violence. Unfortunately, such acts have severe
consequences, such as early and unwanted pregnancies,
the contraction of HIV and AIDS, psychological
trauma and an increase in the number of displaced
persons, especially women and children.

To that end, it is our firm belief that no effort
should be spared to prevent conflict. More resources
should also be devoted to education and to integrating
women into all levels of society, including decision-
making. If all efforts fail to stop a conflict,
international actors must be armed with the requisite
information to address cases of sexual violence and
abuse against women and to end the impunity of the
perpetrators of such acts. We therefore look forward to
the implementation of resolution 1820 (2008), which
notes that women and girls are particularly targeted by
the use of sexual violence and stresses that such
violence can significantly exacerbate conflicts and
impede peace processes.

In conclusion, the Kingdom of Swaziland
supports the role of the Security Council in the
prevention of conflicts, peacekeeping and post-conflict
reconstruction. The participation of women in each
stage of the peace process should be enhanced and
more attention should be given to their status and role.
We further reiterate our respect for the protection of
women's rights and gender mainstreaming throughout
any peace process. It is important to recognize that
women and girls are essential pillars of all societies
and that their active empowerment and participation in
all areas of political, social, cultural and economic life
remains crucial.

