Mr. Thomson (Fiji): Allow me, first, to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today's debate, which
provides an opportunity for all members to contribute
to the discussion on the global women and peace and
security agenda. Allow me also to thank the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2013/149), which provides a
clear articulation of the current and emerging concerns
regarding sexual violence as it pertains to international
peace and security.

The past debates ofthe Council on women and peace
and security in which Fiji has participated have focused
on the broader implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). The current report of the Secretary-General
focuses on sexual violence in conflict, bringing into
sharper focus the work needed for the implementation
of the subsequent resolutions, in particular resolutions
1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010).

Fiji is committed to the elimination of sexual
violence and to working both domestically and with the
international community to do so. At the national level,
Fiji's Ministry of Women has revived the Inter-Agency
Task Force on the Elimination of Violence against
Women to coordinate policy responses across all
Government agencies. It is working with the Fiji police
force to implement the law introduced in the last few
years that, among other things, introduced marital rape
as a specific offence under the criminal code, and also
introduced a child-welfare code requiring teachers,
doctors and other professionals to report suspected
child-abuse cases. The Ministry also champions a
campaign on zero tolerance of violence against women
and children, which operates at the community level in
partnership with community leaders, the police force
and non-governmental organizations.

At the international level, Fiji's commitment to
eliminating sexual violence is expressed primarily
through its peacekeeping efforts. Fiji sends police
peacekeepers to missions where the mandate includes
capacity-building of local security institutions. In post-
conflict situations, our experience has been that a large
part of that capacity- building is to assist local security
institutions in responding to cases of sexual violence,
from initial contact with victims through victim
counseling through to the finality of police involvement
in such cases. Beyond this, community policing and
assisting local police institutions in awareness-raising
and preventative policing has also formed part of Fiji's
contribution.

Eliminating sexual violence is crucial, because only
in the absence of sexual and other forms of violence
will the empowerment of women be possible so as to
achieve gender equality. Women in our communities
are change-makers and core to the functioning of our
communities. They are first responders in moments
of crisis, including in responding to natural disasters
and in adapting the approach of communities to new
challenges such as those posed by climate change. Our
societies are only as strong as the weakest among us. If
we are to address emerging security and developmental
challenges, we have to ensure that those most at risk of
marginalization, including at-risk women and children,
are freed from the risk of violence and fully empowered
to contribute.

Accordingly, I would like to conclude by restating
Fiji's steadfast commitment to working with the
international community to implement resolution 1325
(2000) and subsequent resolutions.

