Ms. Krisnamurthi (Indonesia): Let me first thank
the Plurinational State of Bolivia for convening this
open debate. I also thank the Secretary-General and all
the briefers for their remarks.

Indonesia aligns itself with the statements made on
behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
and the MIKTA countries - Mexico, Indonesia, the
Republic of Korea, Turkey and Australia.

Women are half of the world and therefore can
make up half of every solution. The implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) has put a spotlight on the role of
women in peace and security. There are some pertinent
points to consider in that regard. First, preventing
conflict is far better than settling it. It is the most
effective resolution, one that enables everyone - men,
women and children - to thrive and coexist in peace.
Member States are responsible for preventing conflict
and should pursue that goal through various avenues
relevant to their national circumstances.

In that context, Indonesia considers women to be
drivers of sustaining peace and development through
their political and economic empowerment, with the
support of their communities. In that connection, the
Government has a solid commitment to advancing
women's participation in politics and development. In
President Jokowi's Administration, women ministers
account for one third of the Cabinet and are all tasked
with strategic issues. Additionally, 73 women have
been elected as regional heads or deputy heads since
the last election. Since the last general election, we
have formulated a grand design to enhance women's
representation in Parliament for the forthcoming
election in 2019. Successful women politicians are
going into their communities, recruiting other women
aspiring to be politicians and giving them first-hand
practical experience through mentorship programmes.
As a result, in 2018 the number of women running for
office has increased. Nearly 10 per cent ofthe candidates
in parliamentary and regional elections were women.
We are also empowering women economically, as
women who are economically empowered will become
agents of peace, and when they bring prosperity to their
communities there will be a stronger inclination to
pursue peace.

Secondly, we need to share best practices and
optimize what we know about women and peace and
security. Research conducted by Indonesia's Wahid
Institute found that women possess remarkable
potential for promoting peace. Women are more
tolerant of differences and less inclined to use violence
against disliked groups; 80.7 per cent of women support
the right to freedom of religion and belief; and 80.8 per
cent of women, as compared to 76.7 per cent of men,
do not support radicalism. Women's empowerment
therefore becomes a determining factor in efforts to
stamp out possible starting points for conflict. Women's
empowerment must start at the community level. One
example is the Peace Village initiative conducted by
the Wahid Foundation in Indonesia in collaboration
with UN-Women and Japan. Its main purpose is to
empower women at the village level to build resilient
communities by combining community empowerment
and training in peacebuilding and women's economic
empowerment. Respect for religious differences,
guarantees of religious freedom and mechanisms for
conflict prevention are some of the key indicators
that qualify villages for seed capital to develop
specific products for their village, with training and
financial resources. Indonesia is ready to share the
initiative and develop partnerships with other countries
as well as the United Nations.

Thirdly, we are aware that women peacekeepers
account for only about 3 per cent of the total number
of troops on the ground. We need more female
peacekeepers on the ground because they have a better
capacity for situational awareness; they can provide
appropriate protection of civilians against sexual and
gender-based violence; they can more easily win the
hearts and minds of the local community; and they are
prerequisites for sustaining the peace agenda.

Indonesia is committed to continuing to increase
the number of female peacekeepers. Indonesian
peacekeeping contingents are among the largest,
totalling more than 3,500 personnel, of which 72 are
female peacekeepers. We are currently training 40
additional female peacekeepers, who will be deployed
in the next few months, bringing the total to 112
female peacekeepers.

Indonesia continues to encourage the participation
of and to prepare more female peacekeepers, including
by integrating the gender perspective into the work of
the United Nations peacekeeping operations in which
it takes part and as part of the regular curriculum
of the Indonesian Peacekeeping Mission Centre in
Sentul. Lastly, as a true partner for world peace, we
are committed to ensuring strong institutions, linking
peace and development and strengthening cooperation,
as they are crucial to achieving peace.

