Lord Ahmad (United Kingdom): Allow me first
to extend my heartfelt thanks to Germany and to you,
Mr. President, in particular for your personal efforts in
prioritizing discussion on this important issue before
us today - conflict-related sexual violence - and for
gathering such knowledgeable briefers.

I am sure I speak for everyone in this Chamber
and beyond, when I say that our biggest thanks go
to our briefers, in particular to those courageous
survivors of sexual violence in conflict. Once again,
we have heard compelling testimony that, despite the
considerable momentum that has been built on this very
issue since the adoption of resolution 2106 (2013) and
others, as well as the launch of the United Kingdom-
1ed Preventing Sexual Violence in Conflict Initiative
over seven years ago, there is still so much more to do.
Draft resolution S/2019/328, which is before us today, is
a positive contribution to much-needed efforts to move
the agenda forward.

The United Kingdom is supporting the draft
resolution, which was proposed by Germany, because
time after time in this very Chamber we have heard
shocking reports of conflict-related sexual violence,
like those we heard today. I am sure I speak for everyone
in this Chamber when I pay tribute to the likes of Nadia
Murad and Inas Miloud for their brave courage and
testimony, which they have presented once again today.

The impact of crimes of sexual violence on
countries, survivors, communities and families is
very clear and it is our responsibility, as the Security
Council, to respond to that challenge. The proposed
draft resolution builds on previous resolutions in
developing an integrated, effective and international
approach to tackling such grave crimes. There are three
elements of the draft resolution that I wish to focus on
in my statement.

First, the proposed draft resolution rightly
recognizes the importance of focusing on survivors'
needs through a survivor-centred approach, a point
again articulated by the Secretary-General in his
contribution today. We believe that such an approach is
key to all policies and programmes that aim to meet the
needs of survivors of conflict-related sexual Violence
and to avoid putting them at risk of further harm.

Secondly, the proposed draft resolution
acknowledges that conflict-related sexual violence
has a disproportionate impact on women and girls. It
encourages support for children born of sexual violence
and recognizes that sexual violence also affects men
and boys. The United Kingdom believes that survivor
services should cater to all survivors without exception
and welcomes the efforts made in the draft resolution to
promote that very approach.

Thirdly, the draft resolution emphasizes the role
that civil society plays in efforts to address conflict-
related sexual violence, including by tackling stigma,
as well as its central role in the implementation of a
broader women and peace and security agenda.

However, the United Kingdom believes that more
needs to be done. We regret that the language on services
for survivors of sexual violence, recognizing the acute
need for those services to include comprehensive
reproductive and sexual health care, including safe
termination of pregnancies, did not meet with the
support of all the Council members. It is important
nonetheless that we maintain our consistent efforts in
that respect and the progress that we have made on that
issue, including through previous Council resolutions,
most notably resolution 2106 (2013).

Over the past several years, the United Kingdom
has spent more than £46 million on preventing and
responding to conflict-related sexual violence around
the world, and I want to assure the Council that as our
Prime Minister's special representative on this very
issue, it is a personal priority for me. Our international
consultations have informed our efforts to put survivors
at the centre of our approach, not only in how we
respond to incidents that have already occurred but
also, importantly, and as we heard from our briefers
today, in how we prevent them from happening again.
We have been pleased to work with like-minded
partners, and I would particularly like to pay tribute
to the close cooperation we have enjoyed with Special
Representative Patten and her Office, as well as our
joint visits, such as the one we made not so long ago
to Iraq.

Accountability is key both to response and
prevention - first, because achieving justice is a vital
step in helping survivors to repair and rebuild their
lives, as we have also heard again today, and secondly,
because ending impunity, as we heard from Amal
Clooney, is an essential deterrent to future violence
of this nature. That is why the United Kingdom is
committed to strengthening justice for survivors
and holding perpetrators to account. That means not
only ensuring that international standards and best
practices for gathering evidence are upheld so that
convictions can be secured, but also that survivors are
not traumatized all over again. That is why we should
tackle both conscious and unconscious bias within
criminal justice systems and build the capacity of
judges and prosecutors to gain a better understanding
of conflict-related sexual violence and of the need to
act, which is a priority, as has been illustrated by the
testimonies we have heard today from Nadia Murad.
We owe it to the survivors.

That is why the United Kingdom is working with the
Institute for International Criminal Investigations and
with Nadia's Initiative to develop the Murad Code, an
ethical code of conduct that will ensure that survivors
give informed consent regarding evidence-gathering
and are referred safely and confidentially to support
services. We want to see the Code incorporated into
all donor funding requirements, and we hope that all
members will sign up when we launch it formally at
our Preventing Sexual Violence Initiative international
conference, to be held in London in November.
However, we should also recognize that for some
survivors, achieving justice does not necessarily mean
going through a formal court system, which is why we
support the Dr. Denis Mukwege Foundation and Nadia's
Initiative in developing community-focused redress for
survivors. The United Kingdom recently funded a pilot
project in that regard in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

We also support Dr. Mukwege's plea for more
holistic support for survivors. We therefore endorse
the call to Council members to provide more funding
for the survivor advocacy networks, health-care
professionals and psychosocial services that offer such
support and that are making a real difference in the
lives of survivors on the ground. I was going to end my
statement today with a question for the briefers on how
we, the international community, can do more to ensure
that survivors of sexual violence have access to such
holistic support. But through their testimonies we have
heard many of the answers today. I would particularly
like to respond to the testimonies we heard from the
survivors and from Amal Clooney by saying that in
thanking them for providing their insights today, I want
to assure them that we will reflect on the contributions
they have made. In doing so, I feel proud of the United
Kingdom's contribution, above all in penning and
securing unanimous support for resolution 2379 (2017),
which ensured that we held the members of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) who perpetrated
those crimes to account.

We stand with the Government of Iraq, the
survivors, Nadia Murad and others such as Amal
Clooney who represent them. We totally support
the work and efforts on the ground in Iraq of Karim
Khan, Special Adviser and Head of the United Nations
Investigative Team for the Promotion of Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/ISIL in Iraq. We look
forward to their responses and their continued insights
and expertise and, most importantly, to the testimonies
of survivors. We should all remain focused on that key
priority. It should be the basis of international action in
preventing sexual violence in conflict. Yes, as we have
heard today, words are important, but words alone do
not provide justice and accountability for survivors. It

is time to act, and we must do just that.
