Mrs. Boura (Greece): I too would like to commend
and to congratulate the United Kingdom on its initiative
in organizing this open debate.

Greece aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union and wishes to add
the following.

Human trafficking and modern slavery are
indeed global crimes that violate human rights,
affect and devastate communities and present a
threat to international peace and security. In conflict
situations, they may amount to war crimes, or crimes
against humanity.

In situations of armed conflict and instability,
criminal networks and traffickers target the most
vulnerable populations, particularly women, children,
displaced persons and refugees. Armed groups
systematically engage in the sexual enslavement and
trading ofwomen and girls, and treat civilian populations
as a resource to be exploited and commodities to be
trafficked and traded as part of the economy of war.

The Secretary-General's 2016 report (S/2016/949)
identifies the complex nexus between trafficking in
persons, organized crime, corruption, armed conflict
and terrorism. In spite of the important legislative
framework adopted by the international community in
order to combat this global problem in recent decades,
human trafficking and exploitation in many forms,
including forced labour and recruitment to armed
groups, remain an issue of grave concern and a law
enforcement challenge.

Taking into account the unprecedented levels of
human displacement and the increased vulnerability
of potential victims in refugee and migratory
flows, the prevention of human trafficking must
now be a priority. We are firmly convinced that the
international community should, at the same time,
focus on comprehensive awareness-raising campaigns,
establishing a proactive and inclusive identification
regime for victims and strengthening law enforcement.

In our efforts to combat human trafficking, we
must crack down on the enormous profits generated by
traffickers, follow financial trails and use all available
investigative tools to prosecute the perpetrators. The
implementation of the legal framework to combat human
trafficking would be more meaningful if accompanied
by efforts to identify, protect, assist and rehabilitate
victims. We need to work closely together to promote
multilateral cooperation, enhance early identification
procedures and establish robust referral mechanisms so
that victims can access protection services.

Through close cooperation with leading
international organizations and United Nations
institutions, especially the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, specialized training for law
enforcement and front-line professionals is now more
necessary than ever. Echoing the European Union
statement, we reiterate the importance of strengthening
multilateral partnerships and of engaging, in line with
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 2250 (2015), more women
and young people in actions against human trafficking.

Greece, a first entry point for hundreds of
thousands of migrants and refugees arriving in Europe,
has established the Office of the National Rapporteur
on Trafficking in Human Beings, within the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs, as well as a national identification
and referral mechanism for victims of trafficking.
Of course, sustaining peace and implementing the
Sustainable Development Goals will eventually address
a number of root causes that lead to trafficking, forced
labour and modern slavery.

We are confident that this debate and the momentum
created in the Security Council will contribute to
our common efforts. Greece is ready to support
and participate actively in all relevant initiatives to
strengthen our response to this global challenge.

