Mr. Menkveld (Netherlands): At the outset, I
would like to express my gratitude to the Secretary-
General, his Special Representative on Sexual Violence
in Conflict and the Special Rapporteur on trafficking
in persons, especially women and children for their
important statements on this urgent matter.

My delegation welcomes the report on conflict-
related sexual violence that was submitted in April by
the Secretary-General (S/2016/361). We also welcome
this debate on responding to human trafficking in
situations of conflict-related sexual violence, which is
taking place a few days before the International Day for
the Elimination of Sexual Violence in Conflict. This
is an important Day that reminds us all of the horrible
experiences which survivors of human trafficking
face daily.

Responding to human trafficking in situations of
armed conflict is key. We look forward to the Secretary-
General's report on the implementation of mechanisms
to counter trafficking in persons, and express support
for the work of the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law
and Sexual Violence in Conflict.

Current conflicts, like those in Syria or South
Sudan, are one of the root causes of the increase in
human trafficking. As a consequence of armed conflict,
refugees and migrants attempt to find safety and security
outside their countries. Criminals have established an
infrastructure to extort these people in their search
for a safe place. Reports show that people-smugglers
demand sex as payment of passage. The sexual
exploitation of a growing group of vulnerable women
and girls in a cross-border context makes it essential
to combat trafficking in persons nationally, regionally
and globally.

Also the motivations for extremist groups to commit
human trafficking are disturbing. Vulnerable groups of
women and girls are trafficked and used to compensate
fighters or to finance operations. As extremist groups
often perceive civilian populations as a resource
for commodities, women and girls are seen for the
commodities they can deliver, which is their sexuality
and fertility. As a result, women and girls become a
commodity in the supply and demand of the political
economy of war. Women and children often become
victims of human trafficking in situations of conflict-
related sexual violence. In addition to the physical
scars, the stigmatization and marginalization might
leave even deeper scars on these vulnerable groups.

In our vision, women and women's organizations
have great potential to contribute to ending human
trafficking, as the Security Council has acknowledged
in its resolutions on women, peace and security.
We believe that commitment to keep implementing
these resolutions is important in responding to
and for the protection of vulnerable groups against
human trafficking.

To make protection sustainable we should also

focus on prevention. We cannot protect women if we do
not empower them and include them in decision-making
processes. This is not a symbolic gesture, but a reality
that we have to acknowledge within the Security Council.
Women should be enabled to protect themselves, and
their rights should be acknowledged and promoted. It is
time that the international community acknowledge the
intertwined relation between women's protection and
women's participation in issues of peace and security.

The Netherlands would like to present four ways
forward in which we, the international community,
can better prevent and respond to human trafficking in
situations of conflict-related sexual violence.

First of all, we need to systematically cooperate
with civil society and local communities in the
prevention of, and responses to, human trafficking.
Local communities and civil society are important
stakeholders and advocates. They know how to reach
the survivors and the perpetrators. We have to continue
preventing and responding to human trafficking, but
we also have to decrease the negative consequences
of human trafficking for local communities. We
need to support women and girls in overcoming the
stigmatization, discrimination and prejudices that affect
their access to services, and eventually their human
rights. In order to reintegrate victims, Governments
and the international community have to work together
with local communities.

Secondly, United Nations peacekeeping missions
are often confronted with human trafficking. It is time
that we mandate them to help address the problem.

Thirdly, the perpetrators of human trafficking
and other conflict-related sexual violence should be
brought to justice. To strengthen local justice systems,
the Netherlands supports, for instance, Iraqi women's
organizations that train local courts and other criminal
justice authorities on how to deal with cases of sexual
violence related to armed conflict. The Netherlands
attaches great value to legitimate and professional
justice systems and supports rule of law programming
in several countries.

Fourthly, we feel that countering human trafficking
and sexual violence against women during their
journeys should be prominently addressed in the
context of the forthcoming United Nations summit on
addressing large movements of migrants and refugees,
to be held in September.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands has been a partner
of the the international community's for peace, justice
and development, and we will continue to be so.

