Mr. Liden: The United Nations system has
undertaken commendable efforts in developing a
comprehensive action plan to implement Security
Council 1325 (2000). But Member States also have a
responsibility. That was stressed in the statement made
this morning by the representative of the United
Kingdom on behalf of the European Union (EU).
Sweden fully aligns itself with that statement. Let me
just touch upon three additional aspects of that
responsibility.

First and foremost, we have a responsibility as
Members of the United Nations. As such, we need to
deliver on our commitments and promises. We must
both contribute more women to peace operations and
reinforce the preparedness and awareness of our
contingents, staff and experts. We have to demonstrate
in the strongest possible ways that sexual exploitation
and abuse are completely unacceptable. And when
faced with a report without a gender equality
perspective, we should ask for additional information.
To meet some of those challenges, the Swedish
partnership project Genderforce has been initiated.
Bringing together relevant Government agencies and
organizations, that multi-annual project focuses on
integrating resolution 1325 (2000) into all phases of a
peace operation.

Secondly, we have a responsibility as members of
regional organizations. As their role in peace
operations increases, so should their responsibilities.
The representative of the United Kingdom has told us
what the EU and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) are doing to live up to
their responsibilities. We are pleased to have
contributed to that. But more action is needed,
including more sharing of experiences and good
practices among regional organizations.

Thirdly, we have a responsibility ourselves to
provide ideas and good practices, not only to ask for
reports and proposals from others. A number of gaps
are identified in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2005/636). I would like to share a few ideas on how
some of them could potentially be addressed.

First, threats to women's security prevent women
from being actors. In August this year, the Swedish
Government, together with the United Nations
Development Fund for Women and the International
Law Association consortium hosted a gender justice
partners meeting. The report of that meeting has been
circulated as a United Nations document. It contains
practical recommendations on how to integrate a
gender equality perspective in post-conflict societies
and thus to enhance the security and participation of
women. We are committed to following up that
process, in cooperation with the Republic of South
Africa.

Secondly, both the participation and protection of
women would benefit from a Peacebuilding
Commission with a clear and integrated gender
perspective. The Swedish Minister for Foreign Affairs,
together with 14 colleagues, has presented the
Secretary-General and the President of the General
Assembly with specific ideas on how to integrate a
gender-equality perspective in the design and work of
the Commission and its support offices. That continues
to be a priority for Sweden and for the European
Union.

Thirdly, based on its own experience in the field,
and in order to meet the changing demands of
multifunctional peace operations, Sweden has put
forward the idea of civilian observers. In the
transitional phase of a mission - when, for instance,
expertise in areas such as elections and human rights is
needed - civilian personnel could be phased into
military observer teams. Additional competences could
be incorporated, and the mission would thus be
genuinely multifunctional at the field level as well.
Such a new category of seconded civilian personnel
could significantly increase the number of female
mission members at the field level, where military
observer teams very often constitute the only presence
of a peace mission.

Fourthly, special representatives, special envoys
and other emissaries involved in peace negotiations
should have firm guidelines from the Secretary-
General to enhance women's participation in peace
processes and transitional structures. Any reason for
failure to succeed should be reported on. Such
benchmarks could really make a difference. We need
only compare the impressive level of female
participation in the parliament of Afghanistan with the
much poorer results in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. That does not reflect local conditions. Rather, it
is the result of a determined policy on the part of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan.

In order to shoulder our responsibilities at the
national level, an inter-ministerial working group is
now finalizing a Swedish action plan in order to
intensify our implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). Work is being - and will continue to be -
carried out in cooperation with Government agencies,
as well as with civil society. We look forward to
sharing good practices with States and organizations in
the process of developing or implementing their plans,
methods and tools. Only by cooperating will we be
able to ensure that decisions and ambitions will
improve the daily lives of women and men, girls and
boys. We cannot afford to settle for less.

