Mr. Saikal (Afghanistan): I would like to thank the
Spanish presidency for convening today's open debate
on a topic of crucial importance, which demands the
urgent attention of the international community.

Human trafficking constitutes a grave violation of
international law, including international humanitarian
law. It violates the fundamental values and principles
we hold dear, such as justice, equality and human rights
for all. Over the past several years, the world has seen
human trafficking continue unabated in different parts
of the world, especially in countries stricken by conflict
and facing violent extremism. That has many causes:
to generate illegal profits in the criminal economy; to
enlist people in illegal armed groups; and to impose
forced labour and slavery upon the innocent and have
them carry out terrorist attacks in different parts of
the world.

Human trafficking is particularly prevalent in
countries stricken by conflict and strife, especially
those that continue to suffer at the hands of terrorists
and extremists. We have witnessed a continuing trend
where many terrorist and extremist groups - such as
the Taliban, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant/
Da'esh and Al-Qaida, among others - increasingly
resort to human trafficking to advance their evil
agendas. In our region, as well as in Africa and the
Middle East, extremist groups have abducted men,
women and children as a means to finance and conduct
their criminal activities. In many cases, women and
girls in particular have been put up for sale to mobilize
financial resources and fund military operations.
Such despicable activities represent the most evil of
human actions.
The inextricable link between human trafficking
and terrorism remains a serious source of concern
that demands urgent attention by the international
community. We believe that addressing some of the
underlying factors driving violent extremism should
not be separate from ending the problem of human
trafficking. In various conflict situations, especially
in our region, a multitude of terrorist and extremist
groups, including the Taliban, its Haqqani Network
and Al-Qaida, still enjoy sanctuary and safe havens,
alongside material and financial support, which have
reinforced their operational capability to continue their
reign of terror against innocent people.

One of the best ways to address human trafficking
is to prevent conflict from arising in the first place and
to resole them wherever they occur. In doing so we will
avoid the enabling environment that fuels the problem
of human trafficking. The Security Council should
take necessary measures to identify and address the
lingering problem of continued support for extremists
as a means to advance political objectives. More focus
should be placed on ensuring that States comply with
their counter-terrorism commitments and obligations
on the basis of the relevant Security Council resolutions.

As a front-line State in the fight against global
terrorism and extremism, we assure the Council and
the international community at large that our struggle
against those twin menaces will continue unabated, and
with firm resolve. As we speak, our national security
forces are engaging a multitude of international
extremist groups that pose a serious threat to the
civilized world.

The United Nations Global Plan of Action to
Prevent Trafficking in Persons and the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
and its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children, remain the overall international framework
for decisive action to combat human trafficking in all
its aspects. Afghanistan is a party to the Convention
and has put in place several pieces of legislation to
criminalize various forms of human trafficking. In
addition, we are grateful to the United States Agency
for International Development for its project on
combating human trafficking in Afghanistan, which
is co-funded by the International Organization for
Migration. The project works with our Government to
effectively prevent trafficking, prosecute traffickers,
protect victims and improve regional coordination to
combat cross-border trafficking.
The problem of human trafficking is wide-ranging
and has various components. The unprecedented flow
of migrants and refugees, mainly from countries facing
conflict, has left millions of people vulnerable to human
trafficking throughout the world. In that context, we
are pleased that the joint declaration adopted at the
conclusion of the summit meeting on migration here in
New York in September placed due focus on preventing
human trafficking.

Today's meeting of the Security Council highlights
the fact that the trafficking of persons constitutes
a crime against humanity and that any individual
or groups involved in that heinous practice must be
brought to justice. We hope this meeting will also serve
as a reminder for all that additional progress is required
to implement their commitments and obligations, not
only as matter of legal responsibility but also as a
moral imperative.

Finally, we concur with previous speakers that the
problem of human trafficking in conflict situations
should not be seen in isolation from the global fight
against terrorism. Hence, it is imperative that States
spare no effort whatsoever to implement the relevant
counter-terrorism resolutions of the security Council
and of the General Assembly. In that context, the
relevant States must prevent the cross-border movement
of terrorists and cut off the flow of financial resources
and other enablers that have thus far sustained extremist
activity. We hope the outcome of today's meeting
will revitalize the global fight against a menace that
constitutes a crime against humanity and a challenge
confronting us all.

