Mr. Rivard (Canada): On behalf of the
Government of Canada, I thank the Nigerian
presidency for today's open debate. I also wish to
express my gratitude for the statements made by
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, Ms. Bachelet,
Mr. Kapambwe and Ms. Nemat.

Canada welcomes the recent report by the
Secretary-General on women, peace and security, as
well as the 2011 General Assembly resolution 65/283,
on strengthening the role of mediation in the peaceful
settlement of disputes, conflict prevention and
resolution, as a positive step towards improving
cooperation and coordination.

One year ago this month, Canada announced its
action plan, which seeks to enhance the participation of
women in peace processes. We encourage the
meaningful participation of women in all elements of
peacekeeping. We also promote efforts to protect the
human rights and physical safety of women and girls,
including against rape as a weapon of war and all
forms of sexual violence in conflict.

There remains much work to be done with respect
to mediation and conflict prevention to implement the
Security Council resolution on women and peace and
security. During his recent visit to Tripoli, Canadian
Minister of Foreign Affairs John Baird met with
Libyan women's groups to discuss the important role
that women's leadership will play in the new Libya and
its democratic institutions. The Minister urged the new
Government of Libya to ensure the participation of
women in decision-making during Libya's transition.
Libya is an example of an environment in which
barriers to women's access to peace processes and to
reconstruction efforts will need to be addressed by all
those involved.

(spoke in French)

With regard to follow up to this debate, we
encourage the Security Council to continue to provide
the political leadership and take targeted actions to
ensure the meaningful participation of women in all
conflict prevention, mediation and resolution
processes. In order to inform the work of the Council,
we recommend that the Council receive regular
briefings on those matters by the Secretary-General
and other relevant officials, including the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict. Canada applauds the Secretary-
General's recommendation to develop a framework
including specific early warning indicators on sexual
violence in conflict.

At a time when resources are scarce, we support
the call to use mediation increasingly as a cost-
effective form of conflict prevention and resolution.

