Mr. Gonzalez de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I am grateful for the opportunity to participate
in this debate on specific measures to prevent, punish
and eradicate sexual violence in conflicts. It is an issue
of great concern that affects sensitive areas, such as the
protection of civilians in all kinds of armed conflict,
the displacement of populations and peacebuilding
processes, without forgetting its undeniable connection
with other scourges, such as trafficking in persons.

Spain welcomes the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/149) and supports its recommendations.
Similarly, Spain commends the commitment of the new
Special Representative, Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura,
to the priorities developed by her predecessor,
Ms. Wahlstrom. Spain also shares the new goal set by
Ms. Bangura of promoting national ownership in the
fight against sexual Violence in conflict, which is key
to obtaining lasting results. Ms. Bangura can count on
my country's full support for her work.

Combating sexual violence in conflict requires the
adoption of measures for the prevention, protection
and prosecution of the perpetrators. In all those areas,
the victims' cooperation is essential. However, as
the Secretary-General's report points out, the lack of
adequate information and fear of reporting for cultural
and social reasons, which tend to increase in times of
conflict, are serious obstacles to such collaboration. We
must therefore, to the greatest extent possible, reinforce
mechanisms designed to help victims, raise awareness
about their surroundings and strengthen the capacity of
national courts.

Spain also shares the conclusions of the report
regarding the role of the International Criminal Court.
While the primary responsibility for the trial of
suspects for acts of sexual violence lies with national
courts, the Court plays a crucial complementary role at
the international level.

As I already mentioned, Spain fully supports
the recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General, but would like to highlight those that
relate to the need to define a mechanism to monitor the
obligations ofparties to conflict as set forth in resolution
1960 (2010) - including the possibility ofreferring cases
to the International Criminal Court - and in particular
to those pertaining to disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration processes and security sector reform.
I also wish to stress the importance of the role of the
International Criminal Court, as acknowledged in the
recent conclusions agreed to in the fifty-seventh session
of the Commission on the Status of Women.

In the open debate on women, peace and security
held last fall at the Security Council (see S/PV.6877),
we referred to the numerous initiatives that Spain
had been leading in its foreign policy, development
cooperation and defence policy with a view to achieving
two goals - first, to promote the role of women in
peacebuilding in conflict and post-conflict situations,
and, secondly, to eliminate sexual violence in conflicts,
including the outrageous practice of using systematic
rape as a war tactic.

Focusing now on the second goal, Spain believes
that it is a priority to implement specific programmes
to eradicate all forms of violence and discrimination
against women and girls, while giving special attention
to extreme situations such as trafficking, sexual
exploitation and female genital mutilation. I would also
like to highlight our unconditional support for the work
of UN-Women in its campaign against sexual violence
in armed conflict.

Spain has generously contributed to the Millennium
Development Goals Achievement Fund, which has
provided $94 million for 20 conflict prevention and
peacebuilding programmes in as many countries
around the world.

In the area of training, I would emphasize the
specific seminar on the gender perspective in peace
operations that is being jointly organized by the
Ministries for Foreign Affairs and Defence of Spain
and the Netherlands. The fifth edition of the seminar
will be held soon and will have a specific module on
sexual violence in conflict.

I would conclude by referring to a particularly
vulnerable group in the area of sexual violence, namely,
people with disabilities, who are even more vulnerable
in a context of conflict. On 23 September, a high-level
meeting will be held on achieving the Millennium
Development Goals for persons with disabilities.
Spain, together with the Philippines, has the honour
of having been appointed to co-facilitate the outcome
document of that meeting. It will undoubtedly be the
best opportunity to discuss a new development agenda
that takes into account the imperative of combating
discrimination against persons with disabilities.

