Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this
debate on the eve of a number of deadlines for crucial
upcoming efforts such as the strategic reviews of peace
operations, the women and peace and security agenda
and the United Nations peacebuilding architecture. I
would also like to acknowledge the commitment of the
agencies of the United Nations and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the International
Committee of the Red Cross and the non-governmental
organizations working in difficult conditions, whose
experience in the field, as wejust heard in the briefings,
is clearly essential.

The numbers of all the countries and all the violent
acts committed in them against civilians, including
thousands of women and girls, are unfortunately too
many to list. Those facts are notjust statistics, they are
a reality that we must work to change through better
protection of civilians. How can that be done? There are
four types of action that can be taken, particularly in
areas where peacekeeping operations are deployed. The
first is by protecting the people living within conflict
zones. That sounds obvious, but too often the Blue
Helmets' attitude lacks the dynamism and mobility
needed to ensure a successful mission. We expect
the review of peace operations to take that reality
into account. The United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali has a robust
mandate for the protection of civilians that it is fulfilling
in difficult conditions. It is vital to ensure that the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic reaches its full
operational capability by April, as planned, and that it
adopts a robust posture in implementing its mandate.

Secondly, we must guarantee that protection within
peace operations themselves. Unfortunately, 10 years
after the publication of Prince Zeid's report on sexual
abuse and exploitation in peacekeeping operations
(A/59/710), crimes continue to be committed by those
charged with protecting civilians, including, by the
way, in regional operations such as the African Union
Mission in Somalia, which has been denounced by
Human Rights Watch. In order to prevent such abuses,
we must act on two levels - first, by strictly enforcing
zero tolerance and filtering policies designed to prevent
troops, soldiers and officers who commit such acts from
participating in peacekeeping operations, and secondly,
by punishing and prosecuting those responsible. The
United Nations cannot afford to be impugned for its
actions; its missions and operations must serve as
examples.

Thirdly, I would like to emphasize the importance of
preventive and complementary actions for the protection
of civilians. To begin with, the participation of women
makes operations on the ground more effective to the
degree that they are involved in devising strategies
for protecting civilians. For example, they can help to
design camps and protection sites so as to better meet
their needs in terms of secure access to services and
basic infrastructure. Women's participation in peace
operations is also a way for peacekeepers to have a
closer relationship to local communities and thus win
their trust, which is clearly essential to protection. The
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for example,
works closely with local stakeholders to support victims
of sexual violence and recruitment by armed groups,
and such practices should be followed throughout the
Organization.

Then there is prevention. It is vital that within
human-rights sections, teams of human rights, gender
and protection counsellors should be effective and well
coordinated, in order to enable them to assess whatever
threats are present through accurate analysis of the data
on women and children's human rights and then to sound
the alarm and avoid any deterioration of the situation.
Regarding sexual violence, training is essential and
must be carried out to benefit both those involved in
peacekeeping operations and the local populations, in
order to reduce the social stigma for the victims.

Fourthly and finally, there can be no protection
without justice. The confirmation on 1 December 2014
of the International Criminal Court's indictment of the
warlord Thomas Lubanga for war crimes and, more
recently, the transfer to the Court in January of Dominic
Ongwen, a commander in the Lord's Resistance Army,
are important steps in combating impunity for violence
against civilians, most of them women and girls. But
most acts of violence, particularly sexual violence, go
unpunished, often because women refuse to complain
for fear of repercussions. That is why we must also
ensure that victims are protected when they bring legal
action against the perpetrators of such crimes. We must
break the chain of silence through protection.

