Mr. Strflmmen (Norway): Norway aligns itself
with the statement made by Canada on behalf of the
Human Security Network. What follows are a few
remarks in our national capacity.

We would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2004/814) on the implementation of
Security Council Resolution 1325 (2000) on women,
peace and security. The Security Council's monitoring
of the implementation of this resolution is an effective
and important way of keeping the international
community's attention focused on gender perspectives
and on women's roles in the area of peace and security.

As of June 2004 women constituted one per cent
of military personnel and five per cent of civilian
police personnel assigned by Member States to serve in
United Nations peacekeeping operations. These low
figures indicate that we, the Member States, must do
more to recruit women to our national services in order
for them to gain relevant work experience for
international service.

It is a tough challenge to increase the number of
women in high-level decision-making positions in
peacekeeping operations. Norway welcomes the efforts
of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO) to encourage female candidates to apply for
peacekeeping operations. Last year DPKO established
a gender focal point. We strongly support that decision.
It is vital that DPKO now ensure that the gender
adviser is instrumental in mainstreaming the gender
dimension into all phases of peacekeeping operations,
beginning with the initial planning of new operations
and throughout their implementation.

Responsibility for mainstreaming the gender
perspective rests with the leadership. That
responsibility must be assumed by leadership at all
levels - from this Council to commanders in the field.
According to the Secretary-General's report, only 15
per cent of the Security Council's resolutions adopted
from January 2002 to June 2004 incorporated gender
concerns. Is that good enough? We are convinced that
gender mainstreaming is crucial to creating stability
and lasting peace. We encourage the Security Council
to pay increased attention to gender issues and the role
of women in its work.

Member States, together with the United Nations,
should put even greater effort into giving women a role
in formal decision-making. This would be an important
encouragement for more women to become involved at
the informal level as well. Both women's and men's
points of view need to be integrated into peace
agreements. Sustainable peace can only be achieved if
both women and men are listened to.

It is Vital to work in partnerships and enhance co-
ordination in order to facilitate the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) at all levels. Women's groups
and networks at the local level are crucial. It is
essential to draw on the experience of non-
governmental organizations (NGOs) and researchers
and on formal and informal contacts, in order to
identify women's views and needs in peace processes.
Norway is doing its part. We are focusing on how to
advocate women's recommendations for sustainable
peace in areas Where we are involved in conflict
resolution. We do this through partnerships with
networks at the local level, NGOs, researchers,
individual States and various parts of the United
Nations system.

The real test of the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000) will take place on the
ground. We are therefore pleased to see that many parts
of the United Nations system, including DPKO, funds,
programmes and specialized agencies, are participating
in the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). Their
ability to find practical solutions and cooperate among
themselves and with others is critical to achieving
results. UNIFEM. is making a concerted effort in this
field, and we must ensure that it plays its mandated
role as a catalyst in the United Nations system.

According to the report, the peacekeeping and
humanitarian areas have seen the most dramatic
improvements in terms of new policies, gender
expertise and training initiatives since 2002. We
support the Secretary-General's suggestion to develop
a comprehensive strategy and action plan for
mainstreaming gender perspectives into peacekeeping
efforts both at Headquarters and in peacekeeping
operations.

