Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): Argentina aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered by the representative of Canada on behalf
of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security.

I will deliver an abbreviated version of my
statement. The complete version will be made available
to the Secretariat.

At the outset, I should like to thank the Bolivian
presidency for taking the initiative to organize this
debate, and for the special emphasis on the issue of
women's participation in the prevention and peaceful
resolution of conflicts. We also thank the Secretary-
General, the Executive Director of UN-Woman and
Ms. Randa Siniora Atallah for their briefings.

Argentina reiterates its firm commitment to
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
the continued development of the women and peace
and security agenda. Education is an essential factor
in promoting the comprehensive empowerment of
women of all ages and their effective participation in
decision-making processes at all levels, with a view to
promoting peace, security, development and the full
enjoyment of human rights. In that regard, protecting
education and guaranteeing continuous access to safe
education during conflicts is a fundamental objective
that would help to protect women and girls from the
risks of armed conflict. In that framework, in 2017
Argentina and Norway organized the second Conference
on Safe Schools to disseminate the Safe Schools
Declaration and Guidelines for Protecting Schools and
Universities from Military Use during Armed Conflict.
In that regard, we encourage all Members of the United
Nations, and especially the members of the Council, to
endorse the Declaration.

With regard to concrete actions to implement
resolution 1325 (2000), on women's participation in
conflict resolution and sustainable peacebuilding, in
August the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Argentina
and the Ministry of Justice and Human Rights launched
the creation of a federal network of mediators, with a
gender perspective. The network is made up of more
than 50 professionals from all the provinces of our
country and promotes the substantive involvement of
women in peacebuilding processes and in the handling
of crisis situations and everyday community conflicts.

Similarly, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, in
coordination with the Embassy of Canada in Buenos
Aires and the non-governmental organization Latin
American Security and Defence Network, has begun to
develop an assessment project about the status quo of the
inclusion of the gender perspective in the 10 ministries
involved in the implementation of the resolution 1325
(2000) national action plan. In that regard, it is expected
that the results of that mapping will be ready by March
2019. Those are some examples of concrete measures to
increase the participation of women in conflict prevent
and resolution processes, and we hope that they can
serve as the basis for a fruitful exchange of relevant
good practices.

In conclusion, we reiterate once again the strong
support of Argentina for the implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda, and the
fundamental role played by gender equality and the
empowerment of all women and girls in promoting
the agency and the active participation of all women
in the prevention of conflicts, the peaceful settlement
of conflicts, peacebuilding efforts and post-
conflict accountability.

