Mr. Touray (Sierra Leone): As you know,
Mr. President, Sierra Leone is in the labyrinth of a
post-conflict situation. We are also on the Council's
agenda. We therefore welcome the convening of
another meeting on the issue of women and peace and
security, which this time focuses on measures taken to
respond to the needs of women and girls in
post-conflict situations. I would like to thank you, Sir,
for taking the initiative. I also congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of October. My thanks also go to the
entire membership of the Council and to the Secretary-
General for their continued engagement in promoting
and protecting the role of women in conflict prevention
and resolution, peacebuilding and the fight against
sexual violence in armed conflict.
I would also like to register my delegation's
thoughts and sincere condolences to the peoples of the
two Samoas, Indonesia and the Philippines after the
recent disasters that have befallen their communities.

As we meet today to evaluate the progress made
so far in the implementation of this historic resolution,
my delegation is delighted to note that much progress
has been made in the implementation of the relevant
resolutions adopted in that regard at the levels of our
individual countries, the United Nations and other
related institutions. We are particularly encouraged by
the collective resolve over the years to address the
issue of gender equality and the advancement and
empowerment of women, which is evident in the
number of resolutions and presidential statements
adopted by the Council alone, not to mention those
adopted by the General Assembly.

Almost two months ago, on 7 August, we met in
the Chamber to assess the progress we have all made in
implementing resolution 1820 (2008), which was
adopted in June of last year and pertained to the use of
sexual violence in armed conflict. During that debate,
we provided a detailed account of our own experience
with sexual exploitation and abuse, which was used as
a tactic of war by the belligerent forces during our
decade-long civil war. We also highlighted the
legislative and administrative measures adopted to
address that scourge, as well as the challenges faced in
their implementation.

We made concrete proposals on how we could
work in concert to prevent and respond to sexual
violence, including with regard to the need to appoint a
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
women, peace and security to lead our collective
response to the use of sexual violence in armed
conflict. That is why we wholeheartedly welcome the
recent adoption, on 30 September, of resolution 1888
(2009) to complement resolution 1820 (2008), which
was the first-ever resolution to recognize the threats
posed by sexual violence to the maintenance of
sustainable peace and security. We further reiterate our
support for the Secretary-General's call for the
appointment of a Special Representative to enhance
effective coordination.

In addition to the international human rights
instruments dedicated to the promotion and protection
of the rights and welfare of women and children that
we have ratified, Sierra Leone, as a post-conflict
country, has continued to demonstrate its strong
commitment to promoting the agenda of women and
girls by mainstreaming their concerns into our national
development policies, programmes and plans - as
evident in our setting up of a ministry devoted to the
affairs of women and children, the adoption of a
national policy on both gender mainstreaming and the
advancement of women, the amendment of laws
considered to be discriminatory against women, as well
as the inclusion of this issue into our poverty reduction
strategy paper.

Consistent with those commitments, and with a
view to ensuring that our hard-earned peace and
democracy are sustained, we have continued to adopt
practical measures to respond to the needs of our
women and girls, especially in areas such as decision-
making and women's full participation in, and
ownership of, peacebuilding and recovery processes,
health, education, protection against abuse,
exploitation and violence and combating HIV/AIDS.

Driven by the conviction that, as principal
victims of war, women and their children should be
brought on board in peacemaking, peacebuilding and
peace consolidation processes, as well as with regard to
national recovery, some practical measures have been
taken by our Government along those lines. In the
years since the Lome Peace Agreement and the Beijing
Conference, there has been considerable improvement
in the status of women in Sierra Leone at the national,
regional and international levels vis-a-vis their
participation in public affairs.

There has also been an increase in women's
representation in decision-making positions. Women
are now appointed to important ministerial positions in
the areas of foreign affairs, gender and housing. They
were already represented in 2000 in the Ministry of
Development and Economic Planning. Women have
headed important Government commissions, such as
the National Commission for Democracy and Human
Rights and, quite recently, the National Electoral
Commission. They have also been appointed
Chairpersons of strategic parastatal bodies and given
ambassadorial positions. As I speak, we now have
more female heads of chancery in our diplomatic
missions than ever before.

In the security sector, one of the steps we have
taken to demonstrate our commitment to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) was to

establish an institution known as Women in Security
Sector-Sierra Leone, which has a mandate to promote
the issue of women, peace and security. As a further
demonstration of our commitment to see women in
management positions in the security sector, a female
combatant officer was promoted to the rank of
brigadier and appointed assistant chief of defence staff
for personnel and training. Similarly, a senior female
police officer is now the assistant inspector-general of
police for professional standards.

Producing a child-friendly version of the Truth
and Reconciliation Commission's report was meant to
increase the involvement of children in the process.

The 50/50 Group, a non-partisan organization
that works to increase women's influence in public
policy through sensitization has improved the public
perception of women in politics. In its drive for gender
equality, it has brought on board other partners to look
into laws that are discriminatory against women.

In 2002 and 2004 we organized a series of nation-
wide training programmes for female aspirants to both
parliamentary and local government elections. The
training was meant to provide female aspirants with the
relevant skills to overcome some of the barriers that
have over the years inhibited them from taking an
active part in politics. We are also raising awareness
for a 30 per cent quota for women's representation in
the Cabinet.

In 2001, we embarked upon setting up a task
force for women in politics within the Ministry of
Social Welfare, Gender and Children's Affairs to work
on reducing barriers to women's participation in
politics, increase the registration of women voters and
advocate for women's political empowerment.
However, the task force, which would have been in a
better position to lobby and advocate for an increase in
the participation of women in public activities, could
not be sustained owing to the lack of funds.

It is also important to note the Government's
support for the Mano River Women's Peace Network,
an organization comprised of women from Guinea,
Liberia and Sierra Leone that has worked to
complement nationally driven initiatives to consolidate
peace, prevent future conflicts and restore the
confidence needed to establish sustainable peace and
security, not only in the Mano River Basin but also in
Africa as a whole.

A major priority of my Government has been a
commitment to ensure that our women and girls enjoy
the highest attainable standards of health in our bid to
achieve the objective of healthy living. In that regard,
we have continued to take initiatives that are consistent
with Millennium Development Goals 4 and 5 by
embarking upon extensive programmes to enhance
maternal and infant health care. The sensitization
campaign on immunization, family planning, obstetric
care and the training of traditional birth attendants,
among other actions, is contributing to a reduction in
maternal and infant mortality rates.

Even in the face of the current global economic
meltdown, the Government of Sierra Leone has not
relented in adopting measures to mitigate the impact of
the crisis on health care delivery services for our
women and girls by adopting a gender-sensitive
response to the issue. The Government of Sierra Leone
has made commitments to support the right of women
and girls to basic health care delivery services. For
instance, quite recently, at a high-level event on the
sidelines of the general debate that was co-hosted by
the British Prime Minister and the President of the
World Bank on the theme "Investing in Our Common
Future: Healthy Women, Healthy Children - More
money for health and more health for the money",
President Ernest Bai Koroma of Sierra Leone made a
commitment to launch a new health sector strategic
plan to respond to challenges such as the high cost of
drugs and inadequate facilities and health care delivery
services, in particular for those residing in rural areas.
The President views those challenges as detrimental to
his agenda for change in the area of health; and thus
the need for the new health policy sector strategic plan,
which is intended to achieve the following.
First, the plan aims to introduce a fair health care
financing mechanism that includes the protection of
women and children through the abolition of fees
charged for services. Secondly, it is intended to move
us towards universal coverage, especially with regard
to safe motherhood and child health. Thirdly, it will
endeavour to improve collaboration with partners,
including in strengthening the transparency and
accountability of health spending and in enhancing
accountability to citizens. In order to achieve those
priorities, the President also pledged to increase health
sector spending to the 15 per cent target of the Abuja
Declaration.

Under the Roll Back Malaria programme, the
President of Sierra Leone joined other African leaders
to launch an African leaders' malaria alliance. At the
same time, he made another commitment to defeat
malaria, which is a major killer of children and women,
and in particular of pregnant women.

We have made significant strides in the area of
education by adopting affirmative action to promote
girl-child education - a measure taken to eliminate
gender disparity in education. In order to translate that
into reality, we have introduced free and compulsory
primary education and created incentives to encourage
the retention of girls in schools. That has led to a
higher primary school enrolment of girls in recent
years.

In addressing the need for those children whose
educations were interrupted by the war, or who never
had the opportunity to attend school, we have modified
some of our education programmes to cater to children
10 to 15 years of age by introducing a programme
providing complimentary rapid education for primary
schools, in which the normal six-year primary
education programme has been compressed to three
years in order to give beneficiaries an opportunity to
eventually join the formal education system.

Several other measures taken to eliminate gender
disparity and promote the education of the girl child
have also yielded positive results. For instance, more
parents are now proud to send their girls to school,
even in regions of the country that were previously
against the education of girls.

I do not wish to repeat all that was said in the
previous debate on the use of sexual violence in armed
conflict. Rather, I would like to place on record the
following additional measures taken to contain that
phenomenon.

First, with assistance from UNICEF and other
development partners, we have worked to reunite war-
affected children with their families and have been able
to successfully reintegrate them into their communities.
Secondly, we have set up a couple of technical and
vocational training institutions in most areas in the
country to keep them gainfully engaged. Thirdly, we
have enacted a law against human trafficking to
address the problem of human trafficking and
abduction as a cross-cutting issue.

The global fight against the HIV and AIDS
pandemic remains a priority of the Government of
Sierra Leone. That is why we see the move to develop
policies and guidelines relating to children and HIV
and AIDS, such as support for the prevention of
mother-to-child transmission, as well as pediatric care,
as appropriate and timely.

With barely a year until the tenth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) in October
2010, we in Sierra Leone still believe that, in spite of
the gains accrued thus far, there is still a need for more
action if we are to fully implement resolution 1325
(2000) and other relevant resolutions.

For our part, given our post-conflict situation,
much has been done to promote and protect the rights
of our women and girls. Nonetheless, we earnestly
believe that we still need to do more if our women and
girls are to fully enjoy their inalienable right to a life
free of discrimination, abuse and exploitation.
Achieving women's full and equal participation and
representation at all levels of Government, in
Parliament and in the judiciary, which already headed
by a female chief justice and with no less than three
female Supreme Court judges and a woman heading
the Office of Administrator and Registrar General, is
still a major objective of our Government.

The capacity of our national machinery for the
advancement of women is, however, restricted by a
lack of much-needed human and financial resources.
Health and education facilities remain inadequate,
especially in rural areas. Cultural practices that favour
boys over girls still exist, though on a minimal scale.
We have yet to introduce human rights education,
which has the potential to increase the quality of
education and respect for all in the learning
environment, into our school curriculum. The
increasing number of street children, especially child
hawkers, those orphaned by AIDS and other vulnerable
young people, has become a critical issue, particularly
in the face of the HIV and AIDS pandemic. There is
also a need to pay attention to the matter of training
personnel to deal with issues such as human
trafficking, juvenile justice and the sexual abuse of
children.

In the light of these constraints, I would like to
avail myself of this opportunity to thank all our
development partners for their continued support for
our efforts at empowering our women and at

transforming them from victims of sexual abuse,
violence and exploitation into respected members of
our global community. Only through sustained
collaborative efforts can we succeed in promoting their
rights and contain gender-based violence. That is why
we will always recognize the role of the United
Nations, particularly the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission, in efforts to make women
and gender issues central to the peacebuilding agenda
of the United Nations.

Let me conclude on the note that, as a nation
emerging from a conflict situation, Sierra Leone has
done much indeed to promote and protect the needs of
our women and girls. With continued political will and
commitment, we earnestly believe that we can still do
more with the available resources given the right level
of international support, assistance and collaboration.

