Ms. Rasi (Finland): First of all, let me thank the
Secretary-General for his recent report on women and
peace and security (S/2007/567). As the report
demonstrates, progress has been made in a number of
fields in implementing Security Council resolution
1325 (2000). Yet, as we all know, a lot of work still
remains to be done in order to overcome institutional
and organizational challenges and gaps. Those
challenges have been identified accurately in the
System-wide Action Plan for 2008-2009.

For more than 50 years, Finland has participated
in peacekeeping operations. Finland also has a long
history of advancing women's rights, both nationally
and internationally. During the Finnish European
Union presidency in 2006, the Council of the European
Union decided that gender aspects would be
incorporated in all activities of the European Security
and Defence Policy. To facilitate that task, all European
07-55957
Union member States developed a checklist on
mainstreaming gender into the European Security and
Defence Policy. The adoption of those two instruments
was an important step in the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).

Finland is now in the process of drafting a
national action plan for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). We, in close cooperation with
civil society, are committed to doing our part to ensure
that women's full potential is utilized in the work for
better security. The action plan will pay special
attention to the development of a gender perspective
for national capabilities. The fact that United Nations
peacekeeping missions and crisis management
operations of the European Union and other regional
organizations are dependent on national capabilities
means that it is crucial that a gender perspective be
integrated into the training of national forces and
civilian personnel. We will also pay attention to
women's recruitment for crisis management operations.
We should not underestimate the power of example in
crisis areas. Attention will also be paid to women's and
girls' rights and protection. Finland will also consider
setting up a pool of experts trained in gender issues.

Let me also highlight the need for increased
attention to facilitating women's equal and active
participation, from conflict prevention to peace
negotiations to reconstruction and political
participation. As providers, professionals, mothers and
spouses, women feel the impact of conflicts more
strongly and often better understand the different
dimensions of conflict. Without women's involvement
there will be no sustainable peace and we may risk
losing the support and respect of the majority of the
population.

We, the international community, are in a key
position to promote gender-balanced participation by
all parties. In this context, I would like to refer to the
important work towards a just and sustainable peace
undertaken by the International Women's Commission,
founded by a group of Palestinian and Israeli women
leaders and the United Nations Development Fund for
Women (UNIFEM). The President of Finland, Tarja
Halonen, is one of the honorary Chairs of the
Commission. The Commission has stressed the
importance of involving women in the peace process
between Israel and the Palestinians, and works to
include gender equality and a gender perspective in the
attempts to solve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. In the
3
same vein, other locally initiated dialogues, such as the
face-to-face meetings of the Kosovo Women's Network
and Serbia's Women in Black, should be recognized
and encouraged.

Finally, I would like to assure you, Sir, of
Finland's commitment to close cooperation with you
and the Members of the United Nations in the
implementation of the 2008-2009 System-wide Action
Plan.

