Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank all our briefers and visiting Ministers for their
remarks. I am particularly grateful that we have had
the opportunity to hear a voice from civil society in
this Chamber today, something that is even more vital
at a time when so many such voices are being ignored,
threatened or silenced around the world. That is great,
and it is also great that so many people are attending the
debate here today, but in the spirit of trying to improve
still further how we do things here, I would like to
make a few points frankly.

We meet in this format once a year and repeat
what we already know - that we need more women at
the negotiating table, that peace deals stand a greater
chance of succeeding with women taking part, that we
must turn our words into action. And yet, year after
year, session after session, Secretary-General's report
after report, the actual implementation of this agenda
still falls way too short. We have had resolution after
resolution - eight of them since resolution 1325
(2000) - and yet the promise of that first historic text
still remains unfulfilled.

So I encourage everyone speaking later today to be
specific about what his or her country has been doing
since we last met in this format to make the women
and peace and security agenda a reality - and then,
ideally, to commit to doing even more. This year, the
United Kingdom has worked to increase women's
participation in conflict resolution in some of the most
fragile countries in the world: Somalia, Syria, Yemen
and Afghanistan. We have helped women in parliament,
civil society, the military and business to increase their
voice, influence and participation, and we will keep
doing so next year.

But we also know that the agenda on women and
peace and security is about more than work in individual
countries. So many of the dangers that women face
in conflict are shared ones that are found in every
conflict, such as sexual violence and the stigmatization
of survivors of such horrific crimes. And since they are
shared challenges, we must all share in the response
if we are to affect international change. That is why
the United Kingdom has championed the prevention of
sexual violence in conflict; why we launched the global
principles on stigma in the General Assembly this year;
why we are running 23 projects in conflict and post-
conflict countries to support survivors, end stigma and
deliver justice; and why we have contributed $2 million
to the Women's Peace and Humanitarian Fund. I urge
others to contribute, too.

Turning to peacekeeping, this year United Kingdom
troops on large-scale overseas missions, whether for
the United Nations or anyone else, are now receiving
predeployment training on preventing sexual violence
and on the women and peace and security agenda more
broadly. Alongside our Bangladeshi and Canadian
partners, we will be launching a new global network
of military gender champions at the 2017 United
Nations Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial Conference
in Vancouver next month. We strongly support the
Secretary-General's commitment to gender parity
and his efforts to increase the number of women in
peacekeeping. However, the women and peace and
security agenda is about far more than numbers. We are
concerned, frankly, about the fact that the Secretariat
is deprioritizing gender advisers in United Nations
missions, and we urge the United Nations to reinstate
accountability through its compacts with United
Nations leaders.

In the United Kingdom this year, Baroness Hale
became the first woman ever to head our Supreme
Court, which makes it the first time in our history
that we have had women as our Head of State, Head of
Government, and head of the most senior court in the
land. This year we also appointed our first ever special
envoy for gender equality, putting that issue at the heart
of our foreign policy. But despite such historic steps,
we have more to do. That is why next year we will be
launching the United Kingdom's fourth national action
plan, building on progress made, lessons learned and
our discussions with civil society and focus countries.

My final point is that there is more that all of us
around this table can do - both internally, in the
missions and ministries that we lead, and externally,
in the Security Council and around the United Nations.
Internally, I commend to the Council the gender compact
for the United Kingdom Mission that I launched this
year. I encourage all to read it, steal its good ideas and
apply them in their own missions. And outside our
missions, we must practice every day what we preach
in the Security Council. It is easy to talk about women
and peace and security when that is the subject on our
agenda, as it is today, but the challenge is to talk about
it when our agenda is Syria or Somalia or South Sudan.
We can all do better on that, and I encourage everyone
to come together to do so.

