The Deputy Secretary-General: I thank
speakers for their incredibly supportive response to
the opportunity that we have had to share about our
visit - but, more important, about the big issues.

The representative of Chad referred to the
importance of the recalibrated United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel, which cannot be underscored
enough. While we await the African Union's review
of the Strategy, one thing we have learned is the need

to be better coordinated and coherent and really work
towards ajoined-up response in terms of investments.

We also thank the representative of France because,
along with France, Germany and the European Union,
the Alliance for the Sahel has also been incredibly
important in bringing this all together. I think that
many of the Heads of State in the region emphasize the
need for coordination and living up to the commitments
that were made five or six years ago, which have yet to
realize any benefits. Had we done so, we probably would
not be in the position that we are in now. The urgency of
getting behind one strategy is really important. We are
grateful that that is an outcome of the Security Council.

I must say that the real concern for me is that
that urgency must come when countries are grappling
with a fragile State and everything that comes with
it - the expectations of people and trying to maintain
a democracy, which is not just about elections. It is
about the three arms of Government, which need to be
supported equally, and that gap is closing as countries
inch towards becoming failed States. That is a very
real concern. We saw that on the ground. We saw the
concerns of Heads of State there.

It was reflected in many instances. As the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Sweden said, we should not have
been going to fistula clinics and seeing them full of
young girls. We should have been going to classrooms.
Instead, here we were in Niamey, with three centres.
We only saw one, and they had huge demands to
expand. We were really looking to say that we should
be looking at prevention, and prevention meant getting
girls into school and investments in development. I
suppose that the eight-point plan for the Republic of the
Niger did have money for education, but there is just no
fiscal space for it because funding is being taken up by
the responsibilities to care for migrants coming back
across the borders from Lybia, as well as by security
issues related to handling Boko Haram.

I think the other concern is that Boko Haram is
becoming much more organized. In its own way, it is
providing an alternative to what Governments cannot
provide for their peoples. There is an urgent need to
stop that trend. It was not just the suicide bombers
that we saw, who obviously in some cases were either
hypnotized or forced into it, but there are many willing
girls who are now following and communities that
are sympathizing with many of these terrorist groups.
That, I think, is far more dangerous and we need to turn
it back.

We also saw the challenge of the conflicts between
farmers and herders across the region. Again, I would
emphasize that population growth and other dynamics,
such as urbanization, and the stress they put on food
security are something we have not really looked at.
We have gone to the symptoms and looked at them
from the political, ethnic or religious point of view. It is
much more than that, and I think that we need a better,
joined-up response to how we articulate the Sustainable
Development Goal on cities, for instance. This happens
in context and has repercussions on insecurity.
I would say that we did see a really wonderful
opportunity of getting behind a cross-border initiative
of the Lake Chad Basin Commission to draft its plan,
which really answered a number of the issues we had
and took care of the context of climate and conflict.
But it needs to be urgently supported. There are
frameworks and vehicles, checks and balances that we
can put in there with respect to the areas that we really
worry about or the risks that we think we can mitigate
through a better joined-up partnership of multilateral
system. But it needs to happen now.

I think that reforms in the development system
really do help in bringing about good coordination.
We saw excellent coordination in the humanitarian and
development nexus in Chad and in South Sudan, where
of course the tensions probably helped us to come
together. We also saw it in the Niger, when they got
together with the ruling rural integrated programmes.

I would point to the African Union-United Nations
framework for peace, security and development. The
Secretary-General was there yesterday. They launched
the action plan for development, which includes the
Sahel Strategy. We believe that that represented a solid
step forward. Again, we would plead for support for
that and for the African Women Leaders Network. That
is a strong group. They will manage to put together and
launch the fund for women. It takes a different angle.
This time they are looking at building the capacities of
women fund managers, which means they are looking
to leverage resources that are available in the private
sector and elsewhere. It is not just a case of grants; it is
a case of how we leverage more funding for that. The
work continues.

