Mr. Motomura (Japan): At the outset, I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for your initiative in
convening this open meeting as a follow-up to Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000), entitled "Women and
peace and security".

With the adoption of Council resolution 1325
(2000) in October 2000 and the subsequent statement
by the President of the Security Council in October last
year, the linkage between international peace and
security and gender issues has been increasingly
recognized throughout the international community.
Indeed, there is a growing awareness of the negative
impact that armed conflict has on women and children
in particular and of the importance of women's
participation in post-conflict peace processes.

On the other hand, what is now needed is more
detailed information and analysis of concrete examples,
as well as recommendations and practical measures.
My delegation, therefore, looks forward to the results
of the study conducted by Ms. Angela King, Special
Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of
Women. We also look forward to the results of the
assessments by the two independent experts appointed
by the United Nations Development Fund for Women
on the impact of armed conflict on women and the role
of women in peace-building, as well as the report of
the Secretary-General to be submitted later this year.

The conclusions of these studies and reports will
be crucial in terms of giving direction and providing
concrete methodologies for the steady implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000).

Allow me to briefly describe the basic views and
concrete actions taken by my Government as regards
gender mainstreaming in the area of conflicts and
peacekeeping. First, I would like to draw special
attention to the active role Afghan women are playing
the post-conflict reconstruction of their country. As
Prime Minister Koizumi stated at the international
conference on reconstruction assistance to Afghanistan,
held in Tokyo earlier this year, one of the highest
priorities of Japan's assistance for Afghanistan's
reconstruction is the empowerment of women.

Japan has thus sent an expert to the Ministry of
Women's Affairs and has extended financial support
for the establishment of women's centres in
Afghanistan. Moreover, in February, Japan set up the
Advisory Council on Assistance to Women in
Afghanistan, taking into account the proposals of the
Security Council, and is determined to continuously
support the tremendous efforts the Afghan women
themselves are making to restore peace in their country.

Secondly, with the mandates of peacekeeping
operations becoming more multidimensional, it is
increasingly important that women's views are
integrated into their respective activities. I am pleased
to note that earlier this year the Japanese Government
for the first time dispatched seven women
peacekeepers to the United Nations peacekeeping
operations in East Timor, where they are now engaged
in coordination activities in such areas as
communication and translation. In addition, an
increasing number of Japanese women who are United
Nations staff members are working in the civilian
components of peacekeeping missions. The
Government of Japan will continuously strive to
increase the participation of women in peace operations
in various areas.

Thirdly, given the particular importance of gender
mainstreaming in the field, the Japanese Government
supported the recommendation of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, which was
endorsed by the General Assembly, that "the work of
gender focal points should have the proper back-up in
the Secretariat". In this context, my delegation hopes
that, as stated in General Assembly resolution 56/293
in June this year, the Secretariat will develop and
clearly explain a coherent policy on gender
mainstreaming in all United Nations peacekeeping
activities.

In October we will celebrate the second
anniversary of the adoption of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000). My delegation hopes that the
entire discussion at today's meeting will prove useful
in the ongoing efforts to follow up the resolution and
will be fully reflected in the report of the Secretary-
General.

In closing, let me assure you, Mr. President, of
Japan's readiness to contribute to the goals of this
important resolution in cooperation with all other
interested Member States.

