Mr. Al-Bader (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): First of
all, I should like, on behalf of Qatar, to thank the
Under-Secretary-General of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno,
and His Royal Highness Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-
Hussein, Adviser to the Secretary-General on Sexual
Exploitation and Abuse by United Nations
Peacekeeping Personnel, for their briefings.

Qatar attaches great importance to this matter and

to the serious accusations of breaches of conduct and

acts of sexual violence on the part of peacekeeping

contingents. We vigorously condemn such actions,

which are shameful, unjustifiable and unacceptable,

especially given that they target vulnerable persons -
the very persons we are supposed to be protecting.

Secondly, such actions sully the reputation of
peacekeeping operations, which are vital, as well as
that of the Organization - a very serious matter
indeed. We must study all of the various aspects of this
phenomenon and consult with the troop-contributing
countries so that we can put an end to all such
violations and breaches of conduct.

We must do so with the appropriate resources and
within the general framework of the United Nations.
We need to conduct investigations and adduce evidence
in cases of sexual exploitation, and impose the
appropriate sanctions. The participation and
cooperation of the troop-contributing countries is, of
course, pivotal to the success of this undertaking.

When a peacekeeping operation is established by
the Council, instructions and training must be given to
its personnel, and the gravity of acts of sexual
exploitation and abuse must be made clear. We must
sensitize contingents to United Nations standards in
this area. We need also to draw on Prince Zeid's report
as well as on the report of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations with respect to cases of
sexual abuse and to establish ethical-conduct teams
within the United Nations. We should also create a
climate and a culture on the ground that does not
tolerate this type of abuse.

Finally, we would like to pay tribute to those who
have fallen during peacekeeping operations for having
fulfilled their mission - those faithful soldiers of the
United Nations. We must not allow a few incidents to
cast a shadow on the lofty peacekeeping mission of the
United Nations.

