Mr. Shalgham (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I wish to welcome you,
Mr. President, among us and express our appreciation
to you for conducting our work in this important
meeting. We thank the delegation of Viet Nam for
organizing this important meeting. I would also like to
thank the Special Adviser on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women, the Executive Director of the
United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM) and the representative of the non
governmental organizations for their valuable statements.

Almost nine years have passed since the Security
Council adopted resolution 1325 (2000), during which
it also adopted several resolutions and presidential
statements on the protection of women during and after
armed conflict, their participation in the prevention of
conflict and post-conflict decision-making and their
role in the economic and social spheres. However, we
are still far from reaching the desired goals. Every field
report and all the data indicate that women and
children are increasingly the main victims of conflict,
often being the main targets of combatants and armed
groups who deliberately subject them to various forms
of aggression, human rights violations and forced
displacement. Unfortunately, those practices often
continue after the end of conflict.

In addressing the empowerment of women and
their special needs, especially in post-conflict
situations, we would be remiss if we failed to condemn
the physical and psychological suffering of Palestinian
women as a result of the Zionist occupying authority's
continuous violations of their human rights, its
violations of international law and its recent crimes in
Gaza.

We strongly condemn the plethora of ongoing
rampant acts of violence and aggression against women
and girls during and after armed conflict, including
those taking place in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Somalia and other regions. Libya would also
like to underscore the importance of promoting the role
of women in the political, social and economic spheres
during peacetime, as women are the main guarantors in
preventing the outbreak of conflict, anarchy and
insecurity and the ensuing crimes and human rights
violations.

Libya has therefore launched several initiatives to
empower women and enhance their role in African
countries. In cooperation with Nigeria and Cuba, we
have established a South-South health-care programme.
In 2006, we launched the Al-Qadhafi programme for
African youth, women and children, which places
particular emphasis on health care, education, vocational
training and human rights. Based on our belief in the
important role of women in civic peace and development,
our laws provide for full equality between men and
women. Women in Libya face no obstacle to being
legally employed, and Libyan women serve in senior
posts in the army, police and judicial system.

On the continental level, we would like to
reaffirm the commitment of all African States to gender
equality and the empowerment of women, in
implementation of the African Union's Constitutive
Act. In that regard, the African Union will soon launch
its African Women's Decade for the period 2010 to
2020. In addition, I am pleased to inform the Council
that the African Union's Department of Peace and
Security has issued a framework document on post-
conflict development and reconstruction that includes
guidelines on needs assessment. Both documents
contain strategies and procedures for the employment
of women and the reinvigoration of the employment
sector. The Economic Commission for Africa's
department for women's development and gender
equality will be the focal point responsible for
women's issues and their participation in African
Union activities, including the promotion of gender
equality and equal access by men and women to senior
positions and public office.

In 2004, the African Union adopted an action
plan at Ouagadougou that gave special priority to the
empowerment of women, their access to the workplace,
their effective participation in the adoption of poverty-
reduction strategies, the mainstreaming of gender issues
in all poverty-reduction programmes and policies and the
promotion of employment and equal opportunities for
men and women in the area of employment. That plan
included the following proposals for implementation.

First, women should be encouraged to participate
in free enterprise activities through the provision of
primary skills training and by increasing their access to
credit and capital. Secondly, a culture of free enterprise
should be supported by providing assistance to women
entrepreneurs. Thirdly, support should be mobilized for
the implementation of legislation that provides for
equal rights between men and women with respect to
land ownership, including guarantees for women's
rights to credit, inheritance and ownership, counselling
and services.

There is no doubt that the numerous resolutions
and presidential statements that have been adopted by
the Security Council constitute a major step towards

protecting women and promoting their rights.
However, it is not enough merely to adopt resolutions
and statements; they must be implemented. That
requires coordination and cooperation between the
relevant bodies of the United Nations, civil society
institutions, task forces of specialized agencies.
Regional organizations and relevant governmental and
non-governmental organizations to empower women in
peacekeeping, peacebuilding, humanitarian and
development processes. That will make an effective
contribution to States and to their implementation of
legislation and activities to prevent gender-based
violence and create an environment conducive to
accountability and reporting on women's status.

It is a source of concern that the promotion of the
rights of women and gender equality is often not
considered a priority in the aftermath of conflict. It is
for that reason that we have emphasized the importance
of women's development and empowerment on the
national level and in all areas of life.

