Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Margot Wallstrom, for her
comprehensive and valuable briefing and for the report

of the Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual
violence (S/2012/33). We welcome the efforts of the
Special Representative and share the principles and
objectives she outlined. I would also like to thank the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Ladsous, and the representative of the NGO
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security,
Ms. Megheirbi. We think the deliberations today will
promote our common interest in the subject.

India has been actively participating in the
Council's debates on the agenda item on women and
peace and security. It is a cross-cutting issue with a
multisectoral dimension and requires the active
participation of all Member States. I would therefore
like to thank you, Mr. President, and the delegation of
Togo for organizing this open debate, which affords
Member States an opportunity to discuss the progress
made in the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010)
and contributes to our ongoing consideration of the
subject.

It is estimated that today close to 90 per cent of
current casualties in wars and situations of armed
conflict are civilians, the majority of whom are women
and children. Obviously, women bear a
disproportionately large share of the burden of conflict,
but they have only a marginal say in matters of war and
peace. That is perhaps a function of the gender
imbalance in our societies, which is reflected in
positions of power and influence.

Despite that, women should not be Viewed solely
as victims of war. They also have to assume the key
role of ensuring family livelihoods in the midst of
chaos and destruction. They are particularly active in
peace movements at the grass-roots level and in
cultivating peace within their communities. Therefore,
the absence of women at the peace-negotiating table is
unconscionable. Some of the aspects highlighted by the
landmark Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) -
in particular the greater participation of women in
areas of conflict prevention, peace negotiation and
post-conflict reconstruction - are central to the issue.

Some solutions need to emerge from the conflict-
affected societies themselves. Others are more long-term
and structural, involving, inter alia, the encouragement
of democratic ideals and practices, effective
improvements in economic and social conditions and

12-2393]
expansion of opportunities for education and
productive employment.

Situations of conflict vary. Each has its own
causes and consequences. Clearly, there can be no
off-the-shelf remedies or panaceas. We need to take
practical and effective steps to mitigate the impact of
conflict on women and to enhance their ability to
restore and preserve peace.

It is a matter of deep regret that the international
community must repeatedly debate the issue of sexual
and other forms of violence against women and girls in
situations of armed conflict. That abhorrent behaviour,
whether perpetrated by the parties to the armed conflict
or by others, must be unequivocally, unambiguously
and resolutely condemned. There should be no
tolerance for gender-based violence. All such cases
must be investigated and the perpetrators prosecuted.

Some argue that human rights law and
international humanitarian law do not offer enough
protection to women and children. Such postulation is
a bit extreme. Women's rights and needs have received
the attention they deserve in the codification of
international law. The challenge is the effective
implementation of the laws and the availability of
adequate resources for capacity-building wherever
required. That alone will ensure the real impact of our
efforts on the ground.

By definition, it is States that are parties to the
treaty-based system of international law. By and large,
they respect them, and when they do not, penalties
arise under provisions of the relevant treaties.
However, the most egregious crimes against women in
times of conflict have been and are being committed by
non-State actors, often warring against Governments.
They obey no laws and, as experience has shown
throughout the past decade, are immune to coercive or
punitive measures. The Council therefore needs to
consider, in practical terms, how non-State actors, who
are responsible for the bulk of the crimes that continue
to be committed against women, can be effectively
tackled.

On the part of the United Nations, there has been
modest progress in areas such as gender mainstreaming
in peacekeeping operations and training of peacekeeping
personnel on gender perspectives. In that context, we
commend Special Representative Wallstrom for having
brought a new synergy in addressing the issue of
sexual violence in situations of armed conflict.

12-2393]

My country has taken a lead in that process,
while conscious of the need to incorporate essential
elements of the gender-mainstreaming policy in the
predeployment training of its peacekeepers. India's
formed police unit (FPU) of 100 personnel in Liberia
was the first of its kind among United Nations
peacekeeping operations. As the largest troop-
contributing country in United Nations history, we are
very proud of the exemplary record of our
peacekeepers. I might add that we are willing to
increase our contribution of female FPUs.

The Secretary-General, in his report, referred to
efforts to establish a framework of early warning
indicators specific to conflict-related sexual violence.
The United Nations has also developed a set of
indicators as global markers of progress in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We have
taken note of those efforts. The development of such
indicators, benchmarks and guidelines should involve a
process of broad intergovernmental scrutiny and
approval before their eventual adoption. In that
connection, one must be cognizant of the difficulty in
obtaining credible and verifiable data from conflict
situations.

India will continue to contribute positively to
United Nations efforts in protecting vulnerable sectors
of the population, particularly women and children, in
conflict and post-conflict societies. I would also like to
emphasize that the international community needs to
enhance cooperation by providing new and additional
financial resources, sharing experiences and building
capacity in the areas of justice and the rule of law.

The women and children in our lives ensure our
future. They must live in security. While there is much
talk of the need to safeguard the interests of women
and children, there is less talk of cooperative efforts to
ensure sustained economic growth, which alone can
eradicate the poverty and deprivation that cause their
exclusion.

Several studies point out that most of the global
poor are women. Globalization has affected both men
and women, but women bear the double burden of
inequality and marginalization. Empowering them is
therefore both crucial and urgent. In considering the
role of women in peace and security, the Council, I am
certain, will bear in mind the wider perspective of
women's empowerment, development and peace.

