Mrs. Briz Gutierrez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I wish to begin by thanking you, Sir, for
convening this dialogue and the representatives of the
Secretariat for the interesting and inspiring briefings
we have heard this morning. They have set the tone for
today's discussion.

Since the adoption of Security Council resolution
1325 (2000), Guatemala has supported Council
members' efforts to ensure its ongoing and
comprehensive implementation. We have seen the
growing interest throughout the world in the situation
of women and girl children in armed conflict. We have
strenuously condemned the persistence of gender-based
violence in conflict situations, as well as sexual
exploitation, violence in general and abuse.

We have also stressed the need to put an end to
the impunity of the perpetrators so as to bring peace,
justice and genuine reconciliation to conflict areas,
thereby ensuring that the social fabric of communities
does not deteriorate further and in order to construct a
lasting and robust peace.

Guatemala suffered more than three decades of
armed conflict, and during the negotiations on
Guatemala's peace agreements signed in 1996, an
entire section specifically referring to the importance
of the role of women in maintaining peace, in
particular indigenous women, was incorporated. There
is also an entire section on the importance of women's
participation in strengthening the impact of civil
society. In that connection, we share Ms. McAskie's
vision of the catalytic role and comparative advantages
that the Peacebuilding Commission can have in that
respect in situations on the ground.

We also thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2006/770), which discussed frankly and
comprehensively the shortcomings in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), thus making

it possible to adopt the collective measures needed to
correct them. At the same time, it pointed out the
opportunities that the Action Plan offers for the
resolution's implementation and recognized the
progress made so far.

We wish to highlight the work accomplished by
the Office of the Special Adviser on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women in implementing resolution
1325 (2000) and the Action Plan. We thank the
International Research and Training Institute for the
Advancement of Women for preparing the guide for
national action planning entitled "Securing Equality,
Engendering Peace", which will undoubtedly assist in
national capacity-building with a gender perspective.

We wish to express our gratitude to all of the
system's agencies and funds that have worked to
ensure women's participation at all stages of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding processes -
particularly the United Nations Development Fund for
Women, which has been promoting the participation of
Guatemalan women in electoral processes and in
leadership training in communities and local
governments since 1997. We also thank the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, which has contributed to
the effort to increase women's participation in
Guatemalan contingents on United Nations missions.

As we say in my country, there is a wide gap
between words and deeds. The objective of gender
equality is still far from being attained, despite the fact
that it is established in the Charter, reiterated in various
instruments of international law and emphasized in
resolution 1325 (2000). It is regrettable that, as the
report reveals, six years after the adoption of the
Security Council resolution and 61 years after the
establishment of the United Nations, only 26.07 per
cent of the Council's resolutions include language
relating to women or gender. That shows us that our
level of compliance with the commitments undertaken
in the area of women's advancement still falls well
below expectations. More support is needed in this
area, where it is most lacking.

In Guatemala, we understand very well the
importance of women's participation in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes in their
communities of origin. A gender perspective must be
systematically incorporated into all the multifaceted
efforts of Member States and of the United Nations and
should become a primary component of their policies,
programmes and activities. But, above all, it must be a
central theme in the maintenance of international peace
and security.

Guatemala's army has included women since it
resumed its participation in peacekeeping operations.
Currently, out of the 85 Guatemalan personnel
deployed in the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti, seven are women. For the first time in our
history, a woman lieutenant has been appointed to
command an operations unit. There are also seven
women among the 114 Guatemalan soldiers deployed
in the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

For all those reasons, our delegation agrees with
the measures recommended by the Secretary-General
in his report, particularly the establishment of an
effective accountability, monitoring and reporting
system for a new cycle of the Action Plan, which will
be renewed in 2007. We hope that it will cover the
entire system. We agree that the renewal should be
prepared in accordance with the conclusions and
measures set out in the report. In particular, we support
the Action Plan's renewal to make it a tool for results-
based programming, monitoring and reporting.

We also believe that heads of units, special
representatives and envoys of the Secretary-General
should be held responsible for mainstreaming a gender
perspective into policies and programmes. Moreover,
we should strengthen capacity for full implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), improve coordination of the
system, particularly on the ground, and provide
incentives for the participation of all interested sectors
of civil society.

Not to involve women and girls at all levels of
capacity-building in the area of peacebuilding would
be to make them the most vulnerable group, shown no
mercy by the enemies of peaceful coexistence.

