Mr. Klimkin (Ukraine) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I should like to thank the Spanish presidency
of the Security Council for having convened this very
important debate, which allows us to reiterate and
renew our commitment to the full, timely and effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security.

My colleague Foreign Minister Garcia Margallo
of Spain, in his statement in the general debate of
the current session of the General Assembly (see A/70/PV.21), said that the twenty-first century would
be the century of women, and I agree with him.
Furthermore, I believe that 2015 is a pivotal year for
gender equality and women's empowerment. We have
agreed to the inclusion of a separate Goal on gender
among the Sustainable Development Goals and to the
mainstreaming of the gender perspective throughout
the entire programme. This year, we commemorate the
fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000) and the twentieth anniversary of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action.

(spoke in English)

This year marks 15 years since the adoption of the
landmark resolution establishing the basis for the women
and peace and security agenda and calling for the special
protection and the full and equal participation of women
in all conflict-prevention, conflict-resolution and post-
conflict peacebuilding efforts. Resolution 1325 (2000)
and a further six relevant resolutions adopted from
2008 to 2013 continue to provide main guidelines and a
real framework for Member States in the development
of policy and measures in the above-mentioned areas
as well as in the field of minimizing the impact of
conflicts on women and girls.

In this sense, we welcome the adoption of
resolution 2242 (2015), submitted by Spain, as an
important instrument to reflect all the changes that
have happened since 2000 and introduce a new and
important perspective into the women and peace and
security agenda. Indeed, women tend to suffer more
hardships as a direct result of economic consequences of
conflict, are at increased risk of human trafficking and
of being forced into sex work, and face the acute effects
of undermined health systems. Gender-based violence,
including the systematic use of rape and increased
domestic violence, has been widely recognized as a
pervasive occurrence in conflict.

Ukraine reaffirms its support for the United Nations
zero-tolerance policy on all forms of sexual exploitation
and abuse by United Nations peacekeepers, including all
civilian staff deployed to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. The proper conduct by and discipline over
all personnel deployed in United Nations peacekeeping
operations are vital to their effectiveness. Ukraine,
as an important peacekeeping contributor, welcomes
the fact that the comprehensive reviews of the United
Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding architecture
are taking place at the same time as and in interaction
with the women and peace and security agenda review.
Of course, we strongly support international efforts
aimed at addressing the full range of human rights
violations and abuses faced by women in armed conflict
and post-conflict situations.

Ukraine knows at first hand how disproportionate
the impact of armed conflicts on women can be. Due
to the Russian aggression against Ukraine, the issues
covered by the landmark resolution 1325 (2000) are of
particular importance to our country. A vast majority
of internally displaced persons are women, many of
whom become the sole caretakers of children and older
relatives. As of today, around 1.5 million internally
displaced persons (IDPs) have been forced to leave
their homes as a result of Russia's occupation of Crimea
and aggression in Donbas. About two-thirds of adult
internally displaced persons are women.

The Government of Ukraine is undertaking a
number of targeted steps to address the challenges
that the ongoing foreign aggression places on women
in Ukraine. Ukrainian authorities fully understand the
specific needs ofIDP families, and women in particular.
The law of Ukraine on IDPs adopted in 2014 was
welcomed by the international community, including
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees. The law is aimed at ensuring the rights
and freedoms of internally displaced persons, including
women, and at addressing key issues in this area,
inter alia, by facilitating humanitarian assistance.
On 5 March, our legislation on IDPs was amended in
order to strengthen their social protection, including by
addressing the issue of unemployment.

The full use of the knowledge, skills and experience
of Ukrainian women is vital to reaching a solution of
the current situation in and around Ukraine. We can cite
a number of other examples of women's engagement.
They prepare, collect and distribute food, clothing and
a lot more in the course of providing humanitarian
assistance. Another example is our female Member
of Parliament, Ms. Iryna Gerashchenko, who was
appointed last year as Special Envoy of the President
of Ukraine on the peaceful settlement of the situation
in Donbas.

We would like especially to reiterate our
commitment to ensuring that global obligations on the
women and peace and security agenda are integrated
into our domestic policies and laws in order to
contribute to the empowerment of women and elevate
the importance of women's participation and leadership
in all aspects of peace and security, as well as post-
conflict recovery and reconstruction.

Ukraine confirms its political will and readiness
to assume the following commitments and pledges in
line with the main objective of this open debate: first,
to strengthen the participation of women in political
life and public decision-making; secondly, to increase
women's role in ensuring peace and security; and
thirdly, to elaborate and implement programmes on
the assistance to women from vulnerable groups and
women who have suffered from domestic violence.

The main document that will enable us to
implement these pledges is a national action plan
on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
The Government has already developed a draft
of this document, in close consultation and close
interaction with agencies of the United Nations and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
as well as civil society. The action plan is aimed at
promoting women's greater participation in military,
political, economic and social life, the peace process,
the recovery process, the prevention and combating of
gender-based violence, and the reintegration of persons
affected by the consequences of the ongoing aggression
against my country.

Another important document is the national human
rights strategy that was approved by the President of
Ukraine in August. According to the strategy, ensuring
equal rights for women and men; combating gender-
based violence, human trafficking and slavery; and
combating domestic violence are defined as key
objectives ofthe human rights policy okaraine for thes
coming years. Among recent steps, I can also mention a
local elections law signed in August. The law stipulates
that in multiple-mandate constituencies at the local and
regional levels, not less than 30 per cent of each party
list should be represented by women or men.

In conclusion, I should like to draw special attention
to the case of Nadiya Savchenko who represents the
female face of what is going on in Ukraine. A political
prisoner and Member of the Parliamentary Assembly
of the Council of Europe, Nadiya Savchenko is being
kept in custody by the Russian Federation with no
legal grounds and despite the fact that under the Minsk
arrangements all hostages and illegally detained
persons must be released. I should like to reiterate my
appeal to the international community to maintain
its political and diplomatic pressure on the Russian
Federation to cease the practice of suppressing human
rights and immediately release Nadiya Savchenko and
other Ukrainian political prisoners.

