Mr. Khan (Indonesia): At the outset, please allow
me to join the previous speakers in expressing the
appreciation of the Government of Indonesia for the
convening of this open debate on women, peace and
security. I would also like to thank the Executive Director
of UN-Women and the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations for their important briefings.

Let me begin by quoting the message of Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon that

"sustainable peace is possible only with women's
full participation - their perspectives, their
leadership, their daily, equal presence wherever we
seek to make and keep the peace".

In keeping with that message, Indonesia does not
view women as merely passive victims of conflict
situations. They are also agents and important
contributors to the many dimensions of peacebuilding
processes. Therefore, Indonesia is committed to
implementing resolution 1325 (2000) on women and
peace and security and will work to ensure women's
full participation at all levels in conflict prevention,
conflict resolution and peacebuilding.

While we have covered significant ground towards
fully implementing resolution 1325 (2000), progress
has yet to be made in implementing some key aspects of
that resolution. We recognize that decisive action must
be taken in the following areas. First, the number of
women involved as United Nations peacekeepers needs
to be increased in the future. Secondly, the security,
legal and justice infrastructure required to ensure the
safety and security of women in many conflict and post-
conflict settings needs to be strengthened. Thirdly, the
level of participation of women in peace negotiations,
preventive efforts and key decision-making processes
related to peace and security needs to be enhanced.

In light of those objectives, Indonesia has taken
steps at various levels towards their achievement.
For example, women personnel have been actively
involved as military and police observers in Indonesia's
contingents in the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon, the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur and the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

On the other hand, the measures already adopted
by Indonesia have advanced its implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). Among other things, the
Government of Indonesia is currently in the process
of drafting a presidential decree to establish a legal
basis for the drawing up of a national action plan on the
implementation of that resolution.

When completed, the action plan will facilitate
the integration of gender issues into the policies,
programmes, activities, data collecting mechanisms
and reporting systems of each ministry and related
institutions that have a bearing on peace and security
matters. The plan, which will operate at the central
and the regional levels, will cover all phases of a peace
process from prevention to conflict resolution, as well
as recovery from social conflict.

Under the leadership of the Ministry of Women's
Empowerment and Child Protection, the action plan
will focus on creating greater awareness of the role
of women in conflict resolution and peacebuilding
processes, on strengthening the capacity of various
stakeholders within Government and civil society
organizations, and on building a strong participation in
and ownership of the plan to ensure accountability in its
implementation. In that regard, the role of UN-Women
is greatly appreciated in providing technical assistance
and advocacy in our process to develop the action plan.

Indonesia is also conducting schools of peace for
women programmes in post-conflict areas, where the
principle of non-violence has been introduced and
capacity-building activities are being implemented.
Those programmes will ultimately empower and enable
women to become equal partners in achieving peace,
rather than merely suffering as victims of conflict.

Two years ago, a number of women's civil
society organizations, supported by the Indonesian
Government, organized the Asian Women Peacemaker's
Conference on the interfaith perspective in realizing
the role of women peacemakers in the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). As a result of that two-day
Conference, in addition to identifying a number of
important issues related to the protection, promotion
and participation of women in peace and security, the
following recommendations were made.

First, States should prepare a national action plan
to ensure implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) as
part of their national agenda, strategy and commitment.
That should be accomplished through detailed national
policies. Secondly, States must undertake bureaucratic
reform, in particular security sector reform, to support
the prevention and resolution of conflicts from the
inter-faith and women's perspectives. Thirdly, States
should ensure the protection of the rights of women as
victims of conflict and promote their empowerment
and participation at all levels of the decision-making
process, especially in peacebuilding efforts.

In conclusion, Indonesia wishes to further
underscore the fact that women should not be confined to
serving only as key building blocks of and instruments
for peace and security, but also have the confidence and
potential to be agents of change, skillfully reshaping
and rebuilding communities affected by conflict.

