Mr. Donoghue (Ireland): I am pleased to have the
opportunity to speak at this very timely debate and I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening it.

I also align myself with the statement made by the
observer of the European Union earlier and I offer the
following remarks in a national capacity.

Eight years after the adoption of resolution
1820 (2008), which recognized conflict-related
sexual violence as a war crime and a crime against
humanity, we continue to find ourselves in a deeply
troubling situation.

The use of sexual violence as a tool of war and terror
continues unabated in many conflicts and an increase in
human trafficking, including the trafficking of women
and girls for the purposes of sexual exploitation, has
emerged as an alarming trend. Last December, the
Council heard harrowing accounts of how the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant, Da'esh, the Lord's
Resistance Army and Boko Haram, among others, are
deliberately employing tactics of human trafficking
and sexual abuse in conflict contexts. Today, we heard
distressing evidence from Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Bangura underlining the scale and
gravity of the issue. This is despite the availability of
a range of instruments to address this problem. Chief
among them is the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda.

Resolution 2242 (2015) and resolution 1325
(2000), along with other important documents, such
as the Council's December 2015 presidential statement
S/PRST/2015/25 on human trafficking, have established
a strong normative framework and provide a basis on
which to tackle the contexts in which trafficking takes
place. Norms are of little use without action. We must
focus on action. Taking an optimistic View, we are
beginning to see some positive results on the ground.
For example, Colombia not only ensured the active
participation of women around the peace table, but it is
also taking steps to secure the participation of women
in the political, social and security dimensions of its
impending peace agreement. Just two months ago, we
heard in New York from civil society representatives
from Kenya and Indonesia, who related their experiences
of the role of women in preventing violent extremism.

As we speak, Ireland is hosting in Dublin the first
workshop of gender advisers from the United Nations
and regional organizations engaged in peacekeeping
operations. The purpose is to enable the advisers
to share lessons from the field and to consider next
steps for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
on a regionally coherent basis. However, for every
positive example, we have many more examples of
the worst forms of sexual violence going unchecked,
unaccounted for and unpunished. We need more action
and we need more justice, especially when it comes to
human trafficking.

We have seen from discussions in the Chamber that
cases of human trafficking in the context of conflict-
related sexual violence proliferate in the absence of the
rule oflaw. The buying and selling of human beings, of
women and young girls, cannot be treated just like any
other crime. It is one that sees the victim continue to be
victimized long after the initial offence is committed.
Too often, we have seen that women who have been
rescued from trafficking continue to be devalued,
stigmatized and ostracized by their own communities.

There are no easy answers here, but simple justice
must prevail. There is no excuse for not investigating
and prosecuting cases of trafficking. If an individual
State cannot or will not do so, then we must ensure
that the international community is in a position to
pursue justice through all available means, including
international criminal law, sanctions and cross-border
legal and law enforcement cooperation. However, a
drive to meet the psychological and physical needs of
victims, who are mostly women and girls, must play a
central role in any such actions. If victims cannot meet
their basic needs for shelter, food and protection, the
pursuit of justice and accountability rings hollow and
cannot succeed.
In September, all of us will participate in the
high-level meeting of the General Assembly on mass
movements of refugees and migrants. It will offer
Member States an opportunity to declare how they are
responding and how they will respond to the scourge of
human trafficking, which so often takes place under the
cover of such large-scale movements. In preparing that
meeting as a co-facilitator, Ireland will do whatever it
can to ensure that the questions ofjustice and protection
for the victims of human trafficking are fully addressed,
including in the outcome document for the meeting.

Finally, we can see that the scourge of trafficking
cannot be eliminated unless we step up broader efforts
on conflict prevention and conflict resolution. Ireland
sees the three major reviews from last year as an avenue
through which the United Nations can be brought closer
to fulfilling its mandates. The very reason we sit in the
Chamber is that we seek to end wars, to prevent their
recurrence and to mitigate their consequences. Even if
we fall short in those respects, it is vital that we do
everything we can to protect the most vulnerable people
caught in the midst of conflicts.

