Ms. Aitimova (Kazakhstan): At the outset, allow
me to congratulate the newly elected members of the
Security Council and to express our belief that their
valuable participation in the work of the Council will
contribute significantly to the promotion of world
peace. I would also like to thank the Ghanaian

presidency for organizing this debate and to thank the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on
Gender Issues and Advancement of Women, the Ad
Interim Executive Director of the United Nations
Development Fund for Women and the Coordinator of
the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and
Security for their insightful statements.

In 2000, the Security Council adopted a milestone
resolution that recognized the vital role of women in
the prevention of conflicts and peacebuilding and drew
the international community's attention to the crucial
issues of the impact of armed conflict on women and
girls and the importance of incorporating the gender
perspective into peacekeeping operations, negotiation
processes and Security Council missions.

Ever since the Security Council has organized
annual discussions to review the implementation of the
resolution, it has been indicated repeatedly by
delegations that women's involvement in decision-
making on security issues and in peace processes has
had a very positive effect on the peaceful resolution of
conflicts and on post-conflict peacebuilding. We are
pleased to note that, since the resolution's adoption, the
understanding of the role of women in peacemaking,
peacekeeping and, no less important, peacebuilding has
been growing in recent years. Enhancing the role of
women in the area of peacebuilding and security and
putting an end to violence against women and girls are
priorities for UNIFEM. and related United Nations
bodies.

Therefore, our delegation notes with appreciation
the report of the Secretary-General on women and
peace and security (S/2007/567) and the efforts made
by the United Nations system to implement the
resolution at all levels. Kazakhstan welcomes the
continuation of United Nations activities in this area
through the formulation of the new 2008-2009 Action
Plan and its five indicated areas of work. However, we
would be pleased to see, in addition to monitoring and
accountability, greater emphasis placed on effective
implementation of the Plan, the participation of civil
society, capacity-building aimed at sustaining positive
changes in the situation and the role of women in
conflict and post-conflict countries.

Our delegation believes that there is a need to
expand the sharing of best practices, knowledge and
experience by women who have been involved in
peacebuilding and peace negotiations with those who
wish to join the peace process in conflict areas. There
are many, many wise women throughout the world.
Why not include on the Council's agenda situations
where women have been active and invite them to
speak, since they all have national experience and
knowledge of their national history? At least, I think
that that would not be a bad idea. We are also of the
view that the inclusion of the promotion of the culture
of peace and tolerance into the thematic area of
prevention would contribute significantly to the
effectiveness of United Nations conflict prevention
activities in the field.

Traditionally, the role of women in society and
politics was critical in Kazakh culture. They also
participated in decision-making process on issues of
war and peace, and no crucial decision was taken
without their approval. Women had the power to stop
wars and armed conflicts. They were promoters of
peace and concord in the country.

Therefore, our country is noted for its multi-
ethnic and multi-faith nature. The house called
Kazakhstan is home to some 130 nationalities and
ethnic groups and more than 40 faiths, which live
together as one big family. Indeed, the internal policy
and international initiatives of the Republic of
Kazakhstan are truly based on the principles of trust
and dialogue. Kazakhstan was the initiator of such
unique international forums as the Congress of Leaders
of World and Traditional Religions and the Conference
on Interaction and Confidence-building Measures in
Asia (CICA). In this regard, we believe that
Kazakhstan's valuable experience in protecting and
strengthening agreement and harmonious relations
among the various ethnic and religious groups of our
country may be of interest to the world public.

In conclusion, in reiterating our strong
commitment to the goals of the Beijing Declaration,
the Cairo Programme of Action and the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) and in stating the great
importance we attach to resolution 1325 (2000), allow
me to stress yet again that stronger commitments
should be made and more actions undertaken by
Member States and the United Nations system to
expedite attainment of the goals and tasks outlined in
the resolution.
