Mr. Menon (Singapore): Thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting to address
the issue of sexual exploitation and abuse in
peacekeeping operations. I would also like to express
my gratitude to my friend, the Ambassador of Jordan,
and to Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for their
comprehensive briefings. In addition, I would like to
take this opportunity to commend the diligence of the
thousands of peacekeepers who stand the line with
courage and honour. These men and women are a credit
to the principles of peace and humanitarianism. They
have become integral to helping many countries
recover from post-conflict situations.

Against that backdrop, it is tragic to hear of
continued reports and allegations of sexual abuse and
misconduct by some individuals. The Secretary-
General himself has admitted that although progress
has been made in eliminating exploitation and abuse,
not all managers, commanders and other personnel are
vigorously pursuing the United Nations zero-tolerance

policy. That is a moral outrage. People in war-torn
lands see Blue Helmets and expect their lives to
improve. That hope is the single greatest compliment
that they can pay to the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO), It arises from the Department's
reputation for effectiveness and its strong record of
achievement. So when there is sexual abuse, it is a total
betrayal of trust.

Please do not misunderstand me; I do not say this
with any intention to embarrass DPKO. I acknowledge
the Department's crucial role in managing and
resolving conflicts. I say this because it pains me to see
a small minority sully the reputation of the dedicated
majority. To save the main body, we need to deal with
this cancer, this minority, without remorse.

To my delegation, it boils down to three critical
issues. The first is clear accountability and punishment.
The United Nations cannot champion the concept of
the rule of law while its peacekeepers break the law.
The fact that these abuses have been going on without
censure for a long time is especially unacceptable.
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General and
commanders have to send a message to the units and
entities under their command that such behaviour is
intolerable. Just as each peacekeeper will be held
accountable for his or her actions, commanders and
senior staff will also be held accountable for the
misconduct of personnel under their command.
Accountability must be applied fairly and across the
board. Transgressors must be dealt with swiftly and
consistently. By the same token, commanders and
senior staff must be given the requisite unified
commands if we expect them to address this problem.

The second issue is the need for a system-wide
approach. Peacekeeping operations are the domain of
multiple actors, given the complexity of policing
conflict situations. The challenge is to find common
procedures and to coordinate between disparate
agencies such as the Department of Political Affairs,
the Department of Public Information, the Office of
Human Resources Management and the Office of
Internal Oversight Services. That would help us to
avoid the duplication of responsibilities and to ensure
the effective deployment of resources.

Permit me to cite the example of conduct and
discipline units. Recently, several such units were
formed. However, their roles remain insufficiently
understood by peacekeepers on the ground. The
confusion is perhaps exacerbated by the presence of
child protection advisers and gender advisers already in
field missions. We need to be mindful of possible
overlap and duplication of functions. In terms of
deployment, we were surprised to hear that a conduct
and discipline unit had been appointed for Timor-Leste.
With the termination of the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor, would it not have been better to
send that unit to another mission?

Thirdly, we need to evaluate the efficacy of our
measures and to question whether we have provided
ourselves with enough tools to root out the problem.
For example, do we have more responsive
investigation capacity by OIOS compared with
previous investigations by DPKO? Are the new
investigators better trained to deal with sexual crimes?
How can so many investigations be pending? Does that
mean we have insufficient investigative and
prosecution capability? Do we need to look into
accountability? What tools do our Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General and military
commanders have for monitoring problems on the
ground? Do we need more?

A preliminary look at available data suggests that
the number of allegations increased in 2005. My
delegation urges DPKO to analyse this data and
evaluate the effectiveness of the measures introduced
over the past 12 months. The damage to the image of
peacekeepers and DPKO must be repaired. With clear
accountability, optimization of resources and a tough,
clear-headed approach, we can do this. Our dedicated
peacekeepers deserve no less.

