Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): We are honoured
to participate in today's open debate, especially given
that this is the fifth anniversary of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security. My delegation associates itself with the
statement made on behalf of the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) by the delegation of
Namibia as well as with the statement made by the
delegation of Canada on behalf of the Human Security
Network.

As we commemorate the fifth anniversary of the
adoption of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000),
we are realizing now more than ever the important role
of women in efforts to achieve peace and security.
Time and again, women have played a constructive and
essential part in peace processes. They are gradually
finding a place at the negotiating table, in the
implementation of peace agreements, and in post-
conflict rehabilitation, reconstruction and disarmament.
It is high time for them to be included in those
processes in a more formalized way, at all levels and at
all stages.

The continued under-representation of women in
formal peace processes and other persistent obstacles
and challenges resulting from situations such as
gender-based violence, poverty, lack of rule of law and
various forms of discrimination prevent women's full
and effective participation in conflict resolution.
Conflict destroys infrastructure and disrupts essential
services, which has a negative impact on the
livelihoods of women. We believe, therefore, that more
must be done to achieve greater participation and
effective contributions by women in developing and
implementing post-conflict strategies and programmes.
In addition to resolution 1325 (2000), we already have
other instruments at the regional and global levels
which recognize and seek to enhance the role of
women in peace processes. We should use these
instruments, and we believe that, with sufficient
political will, we can meet the demand for greater
inclusion of women in peace negotiations.

Resolution 1325 (2000) calls for the full
inclusion of women in international peace and security
processes and for action in four critical areas. We note
that progress has been made in a number of those
areas. However, it is clear that there is still room for
improvement, especially with regard to the
mainstreaming of gender consciousness in United
Nations reporting and implementation systems.

These goals, as set out in resolution 1325 (2000),
can become a reality only if there are improvements in
terms of information, coordination and cooperation, as
well as strengthened commitment and accountability at
all levels of the United Nations system. Enhanced
cooperation with regional organizations and Member
States, as well as civil society and women's national
machineries, is also essential, we believe, to its
successful implementation.

My delegation therefore notes with appreciation
the United Nations system-wide action plan for the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000), as contained in the report of the Secretary-
General. This working document identifies numerous
actions that different role-players within the United
Nations system can take to further its implementation
and which can be used to monitor progress. We
encourage immediate implementation of the Secretary-
General's proposals so as to put this action plan into
practice. Member States can also enhance the United
Nations system-wide action plan by continuing to
implement resolution 1325 (2000), including through
the development of national action plans or other
national-level strategies.

The decision by the 2005 world summit to
establish the Peacebuilding Commission is, in our
view, an important milestone and makes a further
contribution to the full implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). It opens the door for women with a view
to ensuring integration of the gender perspective in all
phases of peacebuilding. Our own experience in South
Africa has taught us that, given a chance, women can
bring an important and much needed perspective to
peace processes. Women are no longer simply the
victims of wars and conflicts; they are increasingly an
important part of the solution. We would urge the
Peacebuilding Commission, once established, to pay
particular attention to the knowledge and
understanding women can bring to peace-building
processes.

It is disheartening that sexual and gender-based
violence, including trafficking in persons, continue to
be used as weapons of war in conflicts. In some parts
of the world, gender-based violence has reached near-
epidemic proportions. Every effort must be made to
halt this odious practice and to bring the perpetrators to
justice.

My delegation also wishes to reiterate its
condemnation, in the strongest terms, of all acts of
sexual misconduct by all categories of personnel in
United Nations peacekeeping missions. In that regard,
South Africa welcomes the comprehensive report on
sexual exploitation and abuse by United Nations
peacekeeping personnel. We express our support for
the efforts of the United Nations to fully implement
codes of conduct and disciplinary procedures to
prevent and respond to sexual exploitation and to
enhance monitoring and enforcement mechanisms. We
note with appreciation the strategies and actions
included in the system-wide action plan aimed at fully
implementing those codes of conduct and disciplinary
procedures.

In conclusion, as we look back at the five years
of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), we
realize that peace starts with women and that for peace
to be sustainable, we should ensure that women live
more secure and productive lives and are able to fully
enjoy their human rights and fundamental freedoms.
We should recognize their invaluable role and
contribution as mediators, educators, peacemakers,
peacebuilders and advocates for peace. In our view
peace attained through the participation of all means,
not only the silencing of guns after war but a
sustainable effort at ensuring lasting peace and
prosperity.

My delegation therefore supports the Secretary-
General's report before the Security Council as well as
all of the initiatives undertaken by the United Nations
in implementing resolution 1325 (2000).

