Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I join
those who have already thanked Mr. Guehenno and Ms.
Smythe for their earlier briefings and in welcoming the
presence among us of Ms. Angela King. Let me thank
you, Mr. President, for giving priority to this
discussion, further proof of the overdue sign of the
Council's intention to remain "actively seized" with the
subject - in the jargon of this matter - and, in doing
so, to give much needed impetus to the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000).

In what I am now going to say I associate myself
fully with the remarks later to be presented by the
Italian Ambassador on behalf of the European Union.

All Security Council resolutions, by definition,
concern themselves with issues of the utmost
importance to global peace and security. But resolution
1325 (2000) has very special qualities. It was a
landmark. For the first time, we broadened our gaze
from the traditional political and military aspects of
peace and security and rightly turned our attention to
the rights of those most widely and frequently affected
by conflict. Crucially, in doing so, we recognized that
women were not just disproportionately affected by
conflict but also in many ways held the key to peace.
We resolved that gender considerations must be fully
and thoroughly integrated as a mainstream component
of our conflict-related work in all areas, from conflict
prevention to post-conflict reconstruction. Today's
discussion allows us to pause and to reflect on the
progress made, on the lack of progress made and on the
challenges that lie ahead.

Resolution 1325 (2000) was not just an important

statement of our commitment to work for women. It
has also become a beacon of hope and a rallying call.
Few Security Council resolutions have resonated so
widely and so deeply in the heart of civil society. As a
Council, we cannot turn away from our commitments
or dash the hopes that we have raised. In the three
years that have passed since we adopted resolution
1325 (2000), we have returned to this discussion on a
number of occasions. We have also been helped by the
very useful report (S/2002/ 1154) and recommendations
given to the Council by the Secretary-General last year.
But the question is, how far have we actually got in
implementation? Some progress is undoubtedly being
made, but much evidently remains to be done.

I would now like to say a few words about the
contribution that we in the United Kingdom have been
trying to make. We have identified a number of
avenues for action, both directly on our own part and
through support to key partners.

For our part, we have introduced compulsory
training on gender, child protection and human rights
issues for all United Kingdom personnel embarking on
peacekeeping missions. We have set about actively
searching for and deploying female officers and experts
to peacekeeping missions and other conflict prevention
and conflict resolution missions. Most recently, for
example, we have deployed female police officers to
Sierra Leone and sent a senior gender expert to
Baghdad to work there with the Coalition Provisional
Authority. We are developing a database of suitably
qualified United Kingdom-based women with
experience in conflict prevention and conflict
resolution work and who are willing to join missions
overseas. Once that is complete, we will share that with
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO).

My predecessor in this seat, Jeremy Greenstock,
is today working hard to get the women of Iraq more
fully and actively engaged in the reconstruction effort
there. United Kingdom teams working in Iraq are being
briefed on the importance we attach to this, and in a
recent round of briefing meetings in London, Jeremy
discussed the situation of women in Iraq with the
United Kingdom Minister for Women, as well as
meeting a visiting delegation of Iraqi women and
representatives of United Kingdom non-governmental
organizations active specifically in this field.

In 2001, the United Kingdom Government
created two conflict-prevention pools, totalling
together more than $200 million, to bring together the
resources and the expertise that all departments in
London bring to conflict prevention. That meant that
the work of the Ministry of Defence, the Department
for International Development, the Foreign and
Commonwealth Office and, centrally, the Cabinet
Office all came together to try and produce one
concerted, coherent, focused and strengthened effort to
tackle conflict prevention. Those pools have enabled us
to give direct support to United Nations activities,
including helping DPKO to prepare a field manual for
gender mainstreaming in field operations and enabling
the United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM) to gather information on women's peace-
building and gender justice initiatives. We are also
working with the Urgent Action Fund for Women's
Human Rights, a non-governmental organization that
supports grass-roots activities in countries where there
are multinational peacekeeping operations.

But as well as funding specific gender initiatives,
we insist that all activities supported through these
pools must integrate a gender perspective. We have
seen that well-targeted funding, even at a modest level,
can make a big difference, for example, encouraging
women to play an active role in Afghan politics by
providing childcare facilities in the main parliament in
Kabul. Those things in themselves may sound very
small, almost trivial, but for the women actually
involved, they represent the difference between being
able and not being able to participate. The whole
question of mainstreaming and getting this into the
bloodstream of our overall effort remains basic. And
that is why we are currently evaluating the work
supported through the pools, including looking at
gender aspects and what we have tried to achieve so
far.

Now, what impact are these and other efforts
having? Are we still only scratching the surface? I
think it is evident that we need to work much harder at
measuring the impact of our work and, indeed, in doing
more of the work. But there are some encouraging
SlgIIS.

The International Criminal Court has shown its
willingness to include within its remit certain crimes
against women. Women now make up over a third of
the new national assembly in Timor-Leste, with two
female cabinet members and a 30 per cent female
police force, and a survey published earlier this month
stated that the country with the highest percentage of
women parliamentarians is now Rwanda. But we know
that women and children remain the vast majority of
those killed, wounded, abused or displaced in conflict.

So what should the international community do
next, and what is our role as Council members?
Conflict prevention is a huge field, but the role of
gender is immensely important within it. We need to
keep saying that until it becomes second nature. We
must also remain committed to raising awareness of the
positive role that women can play in peace-building
and reconciliation, not just seeing women portrayed
solely as victims. We have heard today encouraging
accounts of the positive impact that women are having
and can have.

The Council has a key role to play, both in giving
real meaning to the provisions of resolution 1325
(2000) and holding both the United Nations system and
ourselves to account. The Security Council should,
where appropriate, include gender in resolutions,
mission mandates and progress reports. The recent
resolutions on Liberia, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Cote d'Ivoire are good examples of that,
and we must maintain this momentum. As the
Ambassador of Chile pointed out earlier on, in the past
year, the United Kingdom joined a number of Member
States in suggesting that the Council might establish a
mechanism through which it would monitor its own
progress on these issues. This might be the right time
for our experts, supported by the Secretariat, to
examine in more detail whether such a mechanism
would be useful.

An approach that is more coordinated between all
the actors, the United Nations, the Member States, non-
governmental organizations and other parties, is also
very necessary. Undoubtedly more resources are
required, as well. Improving the situation for women in
conflict will not come about just with fine words in
New York. The Presidential statement adopted on the
second anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) asks for a
comprehensive report in 2004. The United Nations
Secretariat and Member States can both usefully
contribute to best practice, and that should also include
the possibility of widening this agenda and
strengthening the coherence of our work with women
with other pressing concerns related to the rights and
protection of civilians - women and men, girls and
boys - in conflict and post-conflict situations. These
are complex but very vital issues and there are no easy
answers.

The Council must continue to focus on
implementation. It must hold to account all those
responsible for implementing resolution 1325 (2000),
us included. We must continue to support the wider
United Nations in its efforts - remember that these
efforts are carried out by all parts of the United Nations
family - and continue to welcome and demand
briefings and progress reports such as those we have
received today. But above all, we should pledge
ourselves to continue to place gender in the mainstream
of our work, actively seeking all opportunities to do so
and remaining in the truer sense actively seized of this
matter.

