Mr. Enikanolaiye (Nigeria): I thank the delegation
of Uruguay for organizing today's open debate
and welcome the participation of that country's
Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs. We also thank the
Deputy Secretary-General and other briefers for sharing
their perspectives on this very important subject.

We would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his very comprehensive report (S/2017/249), including
its far-reaching recommendations, which, if fully
implemented, would ensure that we have truly begun to
address the plight ofwomen and girls in armed conflicts
in an effective manner. It is evident that women and
girls caught in conflict suffer more than men and boys
do, and that they are extremely vulnerable to violent
extremism and remain, in many parts of the world, the
victims of terrorism most affected by the scourge of
sexual violence. We condemn in the strongest possible
terms the abduction, trafficking and maltreatment of
women and girls by extremist groups, including the
heinous activities of Boko Haram in the Lake Chad
region and particularly in north-east Nigeria.

We cannot agree more with the Secretary-General
on the patterns and trends identified in his latest report.
Indeed, the use of women and girls as sex slaves must
equally be condemned. In that regard, we welcome
the efforts of the United Nations aimed at improving
inter-agency coordination, knowledge-building,
advocacy and technical country-level support. My
delegation believes that in order to achieve an enduring
result in the search for workable solutions to the
challenges of sexual violence in conflict, priority must
be accorded to addressing the enabling environment and
the underlying root causes of conflicts, such as poverty,
hunger, human rights abuses, injustice, unemployment,
corruption, the lack of inclusiveness, and impunity.

Perpetrators must be held accountable, but the
capacity of States to do so, with the prevalence of weak
structures and institutions, needs to be addressed.
Beyond the law-enforcement approach, however,
dealing with the political economy of conflicts in a more
holistic manner is crucial to the finding of potential
remedies to the situation of conflicts around the world.
In that regard, multilateral cooperation should be
enhanced so as to strengthen States' capabilities to deal
with the threats posed by violent conflicts, criminality
and terrorism.

Today's open debate bears great relevance with
respect to the terrorist activities of Boko Haram
in north-east Nigeria, which have led to the large
displacement of approximately 2 million people and
conflict-related violence against women and girls,
which has been widely condemned by all. Nigeria
has always acted in a concerted manner to ensure
accountability for crimes of sexual violence. We have
also collaborated with the United Nations and other
international partners to improve service delivery and
enhance protection measures both in communities and
in areas where women and girls seek refuge. Those
efforts by the Government of Nigeria should be seen
in the context of the great strides already made by our
military in severely degrading Boko Haram terrorism.

In spite of the daunting challenges, Nigeria has
been in the vanguard of promoting the involvement
of women in conflict resolution and in the promotion
of peace and security. Only last week, the Nigerian
Government launched its revised national action plan
for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
related resolutions on women and peace and security.
The plan reflects our commitment to ensuring the
security of women and girls during armed conflicts
and enhancing their active and direct participation in
conflict prevention and peacebuilding. We have also
taken measures to enhance the security of women and
girls in internally-displaced-person camps, reduce their
vulnerability and promote their safe return to their
homes and their eventual reintegration into society.

As part of efforts to counter violent extremism,
Nigeria is taking steps to deradicalize convicted
terrorists by developing a range of psychological
experts and hiring counsellors to pioneer rehabilitation
efforts and using Islamic scholars to counter extremist
narratives by training them on various aspects of
dialogue and religious counselling. We are also working
assiduously with the affected communities to design
economic revitalization programmes targeted at people
most affected by terrorism and violent extremism.

We take this opportunity to assure the Council
that, following the recent release of 82 of the abducted
Chibok schoolgirls, the Government has intensified its
efforts to secure the release of the remaining abducted
girls and to free the released girls from the ideological
grips of Boko Haram terrorists. Having regained their
freedom, it is equally important that the girls regain
their self-esteem and be assisted in returning to their
families and their schools. Furthermore, emergency
teams of psychosocial counsellors and health
professionals have been dispatched to the north-east of
the country in order to assist the recently released girls
with the profiling of victims, with a view to adopting
appropriate therapies for them.

Nigeria has carefully and favourably considered
joining the existing 108 countries that have signed
on to the Paris Principles and Guidelines on Children
Associated with Armed Forces and Armed Groups
and the Paris Commitments to protect children from
unlawful recruitment or use by armed forces or armed
groups. Following Nigeria's active participation at this
year's international ministerial conference in Paris in
February, it is our conviction that this step will help to
strengthen Nigeria's commitment to global frameworks
by further preventing the recruitment and use of girl
children as child or female bombers by Boko Haram.

In addition, the Government of Nigeria has put taken
steps for victims of Boko Haram terrorism - in the
form ofrape and other sexual violence against children,
abduction of children and other grave violations - by
putting in motion several legal remedies. Some legal and
social remedies undertaken by the Government include
the diligent prosecution of more than 200 detained
Boko Haram terrorists in competent courts of law, as
well as reintegration, reorientation and rehabilitation
programmes designed to meet the needs of each victim
of sexual violence.

We take note of and fully support the recommendations
contained in the Secretary-General's report (S/2017/249)
under consideration. We are convinced that the
United Nations remains the central platform for
raising awareness for the plight of women and girls in
conflicts, including the peace and security agenda of
the United Nations. We also acknowledge the progress
made so far by the various United Nations mechanisms
in addressing conflict-related sexual violence. Nigeria
stands ready to continue to work with the United Nations
and international partners in that important endeavour.

We commit to ensuring that women and girls enjoy
their full rights and that those who have perpetrated
sexual violence are dealt with in accordance with our
national laws and international obligations.

