Ms. Roopnarine (Trinidad and Tobago): Trinidad
and Tobago is pleased to contribute to this open debate
on the historic 15-year review of resolution 1325 (2000)
on the women and peace and security agenda. It is
symbolic that this 15-year commemoration is taking
place only three days after the global observance of the
International Day of the Girl Child. It is also noteworthy
that a few weeks ago the international community
adopted the most comprehensive universal agenda for
sustainable development.

We, the States Members of the Organization, bear
the responsibility for implementing the 17 Sustainable
Development Goals, particularly Goal 5, which mirrors
the subject of this debate - gender equality and the
empowerment of women and girls. Trinidad and Tobago
is fully committed to the goal of gender equality. For
us, the empowerment of women is an integral part of
national development, as well as an essential pillar in
the maintenance of sustainable peace.

Trinidad and Tobago is committed to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). In 2010, my
country introduced, and since then has been the main
sponsor of the first General Assembly resolution on
women's participation at the decision-making level in
matters related to disarmament, non-proliferation and
arms control. Since its introduction, the resolution has
received the support of a majority of Member States. It
was formulated in the context of the tenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).

General Assembly resolution 69/61 seeks to
highlight women not merely as victims of violence,
but as empowered and indispensable actors in
decision-making efforts to address the issue of
disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control.
Trinidad and Tobago is pleased that the language
contained in that resolution is reflective of the Arms
Trade Treaty and its provisions on gender-based
violence or violence against women and girls.

At the national level, the equal rights of women
and men are guaranteed under the Constitution
of my country. The national policy on gender and
development is the overarching framework that guides
the Government of Trinidad and Tobago in promoting
the full and equal participation of women and men in
the national development process. Equal opportunities
exist for women's participation at the decision-making
level in matters regarding peace and security. It is
underscored by the ascendancy of women to the senior
ranks of the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service and the
three contingents of the Trinidad and Tobago Defence
Force.

At the regional level, we have worked with the
United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs on
initiatives to strengthen the participatory role played
by Latin American and Caribbean women in combating
illicit trafficking in small arms and light weapons. We
have also hosted a number of initiatives in conjunction
with the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace,
Disarmament and Development in Latin America
and the Caribbean and the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs, to provide disarmament and
arms-control training to security personnel, including
women.

My country pledges its commitment to continue
to work with the United Nations in advancing and
empowering women at the global level. Consequently,
Trinidad and Tobago has submitted its candidature
for the Executive Board of UN-Women for the period
2017-2019, during elections to take place within the
Economic and Social Council in 2016. We kindly
request the support ofthe members of ECOSOC for that
important candidature.

Finally, Trinidad and Tobago takes this opportunity
to reaffirm its commitment to the advancement and
empowerment of women. We reiterate our commitment
to the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
look forward to the next 15-year review.

