Mr. Matussek (Germany): Germany commends
the Ghanaian presidency for holding this year's
Security Council debate on women and peace and
security, marking the seventh anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000). Germany associates itself with the
statement made by the presidency of the European
Union and would like to add the following remarks.
Violence against women is one of the most widespread
violations of human rights. Germany believes that it is
imperative to eradicate violence against women and
girls in all its forms. We are deeply concerned about
the pervasive and sometimes systematic use of sexual
violence against women, particularly rape and other
forms of sexual abuse, especially in conflict situations.
We must increase our efforts at the national and
international levels to find adequate responses to the
problem - for the victims and for the perpetrators. We
want a zero-tolerance policy.

In that context, Germany welcomes the initiative
entitled Stop Rape Now: United Nations Action against
Sexual Violence in Conflict, which was launched in the
beginning of 2007. One month ago, the German
Federal Government presented its second action plan to
combat violence against women. The action plan not
only sets goals and targets to combat violence against
women on a national basis, but also addresses the issue
in the context of international cooperation within the
European Union, the Council of Europe and the United
Nations. The action plan contains various references to
resolution 1325 (2000).

Germany welcomes the initiatives of several
countries, including Security Council members, to
develop a mechanism to ensure the systematic
integration and implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) in the work of the Council, including
resolutions, reporting requests and field missions. In
that context, we welcome the fact that the
Peacebuilding Commission, Peacebuilding Support
Office and Peacebuilding Fund have integrated a
gender perspective into their work. Gender equality
was identified as a critical cross-cutting issue for peace
consolidation in both of the countries on the agenda of
the Peacebuilding Commission: Burundi and Sierra
Leone. Now, a dedicated effort is needed to implement
it - in the field as well as in New York.

The promotion of gender equality and the
empowerment of women - whether in the context of
conflict resolution or in the achievement of the
internationally agreed development goals - is an
essential part of the United Nations mandate. A
coherent and effective implementation of that mandate,
including Security Council resolution 1325 (2000),
needs a coherent and effective gender architecture.
Germany supports the concept paper on the subject
prepared by the Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Asha-
Rose Migiro.

Let me re-emphasize that Germany, as a friend of
resolution 1325 (2000), is deeply committed to the
vision of that landmark resolution and continues to
undertake various efforts to realize that vision. The
German Government will account for its efforts and
will present, on the occasion of the International Day
for the Elimination of Violence against Women on
25 November, a detailed report to our Parliament on
German contributions to implement resolution 1325
(2000). The report will document a variety of measures
contributing to the implementation of the resolution
both at the national and the global levels - ranging
from efforts to increase representation of women in all
decision-making mechanisms for the prevention,
management and resolution of conflict to concrete
projects aimed at ending violence against women all
over the world.

Many of these projects have been conducted in
cooperation with non-governmental organizations
(NGOs). Civil society plays a crucial role in the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000), and I wish to emphasize how greatly we
welcome NGO participation in and contributions to our
common efforts to work for women's equal
participation and full involvement in the maintenance
and promotion of peace and security.

