Mr. Reuben (Israel): I thank you, Madame
President, for your delegation's leadership in holding
this very important debate. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General, Under-Secretary-General Le
Roy, Special Representative Wallstrom and Military
Adviser Gaye for their valuable briefings.

In the 10 years since the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), we have seen some positive steps to
prevent sexual violence in conflict. Unfortunately,
overall progress is slow. Israel joined the list of
sponsors of resolution 1960 (2010), recognizing the
urgent need for collective action on this pressing issue.
As a co-sponsor of the previous resolutions 1820
(2008) and 1888 (2009), Israel remains deeply
committed to their full implementation. We welcome
the increased deployment of gender advisers, the
routine inclusion of provisions in peacekeeping
mandates that protect women and girls from sexual
violence, and the growing awareness of the need to
include women in any peacemaking process.

Israel welcomes the Secretary-General's report of
24 November (S/2010/604) and commends him for his
efforts and leadership on this issue. The report
documents how widespread acts of rape and other
forms of sexual violence - too often committed with
impunity - continue to plague many zones of conflict.
As Special Representative Wallstrom has made clear in
various forums, including the Security Council, sexual
violence in conflict is neither cultural nor sexual; it is
criminal.

Acts of sexual violence are horrific crimes
against individuals. Women, girls and boys who are
raped are not only heartlessly robbed of their basic
dignity during the time of the crime, but also bear the
scars of those appalling acts long after hostilities have
ceased. No amount of compensation can heal those
wounds. The sad reality is that most victims are
forgotten, and the perpetrators of the unspeakable
crimes against them are never brought to justice. When
committed in armed conflict and employed deliberately
and systematically, such acts constitute a weapon of
war designed to inflict suffering, instil fear and destroy
the social fabric of communities and families. As is
rightly emphasized in the Secretary-General's report,

"Depending on the circumstances of the offence,
sexual violence can constitute a war crime, a
crime against humanity, an act of torture or a
constituent act of genocide" (S/2010/604, para. 4).

The Secretary-General's report provides a
number of important recommendations for improving
the international community's efforts on this issue.
There is a growing consensus about the need for
timely, objective and accurate monitoring and reporting
arrangements for incidents of sexual violence to ensure
a coherent and coordinated approach to addressing
violations and enforcing accountability. We support the
listing of perpetrators of sexual violence, as
encouraged by resolution 1960 (2010). This can serve
as a means for advancing more focused measures for
combating such atrocities when they occur.

Israel strongly supports the mandate that created
the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and
recognizes that Special Representative Wallstrom will
play a pivotal role in addressing the issue. The newly
formed UN Women, led by Executive Director
Michelle Bachelet, also has a central role to play and is
well positioned to work with the entire United Nations
system.

The impact of sexual violence in conflict can be
measured in the overwhelming pain it has inflicted on
women and men, in the devastation it has wrought in
communities and in the instability it continues to foster
throughout entire regions. Israel believes that Member
States, individually and collectively, must take firm
action to curb this serious threat to human dignity and
peace.

Together, we must make clear that the
international community has zero tolerance for the
perpetrators of sexual violence in armed conflict and
will bring them to justice wherever they carry out their
appalling and destructive crimes.

