Mrs. Pucarinho (Portugal): I would like to
thank you, Sir, for having convened this open debate.
I also thank the Secretary-General; his Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Mr. Bangura; the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in
persons, especially in women and children, Ms. Maria
Grazia Giammarinaro; and Ms. Lisa Davis for their
very comprehenisive briefings this morning.

Portugal aligns itself with the statement made
earlier on behalf of the European Union. I would just
like to add some remarks in my national capacity.

As several Security Council resolutions underline,
ending conflict-related sexual violence is crucial to
improving international peace and security. Conflict-
related sexual violence has been used as tactic of
warfare in numerous armed conflicts, especially by
terrorist and extremist groups, affecting entire peoples
and societies. We note with concern that trafficking
in persons, particularly women and girls, in situations
of conflict-related sexual violence has become an
increasing trend, according to the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2016/361).

Trafficking in human beings is one of the most
serious violations of human rights. It is a complex
reality - transnational in most cases - often committed
within the framework of criminal organizations
that prey on the vulnerabilities and weaknesses of
trafficked persons. Moreover, trafficking for sexual
exploitation turns individuals into commodities, which
dehumanizes them and exacerbates the multiple and
protracted harmful effects of conflict-related violence
committed against victims. And it must be stressed that
the consistent mark and trend of this crime is that most
victims are women and girls.

The recent review processes of United Nations
peacekeeping have recognized the disproportionate
impact of armed conflict on women and girls and the
existing link between peace and gender equality and
women's empowerment. Ensuring respect for women's
and girls' human rights and fundamental freedoms,
and women's active, full and equal political, social
and economic participation, including in conflict
prevention and resolution processes, is in our view
very critical to ending sexual violence in conflict and
trafficking for sexual exploitation. It also contributes
positively to peace processes and to the achievement
of sustainable peace, accelerates economic recovery
and development, and helps counter violent extremism.
The full implementation of resolution 2242 (2015)
and the Secretary-General's Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism should also be an integral part of
the strategy to prevent and resolve conflicts and protect
women and girls from sexual violence and trafficking.

The overwhelming majority of victims, both of
conflict-related sexual Violence and of associated
trafficking, never see justice for what they have endured
or receive the necessary assistance and support. We
must fight to end the culture of impunity for those
who commit such crimes. Those responsible must be
brought to justice. That is a critical element of our
prevention efforts, and in that regard Portugal believes
that the International Criminal Court continues to play
a fundamental deterrent role

As a complement to the roles of international and
national tribunals, the Council should also make full use
of the existing tools that provide concrete mechanisms
for addressing issues of conflict-related sexual violence
and suggest ways to ensure accountability that could
benefit the broader implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda. That could be done, for
example, by guaranteeing the deployment of women's
protection and gender advisers in peacekeeping
operations, by enhancing the monitoring, analysis
and reporting arrangements on conflict-related sexual
violence and by continuing to strictly implement a
zero-tolerance policy with regard to sexual abuse
and exploitation.

For any intervention to be deemed effective, it must
be based on common efforts, which must be coordinated
in the areas of prevention, awareness-raising, support,
research and representation at international, regional
and national levels. That includes training law
enforcement and other officials to identify and protect
victims, prosecuting traffickers and their accomplices
and securing justice for the victims.

Portugal reiterates its pledge to continue conducting
training programmes for national personnel and
members of the armed and security forces and to those
assigned to positions in international peacekeeping
missions that deal with gender equality and violence
against women and girls, including sexual violence,
gender-based violence and trafficking in human beings.
Portugal was one of the first European countries
to adopt the Blue Heart Campaign against Human
Trafficking at the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime. We are currently implementing our third
national action plan to prevent and combat trafficking
in human beings, which covers the period up to 2017. It
reflect my country's commitment, in particular within
the framework of the United Nations, the Council of
Europe, the European Union and the Community of
Portuguese-Speaking Countries.
In conclusion, millions of men, women and
children continue to suffer at the hands of those who
benefit from conflict and violence. Preventing conflict-
related sexual violence and trafficking in human beings
is crucial to achieving a future of dignity, freedom
for all and sustainable development, in line with the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) and with our collective
efforts towards the consolidation of peace and security.

