Mr. Giorgio (Eritrea): Allow me at the outset
to convey my deepest sympathies to the Permanent
Mission of the Russian Federation on the assassination
of Ambassador Andrey Karlov in Ankara, and to the
Permanent Mission of Germany on the tragic attack on
innocent civilians in Berlin. Our thoughts are with the
bereaved families.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the Permanent Representative of Bahrain,
who spoke on behalf of the Group of Friends United
against Human Trafficking.

My delegation wishes to thank Spain for organizing
this open debate of the Security Council on trafficking
in persons in conflict situations, in connection with
the agenda item "Maintenance of international peace
and security". Trafficking in persons is a transnational
crime that affects almost every nation, given its negative
implications for peace and security and its contribution
to grave violations of the basic rights and dignity of the
victims. Therefore, Eritrea views today's open debate
as giving important impetus to the global fight against
the scourge of human trafficking.

It is clear that this is limited in its scope.
Nevertheless, we would like to see it as part of national,
regional and global efforts to address trafficking in
persons. Resolution 2331 (2016), adopted today, decides

"to take decisive and immediate action to
prevent, criminalize, investigate, prosecute and
ensure accountability of those who engage in
trafficking in persons" (resolution 233] (2016),

para. 2 (b)).

This particular paragraph points to the direction of
what Eritrea has been asking of the United Nations for
the past few years, since 2013. It is critical, however,
that the investigations carried out be independent
and transparent.

Given the complex and multidimensional nature
of the crimes of human trafficking, strengthened
coordination among the Inter-Agency Coordination
Group against Trafficking in Persons, Member States
and other stakeholders would contribute to the much-
desired outcome.

It must be underscored that human trafficking
has recently become more acute along migration
routes, where vulnerable communities and individuals
continue to be subjected to sexual violence, degrading
treatment, organ harvesting, murder and kidnapping
for ransom. This highlights the fact that the problem
of trafficking has further evolved. In this regard, as
the United Nations is about to embark on the review
of the Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in
Persons, Eritrea believes that, with the much-improved
understanding and experiences gained over the past 10
years, the Global Plan of Action will play a stronger
and more critical role in harnessing collective action to
advance the fight against human trafficking.

Mindful of the gravity and urgency of the problem,
Eritrea has acceded to the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocol
to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, supplementing the
Convention. Eritrea is also taking concrete steps to
contribute to the fight against human trafficking
by establishing a legal and institutional framework,
including by dismantling criminal networks. Moreover,
it is also actively involved in the Khartoum process
and other projects to address the scourge, including in
cooperation with the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime.

Recognizing that trafficking in persons is a
transnational criminal enterprise with annual revenues
amounting to about $150 billion, it is imperative to flesh
out the underlying causes and intertwined dimensions
of the problem in order to find effective and durable
solutions to the crime.

