Mr. Lucas (Angola): The delegation of Angola
aligns itself with the statements to be delivered by the
Permanent Observer of the African Union and by the
Permanent Representative of Zimbabwe on behalf of the
Southern African Development Community (SADC).

We commend the presidency of Jordan for
convening this open debate on the critical issue of
sexual violence in conflict situations under the agenda
item "Women and peace and security". We praise the
Secretary-General and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, for their leadership and
long-standing commitment to the defence and protection
of victims. We also thank Ms. Hamsatu Allamin for her
valuable contribution to this debate.

Sexual violence in conflict situations is one of the
most egregious forms of human rights Violations. As
the Secretary-General points out in his latest report on
this issue (S/2015/203), 2014 was marked by continuing
human rights violations and crimes against the integrity
of women and girls in conflict situations, including
abductions, labour exploitation, forced marriages,
human trafficking and sexual slavery. As referred to in
the report, sexual Violence perpetrated by State actors,
or armed groups associated with States, is a matter of
concern in many countries and territories where the
rape of women and girls is used as a weapon of war
and a tactic of terror. Women and girls are targeted by
terrorists and armed groups linked to violent extremism
as trophies of war, with the aim of humiliating and
destroying entire communities, especially through
ethnic cleansing, by changing the demographic
composition of those communities. Additionally,
through sexual Violence, extremist groups terrorize
communities into compliance, displace populations
from strategic areas and generate revenues through
trafficking, the slave trade and ransoms.

The United Nations has been pointing out that
States bear the primary responsibility for the protection
of the civilian population, particularly women and
children, in times of peace or conflict. The Secretary-
General stresses the vulnerability and increased risks
endured by refugees and displaced women and girls,
who face additional difficulties due to their limited
access to resources and services, such as education
and health care, including comprehensive sexual
and reproductive health services, and to training and
sources of revenue. Therefore, it is necessary to ensure
a better international response in addressing women's
and girls' specific vulnerabilities.

Eliminating conflict-related sexual violence is
key to addressing the root causes of gender inequality
and changing the mindset of perpetrators, victims and
society at large. Some progress has been achieved in
the struggle since the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000). The Security Council has assumed a leadership
role in this regard by stressing the need for a more
systematic monitoring of sexual Violence in armed
conflict situations. It is now imperative that the United
Nations continues developing appropriate response
mechanisms to counter such a scourge.

The General Assembly's important Declaration
of Commitment to End Sexual Violence in Conflict
made recommendations, among which we highlight
the following. We must ensure that all peace, security
and conflict mediation processes explicitly recognize
the need to prevent, respond to and reduce crimes of
sexual violence; promote women's full participation
in all political, governance and security structures, as
well as in all decision-making processes; ensure that
national military and police doctrine is in accordance
with international law so as to enable a more
effective-prevention and response to sexual violence in
conflict; and support the deployment of national and
international expertise to build national capacity to hold
perpetrators to account and to improve the response to
and support for victims and their access to justice.

Furthermore, the other United Nations decisions
that we fully support stress the importance of, inter
alia, increasing the number of women in peacekeeping
missions and police units with a view to countering
stigma and threats of reprisal against survivors;
including specific actions to prevent conflict-related
sexual violence in disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration processes; and ensuring the mainstreaming
of a gender perspective in conflict resolution and peace
processes.

At the regional and subregional levels, the African
Union and SADC have made the protection of women's
rights apriority, and have adopted measures to tackle the
issue of conflict-related sexual violence and to ensure
women's participation in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts in Africa. The Permanent Observer of the
African Union and the Permanent Representative of
Zimbabwe, speaking on behalf of SADC, will elaborate
on what both organizations are doing in that regard.
Finally, it is crucial to prevent new such crimes
and to hold perpetrators to account. Victims should be
encouraged to speak out and to report violence, and their
voices should be heard and respected. As we celebrate
the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), we look forward to the 2015 high-level
review, which will enable us to make an assessment of
the progress made and the ongoing challenges in the
implementation of the Council's women and peace and
security agenda.

