Mr. Errazuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
thanks the Rwandan presidency for having convened
this important open debate on women, peace and
security focused on the issue of sexual violence in
armed conflict.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered by the Permanent Representative of Canada
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and
Security, as well as that delivered by the representative
of Slovenia on behalf of the Human Security Network.

We also welcome the report of the Secretary-
General on sexual violence in armed conflict
(S/2013/149), in particular with regard to the actions
taken and challenges faced by States in protecting
women, men and children from sexual violence in the
context of conflict and post-conflict situations.

We underscore the role of the Security Council
when it comes to women, peace and security through
the adoption of resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820 (2008),
1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010) and 2086 (2013).

We welcome the work of the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict Situations, Ms. Bangura, whom
we assure of our full cooperation.

Chile is firmly committed to the fight against
violence against women and girls, which we view
as an atrocious crime that must be addressed in a
comprehensive way. Violence, in all forms, goes
against human rights and, as such, addressing it must
be priority for States, and not an optional extra.

The policy of Chile in this area has been strengthened
through our participation in a number of international
instruments that have allowed us to consolidate our
democratic principles and make progress in this
direction. In August 2009, Chile published its national
action plan pursuant to resolution 1325 (2000), which
it structured around the gender perspective, human
rights, participation and coordination. This year, Chile
will begin updating the plan in line with the guidelines
set out by the United Nations so as to incorporate
dissemination, follow-up and awareness-raising
mechanisms on gender and security. We aim to achieve
the comprehensive and cross-cutting implementation
of actions seeking to promote targets for peace and
women's participation and leadership in the planning,

coordination and implementation of prevention
processes in conflict and post-conflict situations.

In that context, we have promoted the inclusion
of the gender perspective and leadership functions in
the context of our armed forces. There has also been
an increasing awareness of gender among the armed
forces and the equitable participation of women in
peacebuilding and decision-making processes, as well
as in international security.

We have achieved that goal with the active
participation of a number of national bodies. In
March, Chile organized a parallel event devoted to
this topic in the context of the fifty-seventh session
of the Commission on the Status of Women, entitled
"Chile global network of women peacebuilders:
implementation of the women, peace and security
agenda - experiences from Latin America". As part of
that event, the Deputy Minister of the National Service
for Women of Chile, Ms. Viviana Paredes, reaffirmed
Chile's commitment to the Security Council resolutions
on this issue and to the national action plan and its
adaptation to the new requirements that my country has
proposed.

We believe it is equally important to continue to
promote the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
in our region through the exchange of experiences and
international cooperation, both at the bilateral level and
in the regional mechanisms for peacekeeping operations
ofwhich Chile is a part. That is the case with the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, for which Chile
has provided female military contingents and in which
it has followed the United Nations zero-tolerance policy
for the sexual abuse and misconduct cases in which
certain members of the Mission have been involved.
We believe that the zero-tolerance policy should be a
general standard that is strictly and zealously enforced
in all peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations.

A key element in making progress on these issues
has been the guidelines established in the Security
Council resolutions that followed historic resolution
1325 (2000), which reinforce its principles and the
undeniable progress that has been made on the issue
of gender-based violence within the United Nations
system. In that respect, it is worth highlighting the
conclusions of the Commission on the Status of Women
at its fifty-seventh session. We promoted the inclusion,
in those conclusions, of the relationship between
the trafficking and illicit use of small arms and light
weapons and the resurgence of violence against women
and children, as we did in the text of the Arms Trade
Treaty, which also deals with this issue.

We agree with the Secretary-General when he states
in his report that national tribunals continue to bear the
primary responsibilty for the fight against impunity
for cases of sexual violence and are an important
complement to the efforts of the International Criminal
Court, fundamentally in terms of restoring Victims'
dignity and holding perpetrators legally accountable.
One of the founding principles of Chile's foreign
policy is the promotion of fundamental and universal
human rights. In that respect, we will continue to
support the efforts aimed at preventing violence against
women in conflict and promoting mediation in conflict
situations. We will continue to advocate for women's
inclusion and participation in efforts at peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and mediation.

