Mr. Voto-Bernales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
Peru thanks you, Sir, for your initiative of organizing
today's open debate on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and the role of women in
peacebuilding.

We also thank the Secretary-General for his
report on the United Nations System-wide Action Plan
for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), and
welcome the statements made by the four senior United
Nations representatives that we heard this morning.

Six years after the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), which involved a change in the way we think
about and deal with the issue of the participation of
women in conflict prevention and in promoting and
assisting in the peacekeeping process, we see that,
despite the efforts made to implement it, realities on
the ground show that we are still a long way away from
achieving the goals that we set ourselves.

It is regrettable that women are continuing to
suffer as a result of armed conflict, during which they
are subject to all forms of physical, sexual and
psychological violence committed by both State and
non-State actors. Increasingly violence and sexual
abuse, as well as the transmission of HIV/AIDS, are
used intentionally as weapons of war. That statement is
corroborated by the in-depth study on all forms of
violence against women that the Secretary-General has
submitted to the General Assembly.

That is why we feel that the international
community must continue to use all instruments
available to it so as to put an end to violations of the
human rights of women and girls in situations of armed
conflict. This must be done through coordinated
strategies and policies at the national and international
levels. For example, although it is important that such
situations be brought systematically before
international tribunals, States themselves have the
primary responsibility for providing justice and for
punishing those responsible for crimes. Only the rule
of law and justice can create a safe and sustainable
environment that will enable the full participation of
women in the peacebuilding process.

With regard to the Secretary-General's report,
Peru welcomes its consideration of the Action Plan for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). In the
light of the conclusions reached, we support the
proposal to continue working to speed up the
implementation of the resolution in the five key areas.

Likewise, we agree with the Secretary-General
that the Action Plan, at all levels of the United Nations
system, should be renewed beyond 2007 and
redesigned to take into account the conclusions and
measures contained in the report.

The establishment of the Peacebuilding
Commission and of its Support Office gives us a fresh
opportunity to help countries in the process of their
economic and social reconstruction and to prevent
them from slipping once again into armed conflict.
Likewise, it is important that States shoulder their
responsibilities and take the necessary and firm steps
necessary to remove those barriers preventing women
from being effectively involved in the political sphere,
in decision-making bodies, and in the peacekeeping
and peacebuilding processes.

We also deem it important that the agencies of the
United Nations system and civil society organizations
continue to implement innovative projects to prevent
gender-based violence in situations of armed conflict
and to address every kind of violence against women.
In that respect, we are pleased to lean that
peacekeeping missions are increasingly incorporating a
gender perspective in the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process.

Likewise, we would like to highlight the fact that
many peacekeeping operations already have offices on
gender issues, thus contributing to the promotion of
national, governmental and non-governmental
capacities in conflict areas.

There is much to be done, and the task must
addressed jointly by States, by the United Nations
system and civil society, in particular by women's
groups. In that respect, we would like to underline the
fact that an Arria-formula meeting, convened by the
delegation of the United Kingdom, was held yesterday,
on Wednesday, 25 October, on the role of women in
peacebuilding. That meeting helped us to obtain
firsthand knowledge of the work done by women's
organizations in the field, with a view to ensuring that
resolution 1325 (2000) is fully known and
implemented.

