Mr. Fernandes (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
you, Madam, for presiding over this meeting and for
your leadership on this topic.

(spoke in English)

I would also like to thank the briefers for their
instructive presentations.

Next year we will witness a convergence of global
milestones on gender issues. Brazil looks forward to the
Security Council high-level review of resolution 1325
(2000) and the celebration of the twentieth anniversary
of the Beijing Platform for Action, a major landmark in
the advancement of women. In parallel, as supported
by Brazil and recommended by the report of the Open
Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals, the
post-2015 development agenda is expected to include a
stand-alone goal for ensuring gender equality and the
empowerment of all women and girls.

Yet major challenges remain, particularly when the
threats of forced displacement and gender inequality
overlap. Nearly two decades ago, the Beijing Platform
for Action recognized that refugee and displaced women
are especially vulnerable to violence and need specific
measures of protection, assistance and training. At a
time when the global population of forcibly displaced
persons and asylum-seekers has reached record levels,
it is especially important to intensify efforts to prevent
women and girls from falling victim to sex and labour
trafficking, gender-based violence, legal discrimination
and other abuses.

Prevention is always the best solution. Even after
hostilities have begun, diplomatic measures should
not be prematurely discarded. The temptation to
employ forceful and military measures to resolve
international crises constitutes, in many instances, an
additional hazard to all civilians, including refugees,
displaced or stateless women and girls. Women should
be acknowledged and empowered as key actors in all
activities that influence their future, from humanitarian
assistance to decisions on displacement and repatriation;
from the planning of economic recovery to the pursuit
of accountability for serious crimes; and from peace
processes to peacebuilding initiatives.

We should also recognize the transformative
potential of the greater participation and leadership
of women in society, including in conflict settings.
As Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, Brazil
convened in September an event, entitled "Women,
Everyday Peacebuilders", that stressed the crucial role
played by women in reconciling former combatants
and mending community divisions. Given appropriate
tools, women can greatly contribute to the effectiveness
of post-conflict activities and therefore enhance
the prospects of reaching a sustainable peace. The
Secretary-General's seven-point action plan on gender-
responsive peacebuilding (see S/2010/466) is a central
reference in that regard.

The long-term protection of displaced women and
girls is also improved when their basic needs are properly
addressed. Education, training and employment, legal
assistance, land and property rights and health services,
including sexual and reproductive health services,
are vital areas to provide women subjected to forced
displacement with a better perspective for their future.

Although Brazil does not fall into the category
of a conflict or post-conflict situation, our National
Plan of Policies for Women integrates relevant
recommendations contained in resolution 1325 (2000),
including those aimed at fighting sexual violence. On
the external front, Brazil has launched South-South
cooperation projects to tackle sexual and gender-
based violence in countries affected by violence or
instability. We stand ready to share our experience
of social inclusion with other countries, as they could
be instrumental for women in areas emerging from
conflict.

Brazil has a long tradition of offering shelter and
safety to victims of distant wars, regardless of their
gender, religion, sexual orientation or ethnic group.
Since last year, we have granted humanitarian visas
to over 5,000 asylum seekers, including hundreds of
women and girls who would otherwise be subject to a
situation of extreme danger. Specific policies aimed at
welcoming Syrian refugees have also been adopted by
other countries in our region, which shows that, besides
being a peaceful and stable region, Latin America and
the Caribbean remain committed to the cause of those
displaced by conflict and persecution.

In keeping with this long-standing regional
commitment, Brazil will host, in partnership with the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, on 2 and 3 December, a ministerial meeting
in commemoration of the thirtieth anniversary of the
Cartagena Declaration on Refugees, a non-binding
regional instrument that reflects Latin America and
the Caribbean's tradition of granting asylum to those
in need. The declaration and action plan to be adopted
in Brasilia shall represent a further step towards the
improvement of our regional framework regarding
the protection of refugees, internally displaced and
stateless people.

At the domestic level, renewed attention is presently
being given to the issue of statelessness, a worldwide
challenge affecting millions of persons, often due to
unequal treatment of women and men by nationality
laws. The Government will soon submit to the Congress
a draft law on the protection of stateless persons.

The Council has been playing an increasingly
relevant role in emphasizing the particular needs of
women and girls affected by conflict, including those
who have been forcibly displaced. The far-reaching
nature of this agenda, however, demands that we do
not lose sight of the important work being done by
other bodies. The General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council, the Peacebuilding Commission,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, the United Nations Population Fund and
UN-Women also require and deserve our full support
and attention in the enduring quest to promote, protect
and empower all women around the world.

