Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): We welcome this
open debate and thank your delegation, Mr. President,
for its useful concept paper (S/2013/335). While a
continued emphasis on protection issues is crucial, we
call at the same time for the same level of emphasis on
the participation pillar of this agenda.

In recent years, we have witnessed an alarming
increase in the documented use of sexual violence in
armed conflict, often as a method of warfare to achieve
military goals. Much remains to be done in terms of
an effective response. Ending impunity is clearly a
central element in this respect. Unfortunately, however,
we must acknowledge that, in practice, the fight to end
impunity has barely begun. Effective justice for victims
of sexual violence in conflict continues to be a great
exception to the rule.

The necessary work to that end is closely linked
to broader efforts to strengthen justice and the rule
of law. An effective judicial response requires States
themselves to strengthen domestic justice systems in all
their aspects, where appropriate, with the assistance of
international donors and agencies. Particular emphasis
should be placed on procedures that allow victims and
witnesses to come forward while minimizing the risk
of reprisals and that take into account the severe trauma
that may have been inflicted on them.

The International Criminal Court (ICC) also has an
important role to play, and we were therefore somewhat
surprised not to see the ICC mentioned explicitly in
the concept paper. The work of the Court can serve in
particular as an incentive for Governments to deliver
accountability at the domestic level. The Court can also
assist such work by providing information and evidence
for use in domestic proceedings, and it is well known
that the ICC Prosecutor has made the fight against
sexual violence a focus of her work.

The Security Council should more often call on
Governments to prioritize the strengthening of domestic
justice systems, but it should also be more assertive
where national systems fail, through the establishment
of fact-finding commissions, commissions of inquiry
and referrals to the ICC. Where domestic justice
systems have broken down completely, such measures
may often be the only way of creating deterrence and
enabling longer-term justice. Evidence needs to be
professionally collected at the earliest possible stages,
a process that may be assisted inter alia by the Justice
Rapid Response initiative.

The Council's ability to respond depends on
the availability of objective, accurate and reliable
information. Monitoring, analysis and reporting
arrangements and the work of the women's protection
advisers are therefore of continued relevance.

There seems to be a major design flaw in our current
national and international efforts to bring about justice
for crimes of sexual violence - the voices ofvictims are
rarely heard. This is lamentable and counterproductive,
because a greater role for victims in this discourse
could have a strong impact on the willingness of the
relevant actors to bring about change.

To conclude, I would briefly like to recall that
sexual violence also affects men and boys, as stated
in the concept paper. In this context, we would like to
inform delegations about the next session of our lecture
series on women and peace and security. It will take
place on 8 or 9 July and will focus on the role of men
as perpetrators but also as victims of sexual violence
in conflict.

