Archbishop Auza: My delegation would like to
congratulate Spain on its presidency of the Security
Council this month and its convening ofthis particularly
important open debate and high-level review of
resolution 1325 (2000). The resolution was historic in
its aim to highlight for the first time the links between
women, armed conflict and peace and security. It
also recognized that women and children are affected
by armed conflict in differentiated and more adverse
ways, and that women play a crucial role in maintaining
and promoting peace and security.

In the light of the number, intensity and changing
nature of current conflicts, the high-level review
and global study we are discussing are very relevant.
Violent extremism and terrorism in many parts of the
world, particularly the Middle East and parts of Africa,
have brought violence to new levels of savagery against
civilians and cultural and religious patrimonies. Women
and girls are caught up in such conflict situations
and subjected to rape, sexual assault, torture, human
trafficking, forced marriages and forced religious
conversions. They are bought and sold and even given
as gifts or trophies to terrorist fighters.

My delegation is particularly appalled by acts of
sexual violence used as a strategy of war and designed
to dehumanize and demoralize women, girls and
their families. Such attacks have long-term, even
lifelong, traumatic effects on women and girls, both
physically and psychologically, and in many cases
the victims of sexual violence are excluded from or
heavily stigmatized in their families and communities.
Such crimes also have a detrimental effect on younger
generations, since women are most often the primary
educators, caregivers and breadwinners. Such realities
are harrowing. As Pope Francis said in his address to the
General Assembly on 25 September, they "should serve
as an urgent call to those charged with the conduct of
international affairs to examine their consciences" (see A/70/PV.3, page 5).

Catholic organizations and agencies rapidly and
effectively respond to needs arising from violence
directed at women and girls in many areas of conflict.
They promote programmes aimed at preventing such
violence and ensuring women's dignity and effective role
in society by promoting pacification and reconciliation,
while at the same time addressing the deeper causes
of violence against women and girls. They run special
programmes designed to fight the stigmatization of
victims of sexual violence and to reintegrate them into
their families and local communities.

Concerning the efforts to implement resolution
1325 (2000), my delegation strongly objects to the
suggestion that recovery and rehabilitation measures
include abortion.

There is no doubt that much still has to be done.
My delegation encourages the United Nations and its
Member States to recruit more women for preventive
diplomacy, mediation efforts, peacekeeping missions
and peacebuilding processes. Women make specific,
and at times decisive, contributions that are necessary
in such critical areas as helping to foster good relations
with local communities and building trust among
parties in conflict - elements that are essential to the
success of any diplomatic effort and conflict resolution.

The role of women in peace and security should not
be considered as an afterthought or simply as something
politically correct. It is an essential contribution to all
our efforts to spare our world from further scourges of
war and violence.

