Mr. Akram (Pakistan): I would like to express
the Pakistani delegation's appreciation to you for
convening this open debate to mark the third
anniversary of the adoption of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000). The resolution elevated women
from being hapless victims of conflict situations to
equal stakeholders in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts and in the rehabilitation of post conflict
situations. Today's meeting provides us with an
opportunity to review the progress and to advance the
implementation of this resolution.

Human rights instruments - particularly the
Geneva Conventions - proscribe torture, violence,
rape and other forms of sexual violence and ill-
treatment of women during conflicts. The Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court pronounces these
acts in the context of armed conflict as crimes against
humanity. These injunctions notwithstanding, women's
suffering in conflict situations has continued. Despite
growing awareness of their plight and increased focus
on their protection, women continue to be the prime
victims of calamities - both natural and man-made -
in conflict situations.

Mention has been made here of the situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in
Afghanistan and other places. You will understand if I,
on my part, address specifically the plight of women in
a conflict that affects a people who are close to the
hearts of the Pakistani people.

The suffering of women in the ongoing freedom
struggle in Jammu and Kashmir is symbolic of the
suffering of women worldwide. The Indian army uses
rape in this deeply conservative society as a weapon to
punish, intimidate, coerce, humiliate and degrade
Kashmiri women. Investigations by human rights
groups into allegations of gang rape by the Indian
security forces show that it has been used routinely in
search-and-cordon operations. There is generally a
pattern of impunity and non-accountability when it
comes to incidents of rape or violence. Investigations
are more a cover-up than an inquiry.

Human rights organizations have testified that in
J ammu and Kashmir, since 1992, rape and ill-treatment
of women are usually reported to have taken place
during counter-insurgency operations by Indian forces.
The Asia Watch and Physicians for Human Rights have
documented the extensive use of rape by the
occupation forces designed to punish and humiliate the
entire community. Amnesty International has reported
that harassment, abduction, rape and deliberate and
arbitrary killings perpetrated by pro-Indian renegades
in Kashmir are also carried out with the support of the
Indian security forces.

We would hope that, like other peacekeeping
operations mentioned by Mr. Guehenno, the United
Nations Military Observer Group for India and
Pakistan will also be tasked to report to the Security
Council on the conditions of women in occupied
Jammu and Kashmir. The implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), like other resolutions of the Security
Council, cannot be promoted on a selective and
discriminatory basis.

There are thousands of destitute women in
Kashmir, illustrating this manifestation of a brutal
conflict. They include women who have been
widowed, or whose husbands have been maimed, or
who have disappeared, or those who are in arbitrary
detention. We urge the United Nations and non-
governmental organizations (NGOs) to prepare a
survey of the number of such destitute Kashmiri
women. The international community should take
appropriate measures to provide help and compensation
to these women.

We urge the humanitarian agencies, especially the
International Committee of the Red Cross, to act as the
instrument and avenue for such relief distribution.
Political considerations and the power of certain
countries should not stand in the way of international
humanitarian agencies responding to the plight of the
Kashmiri women and children suffering from the long
and bloody conflict that has been inflicted on their
homeland.

Unfortunately, such crimes against women do not
remain limited to situations of armed conflicts. A
pattern of targeted violence against women in
situations of communal disturbance within national
borders has also been witnessed. Very little is said of
last year's anti-Muslim violence in the Indian state of
Gujarat, which saw abhorrent illustration of the crimes
against women. The report of Human Rights Watch has
extensively documented these crimes, which included
gang rape, burning women alive, other methods of
murder and the murder of unborn babies. In
Afghanistan, where the destitution of women was a
pervasive consequence of two decades of conflict,
violence against women has been used as a tool to
terrorize populations, force displacement and
demoralize adversaries.

By adopting resolution 1325 (2000), the Security
Council reaffirmed its deep concern at such violence
against women in armed conflict. It also acknowledged
women's possible positive contribution in the
prevention and resolution of conflicts and in post-
conflict consolidation and rehabilitation. The need to
mainstream a gender perspective into peacekeeping has
been affirmed.

We thank Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for
his briefing on the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations' efforts to implement resolution 1325
(2000) in United Nations peacekeeping missions. We
also thank Ms. Amy Smythe, Senior Gender Adviser to
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), for
sharing with us her experience in the implementation
of the resolution. These two presentations to the
Council give us an insight into the normative and
operational implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

The best way to protect women from the scourge
of armed conflict is to prevent and resolve conflicts.
The Security Council, as the organ of the United
Nations responsible for the maintenance of
international peace and security, must strengthen its
capacity to prevent such conflicts and to resolve them.
We must also stress the observance and implementation
of the principles of international humanitarian law and
human rights in international conflicts.

We believe the Council must not only ensure
prompt and effective responses to crisis situations,
irrespective of their geographical locations, but also
avoid selectivity in the implementation of its
resolutions. We need greater international solidarity,
responsibility and respect for the collective decisions
of the United Nations and the determination to
implement them. The Charter contains provisions,
including in Chapter VI, which can be utilized for the
purpose of promoting implementation of Council
resolutions.

At last year's open meeting of the Council to
discuss women and armed conflict, my delegation
suggested a few measures for the Council's
consideration, which we believe are still valid and
applicable.

The first is adopting a declaration that the
targeting of women - especially the use of rape as an
instrument of war - will be considered a war crime,
susceptible to national and international punishment.

The second is initiating a study of recent and
ongoing conflict situations to identify crimes
committed against women, with a view to seeking
redress and compensation for the victims.

The third is requiring current and future United
Nations peacekeeping operations to monitor, and report
regularly to the Security Council, on the situation of
women and girls in their mission areas.

The fourth is promoting the fullest possible
participation by women in peace processes as well in
post-conflict peace-building, including in the
reintegration, reconstruction and rehabilitation of
societies in post-conflict phases.

The fifth is requiring United Nations specialized
organs and agencies to develop ways to address the
special needs of women and girls affected by conflict,
including health and psychological care.

The sixth is the Security Council's involving
other United Nations bodies as well as representatives
of civil society - perhaps using the Arria Formula -
in a comprehensive discussion to promote such
recommendations and actions.

We believe that those actions should be
undertaken in the Security Council's follow-up to
resolution 1325 (2000).

