Mr. Mugoya (Uganda): I wish to thank the
delegation of the United Kingdom for organizing
today's debate on this very important subject. I wish
also to welcome the Secretary-General and to thank
him for the comprehensive report (S/2009/362) he has
submitted on the implementation of resolution 1820
(2008).
At the outset, let me reiterate that Uganda
deplores and condemns sexual violence and supports
the various efforts by the United Nations and other
stakeholders to eradicate its use as an instrument of
war. Uganda has continued to advocate at the regional
and international levels for respect for and protection
in armed conflict of women and children who would
otherwise be victims of sexual violence.

It is clear from the report of the Secretary-
General that the incidence of widespread sexual
violence tends to escalate in situations where State
institutions have broken down. It is also clear that this
is a global problem and that both Stat and non-State
actors have been responsible for some of the very
serious abuses that have taken place. Thus, sexual
violence is a symptom of a much bigger problem,
about which Uganda is greatly concerned.

There should be no impunity for perpetrators of
sexual violence, and all efforts must be made to ensure
that culprits are held accountable for their despicable
actions. Only then can victims begin to heal and to
develop a measure of confidence that they have not
been abandoned altogether. There remains an urgent
need to sensitize all parties to armed conflict to the fact
that certain practices are not acceptable under any
circumstances.

Effective implementation of resolution 1820
(2008) also requires that, at the very minimum, an
atmosphere of peace, security and stability be in place.
The most effective way to avoid sexual violence during
armed conflict is to ensure that peace and the rule of
law are restored in the affected countries. In order to
address the situation more realistically and
conclusively, institutions of the State have to be
strengthened. When institutions of the State such as the
police, prisons, governance and the army are well
established, law enforcement can then be enhanced and
severe penalties for perpetrators will become an actual
deterrent. There are instances where perpetrators of
sexual violence still live openly among their victims,
with impunity.

Possible solutions to drawn-out conflicts need to
be addressed in a holistic way. For instance, integrating
the various forces in an armed conflict requires more
than just a simple change of uniform. It requires a
change in mindset, and it requires counselling, training
and capacity-building. The integration of armed forces
should be well structured. There should be strict
vetting of recruits for the armed forces so that people
who are at high risk of becoming sexual predators are
excluded. High-ranking officers implicated in sexual
violence should be removed from the ranks of armed
personnel as an example to others and in order to send
a clear message of zero tolerance for sexual violence.

It is incumbent upon the Council to ensure that
resolutions to establish or renew mandates or to impose
enforcement measures under Chapter VII of the
Charter contain provisions, as appropriate, on the
prevention of and response to sexual violence, with
corresponding requirements on reporting to the
Council. The United Nations, regional organizations
and civil society need to work together to train good
mediators, including female mediators, in adequate
numbers and to mobilize sufficient resources to carry
out these activities. Uganda supports the creation of an
effective mechanism that will galvanize the various
efforts to find a lasting solution to this problem.

In that regard, my delegation welcomes the
establishment of United Nations Action against Sexual
Violence in Conflict. Its existence is a first step
towards improving the coordination of existing
activities and the exchange of crucial information
between United Nations Headquarters and country-
level offices. We also welcome the Secretary-General's
commitment to submit an annual report on
implementation of resolution 1820 (2008).

