Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq): At the outset, allow me to
thank you, Mr. President, and Secretary of State Rice
for convening this timely and important meeting,
which, in my delegation's view, is crucial and
necessary at a time when women and other vulnerable
groups have become the main victims of armed
conflict.

Women's advancement, security and living
conditions in Iraq had declined during the past three
decades. Wars and economic sanctions and negligence
and oppression by the former regime had eroded
conditions for women. There had been systematic
breaches of human rights, in particular against women,
who were subject to gender-specific abuse and
violence. In the past few years, thousands of Iraqi
women lost their lives and suffered from terrorist acts,
which have targeted the most vulnerable groups in
society, namely, children, women and the elderly. More
recently, terrorist groups have been recruiting and
using Iraqi women to commit suicidal attacks against
civilians. According to statistics, about 17 women have
committed such acts. Terrorists have even used women
with mental disabilities to commit suicidal attacks in a
market crowded with women and children.

With regard to the new Iraq, equality between
women and men and protection against discrimination
were enshrined in the Transitional Administrative Law
and in the new Iraqi constitution that has been adopted.
However, violence against women is rooted in some
traditional practices and tribal codes, and is
compounded by the socio-economic and security
situation in the country.

Throughout the difficulties the country has faced,
Iraqi women have shown resilience, courage and
determination. For the past few years, they have been
playing a larger and more effective role, as they are
part of the political process in the new Iraq. They hold
no less than 25 per cent of parliamentary and
provincial council seats.

They have recently become more empowered,
with the creation of the cross-party women's caucus
composed of 73 women members of parliament. In a
joint effort with United Nations agencies, that party
will advance the development of policies to help
victims of conflict, including widows, orphans, the
families of war victims and Iraqi refugees. The
establishment of the cross-party women's caucus will
enable Iraqi women members of parliament to emerge
as more effective and influential actors in the
legislature, by bridging different viewpoints held by
the various parties to which they belong.

For the first time, Iraqi women have also been
playing an effective role as ministers of important
ministries, including those responsible for human
rights, municipalities and public works, women,
housing and construction and the environment.

I should also mention that the country has for the
first time experienced the establishment of women's
organizations, through which Iraqi women have proven
their capabilities in defeating challenges by taking on
difficult responsibilities on different levels. Those
organizations have been playing an important role in
advancing and empowering women in Iraq. My country
is going through the phase of institutional
reconstruction, and my Government realizes that
without the effective participation and full role of
women, many of the long-term goals will not be
achieved.

Iraq's current political situation provides an
opportunity to redress persistent violations of women's
rights, as the Iraqi constitution will be further amended
as part of the political process. It will open space to
continue to influence the process of addressing
women's rights and promoting gender equality as part
of Iraq's institutional rebuilding. It is anticipated that
60 laws will be either revised or formulated, as
stipulated in Iraq's new constitution, providing an
unprecedented opportunity to influence further the
constitution and legislation and to align them with
international conventions - in particular the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women and both Optional
Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
which my Government recently ratified.

The Government of Iraq, in partnership with the
United Nations Development Fund for Women, is
implementing programmes and projects to promote the
role of women by strengthening the role of civil society
organizations in mitigating violence and by
contributing to building peace in Iraq. Support for that
effort is provided in line with the framework of
resolution 1325 (2000), the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women and the Beijing Platform for Action.

That partnership also includes capacity-building
for women's non-governmental organizations to
promote women's participation in peacebuilding and
conflict mitigation.

Another programme implemented in Iraq by
various United Nations agencies involves
disseminating knowledge on emerging issues and
innovative solutions towards conflict resolution and
increasing tolerance, in order to enhance the capacity
of community groups and women's non-governmental
organizations that promote the culture of peace and
foster dialogue among various groups.

As we are discussing sexual violence and rape as
war crimes under international law, my delegation is of
the view that such crimes against women should be
considered as crimes against humanity, as those actions
cannot find a place in any culture and should not be
excused under any circumstances.
Eight years ago, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security. Its purpose was to address the atrocities
committed against women and girls during conflicts
and even after peace agreements and in post-conflict
situations. We agree that since the adoption of that
resolution, progress towards reaching its main goals
has been slow.

We believe that one of the major problems facing
our endeavours to stop these crimes is the issue of
shame and the social exclusion of victims. Since we
are discussing the issue of data collection on rape and
sexual violence, we believe that due consideration
should be given to cultural differences and to
awareness-raising campaigns undertaken with the help
of community leaders in post-conflict situations, in
particular among the most vulnerable groups in society.

Preventing and eliminating these atrocities must
be the main goal of our endeavours, and to achieve that
goal we must act globally. We commend the efforts of
the United Nations in that regard, but we call upon all
relevant United Nations agencies, the Special
Rapporteur on violence against women, its causes and
consequences, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
civil society and non-governmental organizations to
combine their efforts to combat these crimes and to
establish early warning mechanisms to enable the
international community to prevent these crimes from
taking place.

We also believe that an end must be put to
impunity for the perpetrators of these crimes and that
they should be held accountable for their actions.

To conclude, we would like to express our full
support for an action-oriented resolution that will put
an end to these crimes and atrocities against women
and girls, and my delegation hopes that this important
debate will bring this issue to the world's attention and
make it globally recognized.

