The Secretary-General: I thank the Spanish
presidency of the Council. led by His Excellency
Mr. Rajoy Brey, for convening this important meeting.
I come with a plea for Member States to take steps to
help victims of trafficking today and prevent further
cases in the future. That means attention to immediate
crimes and underlying causes.

Trafficking is a global problem, but the most
vulnerable people are those caught in conflict: women,
children, internally displaced persons and refugees.
War provides oxygen to terrorist groups. It gives them
space to flourish. the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL), Boko Haram, Al-Shabaab and others
are using trafficking and sexual violence as weapons
of terror and an important source of revenue. Both
ISIL and Boko Haram have engaged in the sexual
enslavement of women and girls through trafficking.
Yazidi girls captured in Iraq are trafficked into Syria
and sold in open slave markets as if they were things,
not people.

Before the conflict in Syria began, there were few,
if any, human trafficking victims from that country.
Now, victims from Syria - along with Iraq, Somalia
and other conflict-torn countries - are found in
Europe, Asia and the Middle East. Traumatized Syrian
refugee children are being forced to work. Instead of
studying and playing, they are sewing clothes, serving
food and selling items on the street. We have to fight
trafficking for the sake of the victims When we do,
we will also decrease funding for terrorists and make
everyone safer. We need action on two fronts.

The first is justice and accountability. These are
heinous crimes that demand immediate international
action. International law needs to be respected and
implemented. The United Nations is actively engaged
in preventing sexual exploitation and abuse perpetrated
by peacekeepers. States must also train peacekeepers
and others to respond to trafficking in persons and
prevent sexual exploitation and abuse. We should
intensify training on preventing trafficking in persons
as well as sexual exploitation and abuse.

The United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime is a vital tool. I
call on all States that are not party to its Protocol on
trafficking in persons to join right away. I also urge
countries to adopt dedicated anti-trafficking laws and
national action plans. States should consider creating
multidisciplinary law-enforcement units or specialized
prosecutors' offices to address this threat.

Some States have successfully suppressed
trafficking syndicates by targeting money-laundering
and criminal proceeds. We should step up this action.
Governments have to respond, especially when their
own nationals are involved.

I call on all States to investigate and prosecute such
cases, including those in which their own nationals
commit this crime abroad. All perpetrators must be
brought to justice.

The problem of trafficking is international in
nature, and only an international response can succeed.
The United Nations is bringing together Governments,
other organizations and civil-society groups. I call for
increased support to United Nations entities that are
confronting the problem of trafficking.

I encourage contributions to the United Nations
Voluntary Trust Fund for Victims of Trafficking in
Persons, Especially Women and Children, and the
United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund on Contemporary
Forms of Slavery. These initiatives are helping victims
to heal and become agents of change.

The second front is human rights and stability. If
conflict gives oxygen to traffickers, human rights and
stability suffocate them. That is why it is so important to
advance the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and its 17 Sustainable Development Goals. The 2030
Agenda promises a life of dignity for all people and
focuses on helping the farthest behind first. To fulfil
this promise, we have to stand for the human rights of
all victims and vulnerable people.

I call for all countries to ratify all international
human rights, refugee, labour rights and
crime-prevention conventions, and to put efforts into
their effective implementation.

The majority of trafficking victims are women
and girls. Our response must include special attention
to their rights. States must adopt gender-sensitive and
rights-based migration policies. We need strategic
leadership in ending war and also in preventing
conflicts and sustaining peace. That is why I have
strengthened the commitment of the United Nations
to supporting Member States in early action and in
preventive diplomacy.

As this may be my last speech to the Council, let
me emphasize once again that prevention should be at
the forefront. I welcome my successor's focus on this
very important priority. Let us work together to help
today's victims of trafficking while creating a more
stable and just world for all.
I thank you, Mr. President, for your leadership
and commitment.

