Ms. Perez Colman (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank the Kingdom of Spain for its
invitation to participate in this important open debate
on women and peace and security on the occasion of
the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000).

Argentina makes it a priority to incorporate a gender
perspective into the design and implementation of its
public policies. The implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and subsequent resolutions on women and peace
and security, as well as the prevention and response
to sexual violence in armed conflict, is embodied
in Argentina's firm commitment to international
instruments aimed at protecting women's human rights
and to which it has accorded constitutional status, such
as the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women.

Argentina's incorporation of women into
peacekeeping processes and its process for
implementing resolution 1325 (2000) is its response to
a political decision to mainstream a gender perspective
into public policies and to defend and promote women's
human rights in every area. In that regard, in 2008 we
established a national plan for implementing resolution
1325 (2000) in the area of defence, and in 2012 we
did the same vis-a-vis security. More recently, on
15 September, the President of Argentina, Cristina
Fernandez de Kirchner, approved a national plan of
action for Argentina's implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) and subsequent related resolutions that
consolidates our various policies on the promotion and
defence of women's human rights. The plan is aimed
at increasing women's presence in peacekeeping and
humanitarian assistance missions and their participation
in decision-making bodies. We intend to increase
women's political participation in peace negotiations
and conflict management and in the decision-making
processes for those areas. We will incorporate a
gender perspective in all activities of peacebuilding
and humanitarian missions, notably activities for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. We
will also protect the human rights of women and girls
in countries in conflict and emerging from conflict,
including those in refugee camps and those who are
displaced, particularly in dealing with gender-based
and sexual violence, and promoting their safety and
welfare.

Women in Argentina make up 16 per cent of the
military component, and therefore one important recent
milestone was the promotion of the first woman in our
military to the rank of general. We have also promoted
the presence of women in the army's infantry and
cavalry, which were closed to women until 2012. The
armed forces have created gender desks that work with
the various military units and have strengthened gender
focal points in order to conduct predeployment training
of participants in peacekeeping operations.

Women are victims of various forms of violence in
conflicts. Their impact on women and girls is varied,
disproportionate, multidimensional and complex,
with devastating effects both physically and on their
fundamental rights. Argentina was a sponsor of General
Assembly resolution 69/293, which declared 19 June the
International Day for the Elimination of Sexual Violence
in Conflict, with the intention of raising awareness in
order to tackle the use of this scourge as a weapon of
war and to help promote a culture of peace that can
ensure that we can put an end to this type of cruelty,
which is a threat to the dignity ofpersons and to respect
for human rights and international humanitarian law.

We agree with the assessment in the concept
note (S/2015/749, annex) prepared by the Kingdom of
Spain on the need to ensure that United Nations senior
management, both at Headquarters and in the field,
acts with greater determination in effectively meeting
its responsibilities in the area of women and peace and
security, and we believe that we Member States should
renew our commitment to integrate them into our
national policies and laws.

Argentina has supported all ofthe resolutions aimed
at combating sexual violence in conflict since resolution
1325 (2000) and its specific subsequent resolutions. My
country's commitment to access to justice for women
and the fight against impunity can be seen through its
participation in the Justice Rapid Response mechanism
since February 2009. Argentina is now one of the 10
members of the Executive Board of this mechanism
and regularly participates in its meetings, providing its
experience in investigating human rights violations.

Argentina believes in and supports the work of
the international community to achieve zero tolerance
for acts of sexual violence in conflicts. Impunity with
regard to such acts produces a harmful effect because it
exacerbates cycles of conflict. We must make the switch
from a culture of impunity to a culture of prevention
that promotes justice, responsibility and the rule of law.
The role of the United Nations is crucial to support
States in that process.

Argentina is committed specifically for 2016 to
develop a proposal to establish a quota of 33 per cent
for women at all grades and executive functions within
the armed forces; to work jointly with the Auditor
General of the Armed Forces to establish the post of
Gender Auditor to take forward the process of handling
disciplinary matters with a full gender perspective; and
to go forward with the implementation of the Single
Registry of Cases of Violence against Women in the
proceedings of cases carried out by the armed forces.

The merit of resolution 1325 (2000) was to
acknowledge the important role of women as protagonists
in peace processes and in preventive diplomacy and
their participation at the peace negotiating table and
in the post-conflict reconstruction phase. We reaffirm
Argentina's commitment to join efforts to ensure that
this proactive approach is possible. We are convinced
that we can achieve sustainable and lasting peace only
with women participating at all levels of the peace
process.
