Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Allow
me to thank Chile for organizing this open debate on
the protection of civilians, and for choosing to focus on
the specific needs of women and girls in armed conflict
and post-conflict settings.

Luxembourg fully associates itself with the
statement made by the observer of the European Union.

The year 2015 will coincide with several important
events. The high-level review on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) and the review of the
implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action will undoubtedly be the significant events
of the year in advancing gender equality and women's
empowerment. Two other important reviews will
take place this year, relating to United Nations peace
operations and the peacebuilding architecture. In
terms of the protection of civilians, all of these reviews
should help us to identify ways and means to improve
our methods of action. To that end, it is imperative that
all the findings and recommendations of these distinct
but complementary studies be coordinated to ensure

synergy.

The concept note that you, Sir, have circulated for
this debate (S/2015/32, annex) and the briefings made
by the Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs amd the representatives of the International
Committee of the Red Cross and the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security have well
described the tragic plight of women and girls in
situations of armed conflict and the numerous
widespread violations of international humanitarian
law to which they are subject. That is the case in Syria,
Iraq - where Daesh uses sexual violence as a weapon
of war - the Central African Republic and South
Sudan, where women are impacted disproportionately
by the massive displacements of populations. It is also
the case in Nigeria, where Boko Haram deliberately
targets women and young girls. The list, regrettably, is
far from exhaustive.

Given this widespread scourge, all Member States,
regional organizations, bodies and entities of the United
Nations system and civil society organizations should
work together to provide a protective environment
for civilians. The Security Council in particular must
act consistently by ensuring that those responsible
for crimes committed against civilians are brought to
justice, and by taking targeted measures against those
responsible for grave violations of human rights. On its
field visits, the Security Council should systematically
raise the issue of the protection of women with the
relevant authorities and meet with local women's
organizations.

The same consistency of action is necessary in
establishing peacekeeping and peacebuilding missions.
These missions should have an adequate mandate and
sufficient resources to protect civilians, including
through the deployment of gender advisers and advisers
for the protection of women and children. These three
types of advisors, it must be remembered, each has a
specific role to play. The Council should also continue
to keep abreast of the situation of women and girls by
regularly inviting to its debates the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, or the Executive Director of
UN-Women.

While the protection of civilians and the specific
needs of women and children lie at the centre of our
debate, it would disempower women to limit them to
playing the passive role of victims. We must ensure
strengthened participation of women in mediation,
conflict resolution and in all political processes. Since
2010, Luxembourg has been supporting a programme
conducted by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations promoting the political participation of
women in the aftermath of conflict. This programme has
resulted in progress in terms of women's participation
and organization in Timor-Leste, Haiti, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Liberia. It has also shown
that protection the rights and the physical and moral
integrity of women is an important precondition for
them to take their rightful place in the field of political
action.

In conclusion, let me express our wish that the
ideas put forward in this debate will be implemented
consistently with a view to improving the protection of
civilians on the ground. We must all mobilize so that
2015 can deliver on its promise and start the change
that millions of women and girls around the world are
waiting for.

