Mr. Ehouzou (Benin) (spoke in French): As this
is the first time that I am taking the floor in the
Security Council this month, I would like, on behalf of
my delegation, to warmly congratulate you, Sir, on
your country's assumption of the presidency of the
Council. Your presence here, Mr. Minister, elevates the
level of this debate and attests to the particular interest
that the Government of Ghana attaches to this
important subject. My delegation is grateful to you for
having organized this debate on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), which allows us to take stock
of the efforts made by the United Nations and the
international community to promote the equal
participation of women in the resolution of conflicts,
peacebuilding and the prevention of conflicts
throughout the world. Resolution 1325 (2000) set out
well-defined objectives to guide those efforts.

The exhaustive analysis of the Secretary-General
contained in his latest report (S/2007/567) allows us to
evaluate the significant progress made in gender
mainstreaming in the activities covered, as well as in
promoting the recovery and development of countries
emerging from conflict. However, the report also
points to delays in implementing the 2005-2007 Action
Plan due to a lack of commitment at certain levels.
Institutions that have not yet established action plans in
that regard should be encouraged to endeavour to
swiftly put such plans in place, in order to ensure the
consistent implementation of the resolution in the
context of the Action Plan for 2008-2009. We welcome
in particular the common policy in the area of gender
equality, which is aimed at facilitating the exchange of
information on good practices and lessons learned in
peacekeeping operations.

The participation of women and the taking into
account of women's interests are directly linked to the
degree of commitment to their advancement. The more
that women are involved in the search for solutions to
the problems of our societies, the more the solutions
that are found will contribute to promoting their crucial
role and to the recognition of the importance of women
to the maintenance of peace and security and to the
progress of our societies.

Violations of the rights of women are intolerable,
as is the physical cruelty from which they continue to
suffer. The international community must document
and resolutely combat such acts. Efforts to facilitate
the identification of ill treatment against women and
young girls in armed conflict, and to identify their
needs in post-conflict situations, should include the
intensification of the fight against impunity for crimes
against them. International judicial bodies must be
more involved in punishing gender-based violence
against women. If national jurisdictions do not address
that issue effectively, the International Criminal Court
should itself be encouraged to take up cases of large-
scale rape and sexual exploitation of women and young
girls. We believe that to be an appropriate approach,
given the astronomical number of documented victims
cited in the report of the Secretary-General.

The establishment of the System-wide Action
Plan for 2008-2009 on the basis of lessons learned
from the previous Action Plan has made possible the
very timely targeting of a more limited number of key
thematic areas to serve as points of reference and
evaluation of efforts undertaken. The implementation
strategies from which the new Action Plan emerged are
a good example of the integrated approach called for
by the complexity of the issue. By seamlessly linking
the development of policies with advocacy, capacity
building, working in partnership and networks and the
provision of goods and services, that approach clearly
underscores the key role of Governments and civil
society in expanding the degree to which resolution
1325 (2000) is implemented. It also reflects an
acknowledgement of the need to synergize the efforts
of various actors with those being made at the regional,
national and international levels.

On the whole, we can clearly see from the
Secretary-General's report that the United Nations has
effectively supported the systematization and
institutionalization of its approach to the gender
problem. Evidence of that is the establishment of a
database; the dissemination of information; the
recommendation to establish an integrated knowledge
and information management system accessible to
Member States; and the strengthening of inter-agency
coordination, programming and resource mobilization.

In the light of all this, I am pleased to note that
my Government fully agrees with the implementation
framework and firmly skews its national policy in
favour of the promotion of equality. In that respect,
Benin recently adopted a new family code recognizing
and promoting the equality of men and women in
Beninese society. In order to promote the full
enjoyment of women's rights, our Government has
chosen to establish positive social discrimination
measures to the benefit of women. We are considering
the creation of a women's institute that will study
policies to develop women's potential. That was, inter
alia, one goal behind the introduction in Benin of
mandatory and free primary education for all children.
The measure was primarily targeted at young girls in
rural areas. Benin is also heavily involved in seeking a
minimum of 30 per cent of management positions
being held by women by 2015.
The implementation of measures to promote
gender equality requires the mobilization of major
resources and the establishment of considerable
operational capacity. That is why I urgently appeal to
the international community to mobilize adequate
resources to allow a meaningful implementation of the
gender approach in the countries involve.

