The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Argentina.

I come from a country where women represent
15 per cent of the military and have achieved the rank of
military officers among the hierarchy. We have become
a country that now promotes the presence of women in
all branches of the army, where they had been banned
until 2012. We have established gender offices in each
area of the military and have strengthened gender focal
points with a View to preparing for deployment the
men and women who will participate in peacekeeping
operations. Furthermore, child care centres for parents
who work in the armed forces and the security forces
have been opened.

We have also re-assigned personnel of military
hospitals who have declared that they have conscientious
objections to the interruption of pregnancy, which is
permitted under Argentine legislation, so that women
are able to exercise their right to sexual and reproductive
health services without any obstacle or delay. We
advocate for laws on same-sex marriage and gender
identity and against any form of discrimination. This
year in London, we signed, along with 137 countries,
a commitment to bring an end to sexual violence in
armed conflict.

We work in our region and we work with our
region. I come from a country where women in
particular peacefully confronted State terrorism - I
am speaking of the Mothers and Grandmothers of May
Square - in deciding to fight for justice rather than
for vengeance. They chose to free the truth rather than
remain prisoners of lies. They chose to pass through
the culture of memory rather than the indifference of
oblivion.

I come from that country and that is why we can
understand, as members of the Security Council, that in
all situations of armed conflict, the number of civilian
victims far exceeds the number of combatants. Today,
that number is the highest ever seen in history. We
know that women and men suffer all types of human
rights violations during conflicts. However, only
recently have we been able to reveal and to make people
understand that there are specific forms, different types
of violence that women suffer during conflicts and that
there are different impacts at the various stages - prior
to conflict, during conflict and post-conflict - on
women and girls.

We know that, whether we are talking about
civilians or combatants or refugees or displaced
persons, the impact of conflict on women and girls is
multidimensional and complex. The varying types and
modalities of violence affect women disproportionately
and differently, simply as a result of their being women,
with devastating effects on their psychological and
physical integrity and fundamental rights.

Various reports in recent years from United Nations
agencies, including UN-Women and human rights
organizations and women and feminist organizations
have provided accounts and empirical evidence of the
fact that conflicts crystallize, deepen and generate
evidence of the disproportionate practices of violence,
based on the pre-existing stereotypes of inequality,
discrimination and Violence against women in society.

Also in peacetime, we still encounter cultural
patterns based on patriarchal power structures that
seem to tolerate or justify violence, rape and other
forms of sexual abuse against women. It is undisputed
that in a scenario where political tension increases
and militarization appears to be the chosen path for
resolving a growing conflict, all forms of violence
seem to increase, including rape and other forms of
sexual Violence against women.

We know that violence, which precedes conflicts
and intensifies during a conflict, often remains, in
the post-conflict period, as part of the legacy of the
conflict. It is known that in such situations women and
girls are most vulnerable to sexual violence, especially
rape. Women also face enormous obstacles in obtaining
justice, owing to the stigma that characterizes us as
survivors of sexual violence and the conditions of
structured gender inequality that exist in most of our
societies and often force us to experience and coexist
with the impunity of perpetrators.

On a daily basis, the Council receives reports
describing human rights violations against women
and crimes against the sexual integrity of women and
girls in conflict situations, including the abduction of
women and girls for the purposes of labour exploitation,
sexual slavery and human trafficking. The Council
has been warned that, in many cases, the perpetrators
are members of rebel groups or groups committing
terrorist acts; however, they also belong to militias that
are supported by Governments, including members of
governmental armed forces or security forces, or even
members of peacekeeping operations. We know that,
and we know that women reach refugee camps but are
still not safe there. In March, according to a United
Nations report, up to 16 women living in refugee camps
were being raped every day when they went out to look
for water, fulfilling their duties and tasks, because
there was a fear that if men left the camp they would
be killed.

Today we know that acts of violence against women,
refugees and the displaced in the camps, including
sexual violence, are not an exception but, in many cases,
the rule. Furthermore, sexual violence and the rape of
women and girls used as a weapon of war remains so
widespread and present in all situations of conflict that
it is sometimes considered to be an inherent component
of conflict, running the risk of making natural what
clearly constitutes, in international human rights and
international humanitarian law, a war crime and a
crime against humanity.

Moreover, while sexual violence may be the most
extensive type of violence practiced against women in
conflict, we have also learned that women also suffer
specific damage and are disproportionately affected
in many other ways in conflict situations. Economic
aspects of vulnerability, social exclusion and cultural
marginalization are the effects of militarization and
conflict. The adverse impacts on the rights of women
to food, water, housing, employment, health care and
education are just as great a threat to the lives of women
as the physical form of Violence.

In 2013, it was said that there were 50.2 million
forcibly displaced persons in the world. We know
that women constitute more than half of the refugee
population. However severe the vulnerabilities of
displaced people may be, women live in situations of
even greater vulnerability still, as the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees says,
including once they have managed to reach a place that
is apparently safe. Some women are pursued because
they do not follow certain customs or because they
were the object of an early or forced marriage. The risk
of sexual violence increases also in places where they
go to be protected.

When women become refugees, they must break
with their livelihoods and the cycles of life and become
completely dependent on humanitarian agencies for
basic survival. The anguish is immense for women
who leave their homes to begin an uncertain journey,
which more often than not does not include a return
trip. Women and girls who have fled their homes and
communities often experience prolonged suffering,
and the place of refuge becomes a place of violence.
Sometimes they are forced to offer sex in exchange for
food or to obtain the status ofrefugees or to have access
to documentation.

Women belonging to national, ethnic, religious or
linguistic minorities suffer even more. Age, sex, sexual
orientation and other specific factors can also expose
them to risks of additional discrimination and lack of
protection. Women who are disabled face a greater
risk of lack of protection during a displacement in the
camps. Women and girls who seek refuge in the cities
run the risk of experiencing discrimination and abuse.
Many live in poverty or extreme poverty, which makes
them even more vulnerable and exposed to the risk of
becoming merchandise in the sex trade.

Women and girls who go to camps for displaced
persons and refugees may discover that even there
the material assistance is minimal. The Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs said this year
that only 12 per cent of the projects that are being
financed today in order to comply with international
humanitarian law in the camps - only 12 per
cent - include the gender perspective and a human
rights approach.

The physical distribution of the camps also
represents a problem and a risk for women. In some
cases, the very officials who are supposed to look
after and care for the refugees are the ones who violate
the rights of women. There has been a considerable
rise in the number of undesired pregnancies, sexually
transmitted diseases and abortions. Pregnant women
sometimes have to face a risk to their health due to
the lack of medical assistance, which, along with the
physical and psychological pressure of the conflict,
leads to a disproportionate number of non-provoked
abortions, miscarriages, babies with low birth weights,
representing between 20 and 50 per cent of newborns.
The rate of teenage pregnancy in the camps is roughly
50 per cent. In some cases, the supplies do not include
the specific needs of women.

I note that it was only recently, and thanks to the
impetus and demands of the women's movement, that
we have included hygienic items in the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees' list
of essential supplies even when most of the refugees are
women. When there is no access to hygienic products,
women and girls have to remain separate, without
access to education, without being able to look for food,
and without receiving the regular supplies they need
when they menstruate.

Lastly, I believe it necessary and important to
have this debate today because the current members of
the Security Council have experience with the reality
of refugee camps. I believe that, as my colleagues
have said, in the light of the upcoming review of
resolution 1325 (2000); in the light of the post-2015
sustainable development goals; in the light of the
forthcoming review the sanctions system and United
Nations peacekeeping operations; and in the light of
our twentieth-anniversary review the of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform of Action, it is time for
women, as we have said so often - because we are
half the population, because we are human, because we
have the right to enjoy our rights, and because we have
a voice, convictions and courage - we will head into
2015 staking our claims, expressing ourselves, making
our demands and defending our rights. We will exert
the liberty to think, to say, to act and to be what even
women in refugee camps need. We do not want to be
either oppressors or oppressed. We want to be free and
equal, so that we can be the authors of real peace.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I wish to request all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.

I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Estonia.

