Mr. Kolga (Estonia): At the outset, let me thank
the Secretary-General; the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Zainab Bangura; and Ms. Saran Ke'ita Diakite,
of the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and
Security for their briefings.

Estonia aligns itself with the statements delivered
on behalf of the European Union and the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security.

Estonia is dedicated to protecting and promoting
human rights and fundamental freedoms, both
nationally and internationally. As a member of the
Human Rights Council, Estonia's particular focus is on
the rights ofwomen and children, gender perspective in
conflict settlement and the fight against impunity.

Estonia is proud of having been a sponsor of
resolution 1820 (2008), on women and peace and
security, wherein for the first time in a Security Council
resolution sexual violence was recognized as a tactic
of war and where it is noted that rape and other forms
of sexual violence can constitute a war crime, a crime
against humanity or a constitutive act with respect to
genocide. We welcome the numerous steps taken in this
field within the framework of the United Nations and
commend, among other things, the work of UN-Women
and the Secretary-General's Special Representative on
Sexual Violence in Conflict.

Concerning the latest developments in the
United Nations, we welcome the adoption of the
agreed conclusions of the fifty-seventh session of the
Commission on the Status of Women, in which the
Commission urged States to strongly condemn violence
against women and girls committed in armed conflict
and post-conflict situations and called for effective
measures of accountability and redress, as well as
effective remedies.

Estonia is also very satisfied that the Arms Trade
Treaty, recently adopted by the General Assembly,
includes strong human rights and international
humanitarian law criteria. In assessing the export of
conventional arms, each country has to take into account
the risk ofthose arms being used to commit or facilitate
serious acts of gender-based violence or serious acts of
violence against women and children. We believe that
the effective implementation of the Treaty will make
a difference in the world. We urge States to apply the
relevant articles that are provisionally pending prior to
the Treaty's entry into force.

We appreciate the Secretary-General's report
(S/2013/149) on which today's discussion is based.
The report gives a shiver-raising overview of how
widespread the terrible scourge of sexual violence still
is. It also pointedly highlights emerging concerns such
as the plight of children born out of rape, the practice
of forced marriages by armed groups, sexual violence
against men and boys, the displacement of civilian
populations and the inadequacy of disarmament efforts.
We note with serious concern that, as reported, sexual
violence has been used to force internal and cross-
border displacement in many places of the world and
that women and children are also targeted both inside
and outside refugee and internally displaced persons
camps and settlements.

We share the assessment of Special Representative
that fostering national ownership, leadership and
responsibility in addressing sexual violence are some
ofthe most important aspects in the fight against sexual
violence. It is essential that local communities consider
sexual violence as a crime. Regrettably, as noted in the
report, often, as a consequence ofbeing raped in conflict,
there are reports of coerced marriages of survivors to
either the perpetrator or their family members. It is
certain, as the report also notes, that compelling rape
survivors to marry the perpetrators re-victimizes them.
That results in impunity for perpetrators and sends the
message that sexual Violence is socially acceptable.

There is a wide range of tools available for
preventing crimes of sexual violence, as well as for
holding perpetrators accountable. The use of targeted
sanctions by the Security Council, with a focus on
specific individuals or entities suspected of bearing
the greatest responsibility for such crimes, is an
important aspect of deterrence. We welcome the fact
that the Council has expanded its designation criteria
to explicitly address sexual and gender-based violence.
We look forward to the consistent application of that
tool.

Estonia would welcome having all the Security
Council Sanctions Committees consider focusing on
crimes of sexual violence. In that context, it might be
necessary to harmonize designation criteria for listed
individuals and entities by including any relevant
charges from the international justice mechanisms and,
importantly, from the International Criminal Court
(ICC).

The International Criminal Court itself has a unique
role in setting a new tone in the fight against impunity
for sexual and gender-based violence. The Rome Statute
of the ICC prohibits an unprecedented number of
gender crimes, including rape, sexual slavery, enforced
prostitution, forced pregnancy, enforced sterilization
and other forms of sexual violence as war crimes,
crimes against humanity or genocide.

The Security Council has an important role with
regard to the ICC, especially in the field of State
cooperation with the Court. We strongly support the
Council's calls for State cooperation and its commitment
to an effective follow-up to its decisions in that regard.
Resolution 2085 (2012), on Mali, and resolution 2098
(2013), on the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which called for the establishment of the African-led
International Support Mission to Mali and authorized
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, respectively,
to support the ICC's efforts, are important examples of
the Council's commitment. We hope that the Council
will continue to find ways and means to further support
international criminal justice within the scope of its
mandate.

Allow me to note that Estonia confirms its
commitment to ending impunity and fighting sexual
violence through its financial contributions in the field
as well. In 2013, Estonia contributed financially to a
UNICEF project in the Central African Republic for
the prevention and response to gender-based violence.
Also this year, Estonia will be contributing financially
to the activities of the Office of the Secretary-General's
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict
and to the ICC Trust Fund for Victims.

In our view, the next important step for the United
Nations would be to further implement monitoring,
analysis and reporting arrangements on conflict-
related sexual violence. We would also urge the further
deployment of female protection advisers to Security
Council-mandated missions. We must support the
non-governmental organizations working in the field
and protection for women's human rights defenders. It
should also be noted that the overall goal of achieving
women's empowerment and participation in society is
inextricably linked to the fight against gender-based
violence.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
commend the Council's work on the issue of women
and peace and security, including in the area of sexual
violence in conflict, and to confirm my country's strong
support for an even more systematic and comprehensive
approach to that important issue.

Finally, I would like to remind the Council of
something Ms. Bangura said recently: "I am sure there
will come a time where the only place we can read
about sexual violence in conflict is in the textbooks."
Estonia will be there to support that aim.

