Mr. Maema (Lesotho): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the States members of the Southern
African Development Community (SADC), namely,
Angola, Botswana, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Madagascar, Malawi, Mauritius, Mozambique,
South Africa, Swaziland, the United Republic of
Tanzania, Zambia, Zimbabwe and my own country,
Lesotho.

We thank the Special Adviser to the Secretary-
General on Gender Issues and Advancement of
Women, the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, the Executive Director of the United
Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) and
the Assistant Secretary-General, Peacebuilding Support
Office, for their informative presentations.

We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2006/770) and consider it to be a comprehensive
assessment of the implementation of the United
Nations System-wide Action Plan for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on women,
peace and security. We therefore commend the Office
of the Special Adviser on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women for the pivotal role it played
in the preparation of the report. Also commendable is
the positive response of other United Nations entities
that have contributed towards the successful
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and of the
System-wide Action Plan.

The adoption by the Security Council of
resolution 1325 (2000) was a big step towards the
protection of women in conflict situations and a
recognition of the substantial difference that women
make when actively involved in conflict resolution and
peace processes. We therefore highly commend the
commitment shown by the Secretary-General in
commissioning a study to review the implementation of
the System-wide Action Plan. We are confident that the
findings of the study will be instrumental in
accelerating the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).

We are encouraged by the fact that the study
showed that considerable progress has been made by
all stakeholders in implementing resolution 1325
(2000). That demonstrates the importance we all attach
to the resolution, which, if implemented effectively,
can save millions of lives. The resolution recognizes
the impact of armed conflict on women and stresses the
importance of women's equal participation in resolving
conflicts and thus in promoting peace and security. We
are therefore convinced that, with more women taking
an active role in peacebuilding processes, much can be
achieved.

The pivotal role that women play when trained in
the area of early warning in order to prevent conflict is
well understood by our Governments. Indeed, it has
been noted that women are among the first to sound the
alarm about looming conflicts in the areas where they
live. Unfortunately, their voices continue to be ignored.
In that regard, we concur with the observation in the
Secretary-General's report that concrete measures are
necessary to strengthen capacity-building in the field
so as to ensure women's full participation at all stages
of a peace process, especially in the negotiation and
implementation of peace agreements.

We therefore appreciate the measures taken by
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to hold
regular meetings with women representatives in
countries affected by conflict. However, it is a hard
fact that in most countries there are very few female
representatives, as women are generally not involved
in politics and do not hold decision-making positions.
It is in that regard that SADC stresses the importance
of giving priority to the empowerment of women,
thereby enabling them to participate in politics and
decision-making.
SADC condemns acts of sexual violence
perpetrated against women and girls, especially by
members of United Nations peacekeeping missions and

personnel of other international organizations tasked
with protecting women in situations of armed conflict.
It is disheartening when those charged with the
mandate of protecting civilians during armed conflict
prey on the most vulnerable members of affected
communities. We therefore welcome the Secretary-
General's strategy to address acts of sexual
exploitation and sexual abuse in United Nations
peacekeeping missions. In addition, we welcome in
particular how that effort is reflected in the terms of
appointments for United Nations police, military
observers and so on. Needless to say, the significant
progress noted in this area must be accompanied by
further concrete efforts.

Accelerated implementation of the
recommendations is essential to the realization of the
goals of resolution 1325 (2000). We need to address
the gaps and challenges uncovered in the report of the
Secretary-General in order to enable the United
Nations system to effectively implement the System-
wide Action Plan. Member States also have the critical
role of supporting the United Nations system and
monitoring progress to make sure that implementation
is successful. We in SADC pledge to do our part.

In conclusion, we support the Secretary-General's
recommendation to the Security Council that the
System-wide Action Plan be renewed beyond the year
2007.

