Mr. Sow (Guinea) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks you, Sir, for having organized this
meeting and for having included the item on women,
peace and security on the Council's agenda during your
presidency. This testifies to the interest you attach to
this issue and gives us hope that, under your wise
guidance, our debates will lead to positive results.

We welcome the presence here of Ms. Angela
King, Special Adviser on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women, and assure her of our
readiness to engage in active cooperation with her
Office. My delegation also listened with great interest
to the statements made by Ms. Amy Smythe and Mr.
Jean-Marie Guehenno.

Commemorating the third anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) provides us with an
opportunity to assess accomplishments, carefully to
consider the challenges ahead and to find new
approaches to its implementation. At the Council's
public meeting of 28 October 2002, my delegation,
while encouraging the Secretariat to strengthen its
cooperation, particularly urged the Office of the
Special Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of
Women and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations to pursue their consideration of the
participation of women in those operations.

My delegation welcomes the valuable
information provided to us today by Ms. Smythe and
notes that inter-State conflicts have given rise to a new
kind of violence, with particularly disastrous
consequences for vulnerable individuals, in particular
women, children and the elderly.

In that connection, the participation of civilians in
armed combat - including women - the illegal use of
small arms and the failure to respect international law,
and international humanitarian law in particular, are
among the factors having a negative impact on the lives
of vulnerable individuals, especially women and girls.
That is why my delegation welcomed the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), which was the result of a
lengthy process and which represents a step forward
for the international community.

We welcome that achievement, and believe that
the following effects emanating from the resolution's
adoption most eloquently illustrate the international
community's commitment to the process of
implementing the resolution. Those effects include,
among others, the establishment of groups of friends of
the resolution, the Secretary-General's submission of a
report on the subject, the efforts of various members of
the international community at all levels, the reference
to this issue in 33 out of the 225 resolutions adopted
between October 2000 and 1 October 2003, the
initiative by the United Nations Development
Programme and the United Nations Development Fund
for Women on the role of women in exchanging
weapons for development, the drafting by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees of
a code of conduct to combat sexual abuse in refugee
camps, the establishment of the post of Gender Adviser
within the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
the establishment of similar posts in several missions
and the publication of a study by the Office of the
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Gender
Issues and Advancement of Women.

The varying experiences acquired highlight the
impact of conflict on women and girls, their
participation in combat and their involvement in
conflict-resolution and peace-building processes. We
should also note the importance of issues concerning
national and international legal frameworks, as well as
the participation of women in peacekeeping operations.

While we welcome the progress that has been
made, my delegation also believes that there is a need
to continue to join efforts to further advance the
implementation of the resolution. In doing so there is
not only a need to coordinate the efforts of various
actors, but also for them to share their experiences. The
United Nations system has a fundamental role to play
in that regard.

My delegation, which is prepared to make its
modest contribution to that process, would once again
like to cite the example of the women of West Africa,
and in particular that of the women of the Mano River
Union region, who, despite numerous difficulties, are
continuing their active involvement in the conflict-
resolution and peace-building processes. It is in that
context that the Guinean branch of the Network of
African Women Ministers and Parliamentarians
(REFAMP) organized a subregional conference in
Conakry from 24 to 26 January 2000 on the subject of
the prevention and resolution of conflicts. In order to
maintain that momentum and to follow up on the
recommendations of the subregional consultative
meeting on strengthening the participation of women in
the establishment of peace, held in Addis Ababa from
23 to 25 April 2001, the Secretariat's Division for the
Advancement of Women, in collaboration with the
Centre for Conflict Resolution of Cape Town, South
Africa, and the Government of Guinea, organized a
training workshop in Conakry from 20 to 25 October
2002 on conflict management by women.

Those examples eloquently attest to the vital role
played by the women of Guinea in seeking and
strengthening peace in the subregion, and in particular
in the countries of the Mano River Union. They are
tirelessly working in various assistance activities on
behalf of refugees and displaced persons, and
especially on behalf of women and girls in distress.
The international community should strengthen their
determination to overcome every challenge and support
the initiatives that have been undertaken.

My delegation believes that, despite the unique
nature of the issue of women in armed conflict, there is
a need to widen our thinking on this issue as part of the
broader context of protecting civilians in armed
conflict. The aide-memoire and road map now being
finalized in that connection will serve as a point of
reference in doing so.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that
conflict prevention and resolution, peace-building and
the establishment of new democratic forms of
governance must be based on the active participation of
women in all activities and at every level. It is for that
reason that I hope that today's debate will lead to
specific commitments that will in fact be followed up.

Finally, on behalf of my country, allow me to
condemn the deadly attacks that recently took place in
Iraq. I would also like to convey our condolences to the
bereaved families, including innocent women and girls
and those involved in the work of reconstruction.

