Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal) (spoke in French): I would like to thank you very much,
Mr. President, for having convened this debate. The
very large number of delegations that have expressed a
desire to speak today clearly shows that this issue is at
the heart of our concerns. I should also like very much
to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Mr. Ladsous for their briefings, as well as
Ms. Amina Megheirbi for her very moving statement.
(spoke in English)

Let me start by commending Ms. Margo
Wallstrom for her excellent work over the past two

12-2393]

years and her efforts to spread a clear message that
sexual violence is simply not tolerable and that there is
no real security without women's security.

The report (S/2012/33) before us today gives a
clear and comprehensive idea of the intensive work
that has been carried out worldwide by the Special
Representative in her advocacy for the fight against
conflict-related sexual violence, in field visits, in
engaging with national and non-governmental bodies
and authorities and in coordinating within the United
Nations system. It provides us with important
information on the implementation of the resolutions
passed by this Council regarding monitoring and
reporting arrangements aimed at collecting more
consistent information on conflict-related sexual
violence, but also regarding the establishment of a
team of experts on the rule of law to assist national
authorities to reinforce traditional systems weakened
by conflict.

Moreover, the report provides us with very useful
information on specific situations, in accordance with
resolution 1888 (2009) - information about incidents,
but also about challenges and best practices adopted at
the national level. It also contains very concrete
recommendations, which we welcome.

We must recognize that much has been achieved,
and we are confident that the Special Representative
will continue to carry out her mandate in the same
committed and professional manner.

The Security Council has recognized that the
protection of women is a critical priority for peace and
security. Resolutions 1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010)
have clearly established the fight against sexual
violence in the agenda of this Council. The Council has
created the necessary tools for obtaining reliable and
accurate information on sexual violence. A common
definition of sexual violence and common
methodologies for data collection through monitoring
and recording activities are now used throughout the
system.

The Council has been quite successful in
discharging its responsibilities, but it still needs to
reinforce its effectiveness. For instance, we need to
make full use of existing tools, mainly ensuring
deployment of women's protection advisers in relevant
peacekeeping operations, which will strengthen the
prevention of and the response to sexual violence. We
hope that the challenges that have delayed the
deployment of these advisers will be overcome, since
their deployment in specific missions has already been
requested by this Council.

Another promising tool at the disposal of
Member States is the Team of Experts on the Rule of
Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict. We welcome the
technical cooperation that was provided at the request
of national authorities of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, South Sudan, the Republic of Guinea,
Sierra Leone and Cote d'Ivoire.

All information contained in the report is relevant
for the Security Council in terms of the Charter's
mandate for the maintenance of national peace and
security. The information that is already collected by
the reporting mechanism will improve the Council's
access to timely, objective, accurate and reliable
information on sexual Violence in conflict. The
Secretary-General or the Special Representative will be
able to brief the Council with reliable information on
specific situations that deserve the Council's attention.
That reliable information will consequently enable the
Council to act, collectively and in an appropriate mode,
well before major incidents of widespread sexual
violence reinforce threats to peace and security.

Indeed, a Council that is better informed is also in
a better position to take effective action. With
sufficient information, the Council will be able to take
preventive steps in a timely manner. But the Council
now will also need to take action with regard to those
parties listed in the annex of the Secretary-General's
report, which are, and I quote, "credibly suspected of
committing or being responsible for patterns of rape
and other forms of sexual violence" (S/2012/33, para. 118).

The Council has already passed a clear message
to assure the perpetuators of sexual Violence that the
Council adopts sanctions against perpetrators who have
been identified or who are credibly suspected of
committing sexual violence in situations of armed
conflict on its agenda. The Council should be
consistent and reinforce that message concerning other
individuals in similar circumstances. Impunity is
simply not acceptable.
The work carried out by the Special
Representative and, ultimately, by this Council during
the past few years is making a real difference in many
parts of the world, especially for women and girls, but
also for men and boys. As we have heard, Governments

have recently prosecuted senior officers of their armed
forces for crimes of sexual violence, and leaders of
parties in armed conflict have been arrested and
transferred to the International Criminal Court. These
actions send a powerful signal to the victims of sexual
violence that no military or political leader is above the
law. This political message needs to be constantly
underlined by the United Nations, and by this Council
in particular.

Before concluding, let me mention that we regret
that we have not yet been able to agree on the
presidential statement on this important debate. But we
trust that, with the cooperation of all, we will be able to
achieve this shortly.

I conclude with a word for the victims and the
survivors of sexual violence. They are at the centre of
our debates. Let us not forget them and the fact that
beyond bringing perpetrators to justice, the
international community also needs to afford care and
reparation to the victims.

