Mr. Sobral Duarte (Brazil): Human trafficking
and slavery in all their forms are among the most
despicable crimes known to humanity, as they affect
those most vulnerable, such as migrants and internally
displaced persons, especially women and girls. When
committed in conflict situations, such acts might even
amount to war crimes or crimes against humanity. The
victims of these crimes are often subjected to organ
harvesting, sexual exploitation, forced labour or forced
marriage. Brazil supports efforts aimed at helping
victims recover their dignity and ensuring that they
have access to justice.

Displaced communities are particularly vulnerable
to trafficking and enslavement by criminal groups and
terrorist organizations. Long-term solutions can arise
only from multilateral approaches to peace and security
that address the underlying causes of conflicts and
firmly set dialogue and mediation as priorities. More
often than not, military intervention leads to increased
civilian suffering and vulnerability. The expansion of
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant into Libyan
territory is a reminder of the destabilization that may
result from military action.

The international community can do more to
combat this scourge. Little regard and few resources
have been given to sustain peace in crisis or in post-
conflict situations. Closer cooperation among States
and international agencies can help rescue victims and
bring traffickers to justice. Advancing the universality
of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
would contribute to ensuring accountability for those
responsible for such crimes, when committed in the
context of an armed conflict.

Terrorism and transnational organized crime are
different problems that require different remedies.
The interrelationship between them may, obviously,
arise under specific circumstances, but should in
no way be deemed universal or predetermined. It is
important to pay attention to the forum in which these
issues should be primarily discussed. Terrorism, as a
threat to international peace and security, should be
addressed in the Council. Organized crime, in turn,
remains primarily a domestic public-security issue. It is
more appropriately addressed as a matter of enhanced
international cooperation than as an issue pertaining to
collective security.

While human trafficking and slavery occur in
scenarios plagued by armed conflict, there are no
automatic linkages between these phenomena. They
also take place in situations that do not threaten
international peace and security. For these issues to
be effectively addressed by the United Nations in all
their forms, the Security Council should be mindful
of the mandate and technical expertise of the General
Assembly and of the Human Rights Council, as well
as of the crucial role of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime in this realm.

Migration itself should not be criminalized or
confused with the criminalization of trafficking in
persons. Our actions should aim at protecting the rights of
and providing assistance to those people who are forced
to leave their homes and fall prey to human traffickers.
The international community has a responsibility to act
to find a solution of the refugee crisis. It is not coherent
to make a case for the responsibility to protect and the
protection of civilians while turning our backs on those
fleeing conflict and persecution.

As my country's experience in granting humanitarian
visas to Haitians since 2012 has shown, one of the
most effective means of dismantling criminal human-
trafficking networks is to provide regular and safe ways
of entry for those forced to move.

Let us all work together to ensure that human
trafficking and slavery in all their forms can be brought
to a definitive end and that its victims can resume their
lives with dignity and, above all, with hope.

