The President: I thank Lieutenant General Gaye
for his briefing.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2010/641, containing the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Albania, Argentina, Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, the Czech Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti,
Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany,

Greece, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Lebanon, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Monaco,
Montenegro, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Norway, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Portugal,
Romania, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-
Leste, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and the United
States of America.

Members also have before them document
S/2010/604, containing the report of the Secretary-
General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 1820 (2008) and 1888 (2009).

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, China,
France, Gabon, Japan, Lebanon, Mexico, Nigeria,
Russian Federation, Turkey, Uganda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America

The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1960 (2010).

I remind all speakers to limit their statements to
no more than four minutes in order to enable the
Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the text in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.

I now give the floor to the members of the
Council.


