Ms. Herashchenko (Ukraine) (spoke in Russian): I
represent Ukraine as the President's special envoy for
the peaceful settlement of the situation in Donbas and
as a direct participant in the Minsk peace process.

I would like to thank the presidency of Bolivia
for convening this open debate and the Secretary-
General and the Executive Director of UN-Women for
their statements.

Ukraine also endorses the statement to be made
later today by the observer of the European Union.

We are pleased with the inclusion in the Secretary-
General's report on today's topic (S/2018/900) of
information on the measures that the Government of
Ukraine is taking to implement Council resolution 1325
(2000), particularly on the start of the implementation
process for our national action plan. I have to agree
with the Secretary-General's observation that 2020 will
be a test of our obligations in that regard, and we must
speed up our efforts to implement its main priorities.

I believe that the United Nations has a unique
opportunity to fulfil one of its founding principles,
which is

"to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights,
in the dignity and worth of the human person, in
the equal rights of men and women and of nations
large and small".

The equal participation of women, and their access to
high-level Government positions and decision-making
processes at every level, is vitally important to achieving
gender parity. That is not only affirmed in article 2 of
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, it is also reinforced
in the Sustainable Development Goals. Data from the
Special Rapporteur on violence against women, its
causes and consequences, and from the International
Labour Organization only emphasizes the importance
of ending the gender gap in the representation of
women at every level, in political decision-making and
in ensuring equal pay.

Considering that the armed aggression against
Ukraine is now in its fifth year and that it is women
and children who are the war's primary victims,
the Government of Ukraine has launched efforts to
effectively implement resolution 1325 (2000) and to
guarantee and protect the rights of women in every
public arena. Our national action plan for implementing
the resolution for the period leading up to 2020 is
proceeding successfully. It provides for the inclusion
of the principle of gender parity in professional
training, a policy on expanding women's participation
in peacebuilding processes and a system for protecting
women and girls who are victims of the conflict. One
important component is preventing and combating
gender-based violence during military action.

Within the framework of creating an institutional
mechanism for establishing a gender policy, the Deputy
Prime Minister okaraine has already been tasked with
its coordination and a position of special Government
representative for gender policy issues has been
established. We are currently working on broadening
women's participation in Ukrainian political life.
Unfortunately, women make up only 12 per cent of the
Ukrainian Parliament, which is certainly not enough and
does not correspond to Ukrainian women's professional
potential. We are therefore working on changing our
legislation and introducing gender quotas, which have
already proved their worth in elections at the local level.

In September, the Government approved a national
action plan to implement the recommendations outlined
in the conclusions of the Committee on the Elimination
of Discrimination against Women, defining specific
measures for the period leading up to 2021. Our work
on a national strategy for gender equality in the security
and defence sectors continues, and there are now more
than 25,000 women, of whom 3,400 are officers, in
contract-based military service in the Ukrainian armed
forces on an equal footing with men. The number of
posts to which women can be appointed has increased
significantly, ensuring their equal access to military
ranks. This year for the first time a woman received
the rank of major-general and leads our military's
medical service.

The numbers of civilian and military victims of the
Russian Federation's armed aggression against Ukraine
have risen every year, and I would particularly like to
address the humanitarian disaster caused by the war
against Ukraine. Women serving in our armed forces
have been dying in Donbas since 2014. A few days ago,
Olesia Baklanova, a soldier, was killed. She was just 19
years old. In February, Sabina Galitskaya, a nurse, died
when her car, which was clearly marked as a medical
vehicle, was hit by a Russian anti-tank missile. She was
23. How many more Ukrainian women will have to die
defending their motherland in order to stop the armed
conflict in Donbas instigated by Russia?

A huge continuing problem are the mines and
explosive devices that are literally all over 7,000 square
kilometres of Ukrainian territory. They have killed 92
women in Donbas over the years. A few days ago three
children were blown up by a mine near occupied Horlivka
in the district of Donetsk. The Ukrainian Parliament
is now planning to adopt a major law on humanitarian
demining. Military technology and resources,
including mines marked as manufactured in the
Russian Federation, are coming in over an uncontrolled
400-ki10metre stretch of the Russian-Ukrainian border.
That is why Ukraine has been insisting on the speedy
launch ofa peacekeeping mission for Donbas under the
auspices of the United Nations, with a broad mandate
for an interim administration. That is essential if we
are to prevent a humanitarian disaster and protect the
civilian population, especially women and children,
who are the most vulnerable of all. Needless to say,
Ukraine would welcome a mission that included as
many women peacekeepers as possible.

As Ukraine's representative to the humanitarian
group in Minsk, my main efforts have been aimed
at freeing hostages. Over the course of the war, we
have been able to liberate or find 258 women who
were hostages of illegal armed groups. Right now six
Ukrainian women are still held captive, and 21 have
been declared missing, while about 1,500 women have
been widowed and more than 2,000 have lost their sons.

Many people here will have heard the names of Oleh
Sentsov, Serhiy Glondar, Uzair and Teimur Abdullayev,
Volodymyr Balukh and 70 other Ukrainian political
prisoners held in Russian Federationjails, as well as the
dozens ofprisoners illegally imprisoned on the territory
of occupied Donbas. Their families - mothers, wives,
sisters and daughters who are unable to see or speak to
them - continue to wait for them. Today the European
Parliament awarded Oleh Sentsov the Sakharov Prize
for Freedom of Thought. We welcome that decision and
encourage all States Members of the United Nations to
make every effort to liberate Oleh Sentsov and the other
political prisoners. Oleh should be able to receive his
prize in person, not through intermediaries.

This year, as Ukraine's representative to the Minsk
humanitarian group, I have made dozens of proposals to
the Russian Federation to hand over to Moscow Russians
who have been convicted of serious crimes in Ukraine
in exchange for our prisoners in Crimea, a humanitarian
gesture that would ease the lives of hundreds of women
and children. However, so far Russia has not responded
to our proposal and has blocked questions about freeing
its hostages and political prisoners. Incidentally, it is
not only Ukrainian women who have been hoping for
a large-scale liberation of prisoners on both sides,
which Ukraine has proposed doing as soon as possible.
Russian women - the wives and mothers of Russian
soldiers detained in Ukraine - are also asking the
Russian Federation to do this. It would be a wonderful
humanitarian gesture on both sides. All that is needed
is the political will.

With a view to defining the full extent of the
violations of human rights, including sexual violence, in
the occupied territories of Crimea and Donbas, Ukraine
has been insisting that special observers be sent from
the special monitoring and humanitarian missions
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE), the United Nations and the
International Committee of the Red Cross. Incidentally,
the International Committee of the Red Cross has never
been given access to Ukrainian political prisoners held
in Russian territory or in the occupied areas, which is
a gross violation of their human rights. Prisoners who
have been released have spoken about the existence of
sexual violence. The militants have not shrunk from
assaulting members of the OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission. Last year, in May 2017, a representative of the
Special Monitoring Mission was sexually harassed by
an armed militant who simply refused to let her pass.
The crime was prevented only by the intervention of
her colleagues from the Mission. We were also told
about sexual violence by 12 prisoners who were freed
in December 2014, who included both men and women,
and many of them mentioned incidents of group
sexual violence.
In conclusion, I would like to quote Max van der
Stoel, who said that

"[m]ankind has spent centuries perfecting the art
of war. We are still in our infancy when it comes to
building peace."

That is why I believe that the problem of ensuring
peace in any part of the world is key to guaranteeing
human rights and sustainable development. Not only
has the time come for a decisive increase in the role
of women in that process, it also demands practical
realization. We have a unique opportunity to reject
bureaucratic declarations and take practical steps to
advance women's rights, enable their participation in
peace negotiations and post-conflict reconstruction and
protect them from sexual and gender-based violence. I
urge us to ramp up those efforts without delay.

