Mr. Logar (Slovenia): Allow me to start by
thanking Jordan for organizing this important debate,
as well as Ms. Bangura, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and
Ms. Allamin, from the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security, for their important briefings.

Slovenia aligns itself with the statement made by
the observer of the European Union. I would like to
make additional remarks in my national capacity.

Sexual Violence is present in every conflict
situation. It is a tactic of war and not just an incidental
by-product or collateral damage of a conflict. We
should bear in mind that rape and other forms of sexual
Violence constitute war crimes and crimes against
humanity. Conflict-related sexual violence is also a
security issue, not just a humanitarian or human rights
issue.

Slovenia is deeply concerned by the findings of
the latest report of the Secretary-General on conflict-
related sexual violence (see S/2015/203). Violations
perpetrated by State actors or associated armed groups
remain of grave concern, although the majority of
incidents of sexual violence are perpetrated by armed
non-State actors. Slovenia joins others in condemning
grave violations committed against women in armed
conflict by armed non-State actors, such as the heinous
acts perpetrated by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant/Daesh in Syria and Iraq, and Boko Haram in
Nigeria and neighbouring States, as well as other such
non-State actors in Somalia, Mali, Libya and Yemen.
In that respect, let me reiterate that all perpetrators
should be held accountable, and an end should be put to
impunity in order to prevent and deter sexual Violence.

The report of the Secretary-General also shows
that 2014 was marked by sexual violence in the context
of violent extremism. Extremist groups use sexual
violence to achieve tactical objectives with the aim of
terrorizing communities into compliance, displacing
them from strategic areas and generating revenue
through trafficking, the slave trade and ransoms. We are
also deeply concerned by the increased risk of displaced
or refugee women and girls to sexual exploitation, such
as human trafficking, and early and forced marriages.
States have the the primary responsibility to protect
civilians from such crimes. They should therefore lead
the efforts to prevent and end conflict-related sexual
violence. At the same time, the international community
should assist States in addressing these issues, including
by investigating and prosecuting the perpetrators and
others responsible for crimes, including United Nations
and other peacekeeping personnel.

Although women represent the majority of victims
in conflict-related sexual violence, this is not only
a women's issue. Men and boys are also Victims,
particularly in detention. Sexual violence against them
is used as a means of humiliation and, very often, as a
means of torture. Allow me to draw attention to another
finding in the Secretary-General's report. Sexual
violence in conflict occurs where there is also systemic
discrimination against women. Therefore, it is of the
utmost importance to promote efforts to eliminate
discrimination in law and in practice in peace time, and
to promote the participation of women in peace-related
processes and activities, and in post-conflict rebuilding.

In conclusion, I would like emphasize that sexual
violence presents an obstacle to peace and security.
It hinders women from participating in peace and
democratic processes and in post-conf lict reconstruction
and reconciliation. As a tool of war it can become a
way of life. Once entrenched in the fabric of society,
it lingers long after the ceasefire. Many women lose
their health, livelihoods, partners, families and support
networks as a result of rape. That in turn can shatter the
structures that anchor community values and disrupt
their transmission to future generations. That Vicious
circle must be stopped.

A year after the holding in London of the Global
Summit to End Sexual Violence in Conflict, Slovenia
will contribute to the agenda on sexual violence in
conflict through a special event we are organizing
under the title "Ending Sexual Violence in Conflict:
One Year after the Summit", within the framework of
an international conference, the Bled Strategic Forum,
to be held later this year under the auspices of the
President of the Republic. I invite all participants in
today's debate to join us in Bled.

