Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Madame President, for convening this important debate
today. I also thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2014/181), and in particular Special Representative
Bangura, her staff, the Team of Experts on the Rule
of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, and United
Nations country teams around the world for their
continual efforts to raise awareness and to tackle sexual
violence in conflict.

I warmly welcome Ms. Rhoda Misaka from South
Sudan and the recommendations that she has made. I
look forward to hearing the statement that the African
Union ambassador will make on behalf of Ms. Bineta
Diop, whose appointment as Special Envoy of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission on
Women, Peace and Security makes clear the importance
that the African Union places on the most vulnerable
victims of conflict, including the victims of sexual
violence.

The Secretary-General's report is alarming. He is
right - this crime is as destructive as any bomb. With
data from all over the world, the report demonstrates that
sexual violence is prevalent and a matter of profound
importance to international peace and security. When
unpunished, such crimes sow the seeds for future
conflict, perpetuate violence and undermine the
prospects for sustainable development. If implemented,
the report's recommendations, based on resolution 2106
(2013), will improve support for survivors, reduce the
space for impunity and help prevent future crimes.

Today I want to make three particular points. First,
preventing and redressing sexual violence in conflict
is integral to the wider work on conflict prevention
and a moral duty for the Governments and citizens of
a civilized world. As Special Representative Bangura
put it, it is a great moral duty of our time. Many
United Nations agencies, women's and civil society
organizations, non-governmental organizations and
human rights defenders work diligently day by day
to achieve this. But their efforts can succeed only if
Governments commit their support and work together
in a coordinated way to enable robust mechanisms
for documenting and investigating acts of sexual
violence, greater support to survivors, increased
gender-based responses and security sector reform,
and greater international coordination. If we are
serious about eradicating sexual violence in conflict,
we must resource the fight. We must also eradicate the
root causes of this inhumane crime, including gender
inequality, discrimination and false perceptions of
masculinity.

Secondly, the United Nations leading role in this
is absolutely critical. The breadth of United Nations
activity is impressive and it is also having an impact.
The United Kingdom supports all the United Nations
work and encourages United Nations agencies to deliver
as one in their efforts to support States in fulfilling
their responsibilities. Tackling sexual violence must
also be at the heart of strong protection-of-civilians
mandates in United Nations peacekeeping operations,
which are primarily delivered through military and
police personnel. We welcome the deployment of
women protection advisers in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali and look forward to their deployment in the
Central African Republic and other missions.

Thirdly, as noted in the report, my Foreign Secretary
and the whole British Government remain committed
to this cause. In just over six weeks time, Foreign
Secretary William Hague and Angelina Jolie, Special
Envoy of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, will co-chair the Global Summit to End
Sexual Violence in Conflict. The goal is to end the
culture of impunity for the use of sexual Violence both as
a tool and as a side effect ofwar worldwide. In line with
the Declaration of Commitment to End Sexual Violence
in Conflict, the summit will identify specific actions by
the international community where we believe greater
progress is necessary. That will include a number of
conflict and post-conflict affected States. We hope they
will use this platform to set out their plans and activity
for combating sexual violence.

Collectively we must change the calculus of anyone
who thinks that they can use the fog of war as cover to
get away with rape and other forms of sexual abuse. We
must shift the stigma for such crimes from the victim
to the perpetrator. We must ensure there is nowhere
to hide for those guilty of grave violations of human
rights. We must, as Special Representative Bangura
said, hold perpetrators accountable. Where violations
do occur, we must empower survivors to speak out,
safe in the knowledge that they will be supported and
protected and able to access services and legal redress.

I am pleased that since the publication of the
Secretary- General's report on 13 March, Chad, Lesotho,
Saint Lucia, Suriname and Trinidad and Tobago, have
all endorsed the Declaration of Commitment, taking
the number of endorsing countries to 145. That is
hugely encouraging. We look forward to welcoming all
endorsing countries to the London summit in June. The
United Kingdom strongly encourages countries that
have no yet endorsed, particularly those on the Security
Council, to do so as soon as possible and to attend the
summit.

Under the Charter, the Security Council has
the primary responsibilty for the maintenance of
international peace and security. We know that we
can improve international peace and security if we
eliminate sexual violence in conflict, and we have the
opportunity to do so. Through the June Summit, next
year's high-level review of resolution 1325 (2000) and
the building of the sustainable development goals, the
Security Council and Member States can make progress
towards ending this terrible crime. We should all now
commit to that goal.
