Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): At the outset, I would
like to thank France for providing this opportunity
for us to reflect on this very disturbing, very alarming
and very shocking topic. I also thank you, Sir, for the
concrete actions and steps that you have proposed (see S/2016/496, annex).

Hungary naturally aligns itself with the statement
to be delivered later by the observer on behalf of the
European Union.

Human trafficking, or modern-day slavery, is a
spreading global threat that can be found in every
country. Specifically in conflict and post-conflict
situations, the level of insecurity and the breakdown
in family and community structures and other safety
nets raise the risk of the exposure of women and girls,
in particular, to all forms of violence. We are deeply
troubled that the trafficking in persons, often for sexual
purposes, has become a recurring feature and a by-
product of armed conflict.

The Secretary-General's recent report on conflict-
related sexual Violence (S/2016/361) portrays a deeply
disturbing picture of groups, such as Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) and Boko Haram, using slavery
and sexual violence as an institution, often targeting
ethnic and religious minorities in order to facilitate
recruitment by promising male fighters access to
women, generate revenue, terrorize local communities
or displace inhabitants from strategic territories. We
find the growing presence of Da'esh in Libyan regions
that function as popular trafficking routes across the
Mediterranean particularly worrying. Hungary is of the
view that a number of steps will need to be taken if we
wish to fight the global threat more effectively.

First, Member States will need to play a more
active, leading role in the fight against conflict-related
sexual violence and human trafficking.

Secondly, effective implementation of the relevant
international instruments is essential. In this context,
Hungary recognizes that the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) has continued to support
Member States in providing technical assistance, upon
request, in assisting implementation.

Thirdly, prevention and protection efforts, we
believe, are urgently required. Hungary shares the view
that strategies to prevent and protect women and girls
in conflict from trafficking must be gender-sensitive
and gender-responsive. The protection of women and
girls exploited by extremist groups is particularly
critical. We Member States must also make sure that
those we send to protect populations are not complicit
in their exploitation.

Fourthly, accountability for sexual violence and
human trafficking must be ensured. We underline the
strong need to bring those responsible tojustice. It isjust
too easy to always point at the International Criminal
Court as the forum where such trials should take place;
we must not forget that the primary responsibility lies
with States. States must step up their efforts in finding
the perpetrators and bringing them to justice before
their national courts. Hungary supports the inclusion
of perpetrators of gross violations of women's human
rights and other forms of gender-based crimes in United
Nations and bilateral sanctions. In this context, we
encourage broader involvement in human trafficking as
a basis for listing in United Nations sanctions regimes.

Fifthly, Hungary strongly support efforts aimed
at enhancing the meaningful participation of women
in crisis prevention and resolution. We are confident
that the effective involvement of women in every stage
of peace processes is an essential tool to address the
phenomenon of sexual and gender-based violence in
conflict.

Hungary looks forward to the report currently
being prepared by UNODC on the implementation of
presidential statement S/PRST/2015/25, which will be
presented to the Council in December. We are ready to
participate consistently and actively in discussions on
how to strengthen the United Nations response to this
global threat.
