Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate on
women and peace and security to address the challenges
facing the full implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda. 1 would also like to note the lateness
of the hour this evening, which serves to highlight the
importance of this issue to the many Member States
here today. We also appreciate you and your team's
leadership, Sir, on this issue. And we applaud Spain
for choosing to highlight this priority issue at a high
level, and thank the United Kingom, as penholder, for
its important work as well. We also note the extensive
efforts by the League of Arab States to combat violence
against women in our region, and in particular the Arab
League strategy, whose full implementation we are all
working towards.

As a proud sponsor of resolution 2242 (2015),
adopted unanimously this morning, the United Arab
Emirates commends the important focus on the role of
women in countering violent extremism and terrorism,
as many delegations highlighted here today. We join
others in thanking the Secretary-General for his bold
call to action and for calling attention to the need to
combat the growing spread of violent extremism. We
would also like to thank the Executive Director of
UN-Women, Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, for her
briefing on the conclusions of the Secretary-General's
report on women and peace and security (S/2015/716).
We extend our continued support to UN-Women in
its role as secretariat of the global study. We welcome
the launch of the study and we urge the international
community to implement its key findings, rather than
simply take note of them.

The high-level review on women and peace and
security is timely given today's security challenges,
which have been exacerbated by the growing impact
of non-State actors and violent extremism, as well as
the global refugee crisis. The rise of Daesh and its
systematic use of sexual assault and rape is intended
to destabilize and terrorize communities. Radical
doctrines such as those propagated by Daesh are an
insult to Islam, and in opposition to its universal tenets.

It is the core belief of the United Arab Emirates
that it is critical to tackle the root causes of extremism
before it becomes violent extremism. That requires
collective international intervention to confront
extremist ideology and propaganda, but at the national
level it also requires supportive policies directed
towards girls' education and women's empowerment,
religious tolerance and a Constitution that guarantees
equal treatment and opportunity. In the United Arab
Emirates, ensuring there are real opportunities for
women's leadership throughout society has also been
an important policy priority, and is demonstrated
by women such as Major Mariam Al-Mansouri, the
country's first active-duty female fighter pilot. She
is here this evening in another room in the United
Nations, where she will receive the Asia Society 2015
Game Changers Award for her achievements. We are
so proud of her. There is no better counter to Daesh's
destructive narrative than the example she provides of
the role and impact of women and peace and security in
a moderate, tolerant Muslim society.

Now more than ever, it is crucial that we recognize
the important and necessary contributions that women
make in international peace and security efforts. We
must place a sharper focus on prevention, the often-
overlooked pillar of the women and peace and security
agenda. As Alaa Murabit noted this morning, the
engagement of women cannot continue to be a question
of convenience. To truly achieve peace and security, we
must prevent conflict and prevent violent extremism by
addressing the root causes and investing in prevention
early on. That shifting of gears needs to happen across
the entire United Nations house, as well as in the
approach of Member States to conflict prevention.

We know that empowering women and including
their perspectives as part of inclusive peacebuilding is
essential to creating functional, just and stable societies.
That is why in the United Arab Emirates 13 years ago,
under the auspices of our First Lady, Her Highness
Sheikha Fatima bint Mubarak, our country adopted its
national strategy for the advancement of women, which
prioritizes the participation of women in the national
development process in both the public and private
sectors and strengthens the concept of gender equality
in policies, programmes and legislation. That is a live
process, and we continue to work with our partners to
do better as part of a commitment made at the highest
levels of our Government.

In the international realm, the United Arab
Emirates seeks not only to empower women but to
empower society through women, in every setting
and everywhere. That is even more critical when
women are caught up in humanitarian or vulnerable
settings. The United Arab Emirates has continued to
strengthen that platform. Most recently, in February,
we hosted a meeting of development and humanitarian
experts in maternal and child health in Abu Dhabi to
engage the Secretary-General's Every Woman, Every
Child global movement. That unprecedented gathering
developed the Abu Dhabi Declaration, which generated
momentum for the renewed Every Woman, Every Child
global strategy, launched at the General Assembly, to
add focus on the "everywhere" component, that is, to
broaden and strengthen this global movement and leave
no one behind.

The Abu Dhabi Declaration helped ensure not
only that gender is a key consideration in responses to
humanitarian emergencies, but also that humanitarian
settings are a key consideration in strategies for the
advancement of gender equality. As we know, crises
deepen existing gender inequalities, marginalization
and exclusion. Yet women and young people are often
both the first responders to crises and the leading
innovators of sustainable solutions in crises. That
is why the United Arab Emirates is dedicated to this
initiative, for which we will continue to provide our
steadfast support. As such, the United Arab Emirates
will host a conference in Abu Dhabi in February with
the United Nations High-Level Panel on Humanitarian
Financing. Our hope is that the meeting will inform
and enhance international action and innovation for
the implementation and financing of the Every Woman,
Every Child everywhere, in particular in advance of
the World Humanitarian Summit and World Health
Assembly next year.

As many Ministers noted today, there is now
overwhelming evidence and consensus that the well-
being of women in conflict and post-conflict settings,
respect for women's rights and their asctive participation
in peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding are
directly related to the maintenance of international
peace and security and sustainable development. The
United Arab Emirates is committed to advancing
sustainable peace by promoting and respecting women
and girls' human rights and meaningfully integrating
women within all efforts to prevent, resolve and rebuild
from conflict. In that regard, I would like to share three
priority issues that still must be addressed in order
to achieve the full implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), which we have all committed to.

First, there is a need to prioritize women's
meaningful participation in all peace and security
processes, as well as efforts to combat, reduce
and prevent terrorism and violent extremism. That
requires increasing the recruitment, retention and
professionalization of women across all justice and
security-sector components, including in peacekeeping
operations.

Secondly, there is a need to recognize that holistic
approaches to conflict prevention should aim to address
the root causes and drivers of conflict and cycles of
violence, including violent extremism, and not just
their impacts on women, men, girls and boys after the
damage is done. That requires engaging women in key
political and decision-making processes, including in
the development of any strategies or approaches aimed
at preventing conflict. And it requires supporting the
development of gender-sensitive security and justice
sectors that are accessible to women and girls, uphold
the rule of law and implement non-discriminatory laws,
policies and practices.

Thirdly, there is a need to advocate for United
Nations system leadership to deliver on the women and
peace and security agenda over the next decade. That
requires systematically integrating women and peace
and security as a cross-cutting issue and recruiting
gender and women and peace and security expertise,
specifically in leadership capacities, both at United
Nations Headquarters and in the field, including with
regard to Special Envoys and Representatives and
senior mediators.
Lastly, we must harness the political will
demonstrated today under your leadership,
Mr. President, and translate it into effective action by
Member States to ensure that we, collectively, move
the women and peace and security agenda forward.
We should do this by tying our funding to the agenda.
Today, I am pleased to announce that the United Arab
Emirates will allocate $500,000 to UN-Women, to be
utilized in countering extremism within the context of
the women and peace and security agenda.

The United Arab Emirates stands in support of all
United Nations efforts on this critical agenda and will
continue working through our national, regional and
international platforms to implement resolution 1325
(2000).

