Mr. Vilovie (Croatia): I would like to thank the
United Kingdom presidency of the Security Council for
holding this important debate, and all the briefers for
their statements.

Croatia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union. I
would also like to make some additional remarks in my
national capacity.

The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/149) paints a grim picture. Women and girls
suffer from sexual violence in armed conflict. Victims
are often left alone and unprotected when pursuing
legal action, or are otherwise effectively denied access
to justice. Perpetrators benefit from a climate of
impunity. It is essential that we address the problem
comprehensively. In my own country, in the heart of
Europe, rape was used as a method of intimidation
and terror during the aggression to which we were
exposed at the beginning of the 1990s. Today, Croatia's
strong commitment to gender equality, domestically
and internationally, is well established. Our work on
the agenda of women and peace and security is a key
priority, and we are ready to contribute.

Croatia welcomes the Group of Eight (G-8)
Declaration on Preventing Sexual Violence in Conflict,
announced at the ministerial meeting held in London in
April. It is an important signal from some of the world's
most powerful countries that the G-8 is ready to take
a prominent role in preventing and combating sexual
violence in war and conflicts.

Women are often victims of armed conflict, but they
can also play a central role in preventing and resolving
violent conflicts, as actors in conflict resolution and
peacebuilding. The continued high incidence of horrific
sexual violence against women and girls in conflicts
demands the international community's attention as
a human rights matter and as a question of ensuring
respect for international humanitarian law. It is an issue
that bears directly on peace and security. The Council's
landmark resolution, 1325 (2000), is still not being
fully implemented.

It is clear that the use of rape and sexual violence
exacerbates conflicts and perpetuates them long after
active hostilities are over. Such crimes inflict indelible
scars on individuals, families and societies that make
reconciliation and peacebuilding much more difficult.

A special effort is required to tackle the culture of
impunity head-on. We can no longer tolerate impunity
for the worst acts of Violence against women and girls,
as set forth in the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court. I wish to pay special tribute to all
women and girl victims of the brutal violence in
Syria. We must all join forces to end impunity for such
crimes. The Statute of the International Criminal Court
explicitly states that rape and other forms of sexual
violence can be prosecuted as war crimes or crimes
against humanity. Amnesties should not extend to
crimes of sexual violence.

We also underline the importance that all relevant
peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations properly
address the impact of conflict on women and girls, and
that the increased participation of women be encouraged.
It is an approach that is reflected domestically
through our National Action Plan on Women, Peace
and Security, which we launched in 2011. The plan is
Croatia's blueprint for practical implementation of our
obligations under resolution 1325 (2000).

We need much greater progress in ensuring the
adequate participation of women in peace talks. The
inclusion of relevant issues in peace agreements is the
exception rather than the rule. Peace accords that fail
to include women in post-conflict governance often
neglect their access to economic opportunities, justice
and reparations. We need to have more women as lead
negotiators and ensure adequate gender expertise for
peace processes.

Clear guidance on how to operationalize the
protection of civilians mandate, including the protection
ofwomen and girls from sexual violence, is also needed
for peacekeeping missions. We have the opportunity to
use United Nations expertise, including such human
rights mechanisms as the United Nations Special
Rapporteur on Violence against Women. All Member
States should ensure that the training of peacekeepers
includes training on resolution 1325 (2000).

Sexual violence is linked to the illicit extraction
of natural resources and leads to the displacement
of civilian populations. Armed groups use forced
marriages, rape and sexual slavery as tactics during
detentions or interrogation. The plight of children
born of wartime rape, about which there is little or
no information available and therefore no meaningful
programmatic intervention, is a matter of our deepest
concern.

Croatia welcomes the emphasis on the urgency
of ensuring that sexual violence considerations are
explicitly and consistently reflected in peace processes,
ceasefires and peace agreements, and in all security
sector reform and other processes in which the United
Nations is involved. In that regard, we commend the
adoption of resolution 2106 (2013), which we are proud
to have co-sponsored.

