Mr. Rossier (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, I would like to thank you for having
organized this debate. I also thank the Secretary-
General for his briefing and the representatives of civil
society for their statements. Switzerland welcomes
the adoption of resolution 2242 (2015), which we
co-sponsored.

Fifteen years after the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), Switzerland remains strongly committed
to advancing its objectives. For this reason, I am
pleased to announce that we have made the following
commitments.

Last month, the Swiss Government decided to
provide support to UN-Women in the amount of
approximately $50 million over the next three years.
Despite the current tight budgetary situation, the
Government has nonetheless increased its contribution
by 25 per cent, which highlights the importance that
Switzerland attaches to this issue.

The substantive participation of women is a
prerequisite for the quality and sustainability of peace
agreements. Whether it is at the negotiating table or
through other channels, women bring new proposals to
peace processes that are essential to ensuring lasting
peace. This must be a priority, as our track record so
far is not good enough. In that respect, Switzerland
supports women's networks at all levels, particularly in
peace processes in the Middle East, North Africa and
Myanmar, and we will continue this support.

Switzerland currently spends approximately
$15 million a year on programmes to combat all forms
of sexual violence. Most are implemented in emergency
situations, especially in post-conflict contexts such as
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Afghanistan,
Syria, Lebanon, Nepal, Tajikistan, the western Balkans
and Bolivia.

For Switzerland, the fight against all forms of
sexual violence will remain a priority in coming years.
We will continue to increase our commitment through
our humanitarian and development activities as well
as through the promotion of programmes to promote
peace and address the past. We support, inter alia,
UN-Women's Justice Rapid Response, based in Geneva,
which is aimed at enabling the quick and thorough
investigation of accusations of sexual violence.

Urgent action is further required to prevent and
punish sexual abuse by United Nations personnel
serving in peacekeeping operations. Switzerland shares
the Secretary-General's outrage at such crimes. We call
for zero tolerance and welcome the measures that he
announced.

The Security Council has repeatedly recognized the
need to empower women and increase their participation
as mitigating factors to the spread of violent extremism.

Switzerland has been a strong supporter of the Global
Community Engagement and Resilience Fund, the
first global effort to support local initiatives aimed at
strengthening resilience against violent extremism.

Strengthening the role of women will be among
the major issues to be addressed by the Fund, to which
Switzerland is providing $4 million over the next four
years. Moreover, we welcome the inclusion of the women
and peace and security agenda in the United Nations
plan of action on the prevention of violent extremism to
be presented in early 2016. We will actively support its
implementation.
Over the past 15 years we have made very good
progress on establishing a normative framework for the
women and peace and security agenda. Now we need
to ensure that we have an effective implementation,
monitoring and accountability mechanism. Switzerland
will support the strengthening of the role of human
rights mechanisms, in particular treaty bodies, in
order to enhance accountability in the implementation
of obligations relating to the women and peace and
security agenda. In this regard, we see the Committee
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women, given its value added, as the right
avenue for so doing.

In conclusion, Switzerland's position is very
straightforward. It is high time that resolution 1325
(2000) be finally and comprehensively implemented.
To paraphrase the words spoken by Angelina Jolie in
this Chamber, we all set the bar.

