Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Uruguay for its initiative to convene today's
open debate and Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs
Cancela for presiding over the meeting.

China thanks Deputy Secretary-General
Mohammed and Under-Secretary-General Dieng for
their briefings. China also listened carefully to the
statement made by the representative of civil society.

In recent years, with the common effort of the
international community, the Security Council has
made positive progress in implementing its relevant
resolutions on women and peace and security. On the
other hand, the international security situation remains
grim and terrorist activities are rampant. Women
and children in conflict continue to be threatened
with sexual violence. The international community
should pay heightened attention to the issue of sexual
violence in conflict, adopt effective measures and
comprehensively enhance the protection of vulnerable
groups, such as women in conflict.

We must first prevent and defuse armed conflicts
through peaceful means and eliminate sexual violence
in conflict at its roots. The international community
should stick to the general direction of finding political
solutions to hotspots and resolve conflict peacefully
through negotiations, good offices and mediation.
In all phases of the peace process, efforts are to be
made to ensure women's full right of participation and
decision-making. Attention is also to be given to using
women's unique advantages in effectively addressing
their security concerns and making them a major force
in concluding peace.
Secondly, we must enhance the capacity of
countries concerned to combat sexual violence in
conflict. The countries concerned bear the primary
responsibility for preventing and combatting sexual
violence in conflict and protecting their women and
children. The international community should respect
the sovereignty and will of the countries concerned,
respect the measures they adopt in the light of
their own situations, actively provide constructive
assistance to the countries concerned, enhance their
capacity-building in the areas of security, economy and
governance, and facilitate the implementation of the
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions on
women and peace and security.

Thirdly, we must increase efforts to combat
terrorism and cross-border organized crime. The
international community should pay close attention to
the new phenomenon of sexual violence perpetrated by
terrorist organizations, maintain unified standards, and
strengthen cooperation to effectively fight international
terrorism, especially terrorist activities, their financing,
trafficking in persons and the spread of extremist
ideologies with the aim of committing sexual crimes
through the use of the Internet and social media. The
relevant countries should strengthen border control and
law enforcement cooperation, share counter-terrorism
information and resources, and shut down the channels
used by terrorists to travel.

Fourthly, we must ensure the synergy of United
Nations institutions. The Security Council should
assume its primary responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security, and strengthen
coordination with the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council, the Peacebuilding Commission,
UN-Women and other relevant agencies to coordinate
the handling of issues related to the women and peace
and security agenda.

United Nations peacekeeping operations should
maintain the policy of zero tolorance for sexual
crimes committed by peacekeepers. The troop- and
police-contributing countries should continue to
strengthen the relevant training of their peacekeepers
so as to raise their awareness of issues related to the
protection of women and children and increase women's
participation in peacekeeping operations.

China shall continue to work with the international
community to jointly create a peaceful, secure and
stable international environment, contribute to
eliminating sexual violence in conflict at an early date,
and continuously advance the cause of women around
the world.

