Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Allow me at the outset
to join others in offering my delegation's heartfelt
condolences to the Government and the people of Sri
Lanka, especially the victims, following the horrific
terrorist attack that claimed more than 300 lives and
wounded many others. Indonesia strongly condemns
that attack.

Let me also thank Germany for convening this
very important open debate. I also thank the Secretary-
General and all the briefers for their comprehensive and
inspirational presentations.

As reported by Secretary-General (S/2019/280),
structural discrimination is at the heart of differential
impact on the victims of conflict-related sexual
violence. Most victims do not seek care owing to a
range of challenges, including stigma, threats, fear of
reprisal and community pressures. Their reluctancy
to report prevents their cases from being reported, let
alone addressed.

On that note, Indonesia condemns the use of sexual
violence as a tactic of war that can exacerbate conflict
and impede the restoration of peace. It is very timely
for the Security Council to send a strong message of our
continued commitment to address that issue. Indonesia
attaches great importance to efforts to end and prevent
sexual violence in the context of the women and peace
and security agenda.

Indonesia hosted a regional training exercise on
women and peace and security on 8 and 9 April. One
of its outcomes was a recommendation to establish a
global coalition of women networks for peace and
tolerance, made up of female peacekeepers, negotiators
and mediators. That coalition will strengthen our
collective efforts to increase women's contribution to
fostering peace and security. In that context, I wish to
focus on three points.

First is the centrality of national authorities with
the primary responsibility to eliminate conflict-related
sexual violence and prioritize the needs of the survivors
of those crimes, while permitting no discrimination.
Treating such persons as survivors - rather than simply
blaming the victims - will help national authorities to
develop long-term and practical policies for addressing
conflict-related sexual violence, taking into account
sociocultural considerations.

Second is the fact that there is no one-size-fits-
all solution to end and prevent conflict-related sexual
violence. Accountability for such crimes should be
considered on a case-by-case basis, using a tailor-made
approach in every conflict. For instance, the creation of
a specialized police unit and court dedicated to sexual
violence might be effective in one conflict situation but
not effective at all in others.

Therefore, Indonesia recognizes the importance of
approaching such issues on a country-specific basis. We
particularly commend the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict
for their efforts to encourage the implementation of
joint communiques to address conflict-related sexual
violence between the United Nations and several
national Governments. A tailor-made approach will
help to ensure both accountability for past crimes and
the prevention of future crimes.

Third is the importance of capacity-building to
strengthen efforts in eliminating conflict-related
sexual violence. In order to address the root causes of
conflict, capacity-building should be aimed at building
the capacity of law enforcement, strengthening national
legislation and ensuring its effective implementation.
In that regard, capacity-building programmes must
be proportional and responsive in order to ensure that
reparation and reconciliation processes are established
for the victims of conflict-related sexual Violence
and to support the fight against impunity based on
political intimidation.

Indonesia has been a champion of the women and
peace and security agenda in the region. As one of the
largest troop-contributing countries to peacekeeping
operations, Indonesia believes that it is crucial to
enhance training for United Nations peacekeepers on
conflict-related sexual violence. We are glad to note that
the Secretary-General also shared similar views in his
statement. Therefore, eliminating sexual exploitation
and abuse has been integrated into the predeployment
curriculum at the Indonesian Peacekeeping Operations
Training Centre.

The year 2019 marks the seventieth anniversary
of the Geneva Conventions. It is time to revitalize all
parties' commitments to take all possible measures to
implement international humanitarian law, including
our commitments to end and prevent sexual violence
in conflict. Ultimately, our efforts should focus on
strengthening national ownership, leadership and
capacities for reaching a constructive solution to
combating conflict-related sexual violence.

