The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity.

I would first like to join others in thanking the
Secretary- General for his insightful report (S/2014/l81),
which has provided this important debate with ample
guidance. I would also like to express our appreciation
to Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Zainab Hawa Bangura for her determined and enduring
efforts to ensure global involvement in the fight against
the abhorrent crimes of rape and sexual violence,
especially in conflict.

Those present will all agree with me that Ms. Rhoda
Misaka stirred our conscience this morning with
her impassioned statement. She reveals the horror of
sexual violence in conflict and invites us to fight this
barbarism - more than barbarism - with unrelenting
determination and commitment. We want to thank her
and say that we support her in her work.

Nigeria takes note of the highlights of the Secretary-
General's report, including the actions taken by States
and the challenges confronting them in conflict and
post-conflict situations in preventing sexual violence.
We welcome the broad-based consultations that guided
the report's preparation, which involved United Nations
entities in the United Nations Action against Sexual
Violence in Conflict, field missions and country teams,
all concerned Member States and non-governmental
organizations. We acknowledge the important work of
the United Nations Team of Experts on the Rule of Law
and Sexual Violence in Conflict. We encourage Member
States to draw on their expertise in strengthening the
rule of law and the capacities of civilian and military
justice systems.

That is all part of a broader effort to strengthen
institutional safeguards against impunity for conflict-
related sexual Violence. Donors should be encouraged to
ensure sustainable funding for this valuable resource for
the countries concerned. Nigeria shares the Secretary-
General's view that the lack of capacity remains one
of the major impediments to ensuring accountability,
which leads to widespread impunity. In turn, that has a
detrimental impact on access to justice and the security
and safety of survivors. It is evident that survivors'
access to justice can be hindered by restrictions on
physical access and inadequate legislation, or, indeed,
by the financial and social costs associated with
reporting and pursuing justice for crimes of sexual
violence. Regrettably, many countries lack legal aid
services and protocols for the protection of victims and
witnesses, and an already weakened criminal justice
system amplifies the lack of access to justice. We are
pleased to note that United Nations actors, including
the Team of Experts, continue to support national
authorities in that regard.

It is a matter of concern, as highlighted in the
report, that the prevalence of sexual violence during a
conflict often leaves not only an impact but especially
bitter memories, with acute consequences for the
security of women and children even when peace
has been restored. That may ultimately have a direct
bearing on the durability of peace and prospects for
sustainable development.

With that in mind, the time has come for us to
redouble our efforts in the fight against the scourge
and to hold all perpetrators accountable. That is the
consensus in the Chamber.

The Security Council demonstrated leadership in
that regard in June 2013, by adopting resolution 2106
(2013), which underscores the need for more systematic
monitoring of sexual violence in armed conflict.
It is therefore imperative that the Council develop
appropriate response mechanisms and consistently
improve existing ones to ensure the participation
of women in all aspects of mediation, post-conflict
recovery and peacebuilding.

We acknowledge the critical role of women
protection advisers within human rights and women's
empowerment and gender units in peacekeeping
operations.

At the global level there is now unprecedented
commitment and momentum on the application of all the
relevant Security Council resolutions. The international
community must sustain that momentum. As part of
those accomplishments, we believe that a great deal
more needs to be done to implement commitments on
women and peace and security. For example, there is a
need for increased sex-disaggregated data on security
threats in order to contribute to greater security for
women.

My country welcomes the Secretary-General's
recommendations that outline critical elements for
the prevention of sexual violence in conflict, specific
actions required at political and operational levels
and the need for national ownership, leadership and
responsibility.
The determination to tackle sexual violence in
conflict is not confined to the United Nations. At the
regional level, under the auspices of the African Union,
the African Solidarity Initiative held a high-level
meeting in October 2013 on preventing and responding
to sexual violence in conflict and post-conflict
countries and beyond. That consultation was organized
under key international policy and action frameworks,
particularly resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008),
the 2005 World Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1), the Protocol on the Rights of Women in
Africa, the protocol on the prevention and suppression
of sexual violence against women and children and the
2009 African Union gender policy. The meeting was
aimed at significantly reducing and eliminating sexual
violence and accelerating the implementation of agreed
responses, especially those related to prevention and
protection and victims' access to care and justice.

At the subregional level in West Africa, the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) has also put in place strong mechanisms
with regard to the role of women in conflict prevention
and management. Those include the protocol on conflict
prevention, management, resolution, peacekeeping and
security and the supplementary protocol on democracy
and good governance. Those mechanisms form the
basis of the ECOWAS conflict-prevention framework.

The women and peace and security component
of the framework is aimed at consolidating women's
role, participation and impact at all stages of conflict
management, including humanitarian provisions, while
reinforcing various national and regional mechanisms
on their protection and promotion.

Other regional initiatives of that nature include the
women's network for peace and security in the ECOWAS
region; the West Africa Network for Peacebuilding; the
Movement against Small Arms and Light Weapons in
West Africa; and the Alliance of African Initiatives for
peace and stability in West Africa.

At national level, through the Law Reform
Commission and the Federal Ministry of Justice,
Nigeria has initiated reforms in the criminal justice
system to ensure the delivery of gender justice in law
and practice. Bills on addressing gender equality and
all forms of violence against women and girls have been
sponsored at both the federal and state level. Strident
steps have been taken at the national level to ensure the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). In the same
vein, Nigeria stresses the importance of compliance
with resolution 1820 (2008), on ending acts of sexual
violence against women in conflict.

Nigeria fully embraces the adoption of political
commitments to prevent sexual violence in conflict,
namely, the historic declarations adopted by the Group
of Eight countries in April 2013 and the Declaration
of Commitment to End Sexual Violence in Conflict,
which has been signed by more than 140 nations. We
believe that Member States should implement those
commitments as a matter of high priority. Member
States that have yet to sign that important Declaration
should be encouraged to do so before the October
deadline - about six months from now.

It is critical for States to focus collectively on
converting the political commitments into concrete
preventive action, particularly at national level. It is in
that spirit that Nigeria today, in this forum, declares its
intention to sign on to that laudable initiative as a means
of demonstrating its unwavering commitment to the
fight against sexual violence and all its ramifications.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

Iwish to request all speakers to limit their statements
to no more than four minutes to enable the Council
to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations with
lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate
the texts in writing and to deliver a condensed version
when speaking in the Chamber.

I wish to inform all concerned that we will be
carrying on this open debate right through the lunch
hour, as we have a very large number of speakers.

I now give the floor to the Her Excellency Ms. Maria
Fernanda Espinosa, Minister of National Defence of
Ecuador.

