Mr. Minami (Japan): At the outset, I would like to
thank the President for convening this meeting. I would
also like to join the others in thanking the briefers for
their very extensive and excellent briefings.

I also wish to express my deepest gratitude to
Ms. Zainab Bangura for her passionate service as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict over the past five years, and
I would like to welcome the appointment of Ms. Patten
as the new Special Representative.

Japan welcomes the Secretary-General's new
vision on prevention, which emphasizes equal rights
and women's empowerment. We look forward to the
new strategy of the Task Force on Gender Parity and
Equality in the United Nations System.

We are seriously concerned that sexual violence
continues to be perpetrated by terrorist groups as a tactic
of war and terrorism. Such acts, entailing systematic
abuses toward strategic objectives, may amount to
crimes against humanity and, therefore, we in turn must
address them systematically and strategically. Needless
to say, the Security Council is the appropriate organ
of the United Nations for discussions and actions on
this issue, as it is directly linked to the maintenance of
peace and security; it should absolutely not be viewed
as an add-on element of the Council's work.

While we welcome improvements in the quality of
information on sexual violence contained in the report
of the Secretary General (S/2017/249), we still see a
need for the Council to be timely briefed on sexual
violence in conflict in the context of country-specific
situations and relevant thematic areas of work. Ample
and adequate information determines the quality of our
collective actions.

We appreciate the firm will of the Secretary-
General to make peacekeeping operations as gender
responsive as possible. In particular, Japan has been
a strong supporter of the Secretary-General's zero-
tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse
throughout the United Nations system, as well as all
efforts to realize this policy on the ground.

It is also encouraging to recognize the increased
presence of women's protection advisers within
United Nations peacekeeping missions. Their role
to improve capacities for monitoring, analysing and
reporting on sexual violence is of great importance;
therefore, dedicated human and financial resources
should be ensured to sustain their work. Japan has
joined collective efforts in that regard by contributing
financially to United Nations capacity-building training
for these advisers.

Today, I would like to emphasize three points that
Japan considers especially important.

First, we have to recognize that there are definite
limitations to the method of dealing with issues of
sexual violence at the national level only, as has been
the case in the past. The importance of cross-border
cooperation should be fully emphasized, as in resolution
2331 (2016), on human trafficking. International
judicial cooperation should be promoted to effectively
hold perpetrators accountable, and financial flows to
terrorists must be cut off to thwart their objectives.
Now is the time to step up our efforts to discuss and
develop a new international framework of cooperation.

Secondly, acknowledging victims should be the
priority of our considerations. Victims of sexual
violence should be classified and treated as legitimate
victims of violence, including terrorism, with the
purpose of rendering them eligible for official support.
This year, we decided to support a project for Syrian
refugees and local communities in Jordan in the same
context through United Nations Action against Sexual
Violence in Conflict. In addition, Japan has been an
active partner of the International Criminal Court,
contributing to the support projects of the Trust Fund
for Victims for the victims of sexual and gender-based
violence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Republic of Uganda.

Thirdly, Japan is proud to be a leading supporter of
the work of the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
and specifically the Team of Experts on the Rule of
Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, in their efforts to
provide assistance to the Governments of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Central African Republic
and Somalia. I reiterate our ongoing support for the
Team of Experts, and also encourage other Member
States to join our efforts with the Team of Experts,
which is only funded through voluntary contributions.

In conclusion, Japan has a growing concern, as the
scope of this issue expands and grows more complex.
We are witnessing new vulnerable victim groups, such
as children born of rape, men and boys, and displaced
populations. In that context, we would welcome more
information sharing on these new groups by the Special
Representative and the Team of Experts. Japan remains
committed to combating all forms of sexual violence
in conflict.

