Mr. Wetland (Norway): Last week, CNN ran a
story of an 8-year old Liberian girl who had been gang-
raped by four boys. This happened here in the United
States, in Arizona, and thus aroused reaction and
became global news. However, when such atrocities
happen in conflict-ridden parts of Africa and
elsewhere, apathy and indifference are all too
prevalent.

Daily, there is violence, molesting and suffering.
Lives are ruined. We hear about villages where every
single female is raped and where a girl's capacity to
have children is taken away from her while she is still
a child herself. We see the destruction of families and
entire communities.

With the adoption of resolution 1820 (2008),
building on resolution 1325 (2000) and this week
supplemented by resolution 1882 (2009), we now have
a comprehensive set of norms addressing these
gruesome realities.

We welcome the Secretary-General's report
(S/2009/362), with its comprehensive and direct policy
recommendations. In today's meeting, I would like to
make the following points on what we believe, in
particular, needs to be done.

First, impunity must end. Rapists and perpetrators
of sexual violence must be held accountable, tried and
convicted, irrespective of rank or status, by they
soldier or civilian. The responsibility lies with
Governments and military leaders who too often have
turned a blind eye to this.

The report rightly calls for comprehensive legal
and judicial reform, in conformity with international
standards, without delay and with a view to bringing
perpetrators to justice and to ensuring that victims are
treated with dignity throughout the judicial process and
that they are protected and receive remedy.

Second, while collecting evidence is difficult, it
must be given the highest priority, and reporting
methods must be improved. Unimpeded access to
humanitarian assistance for victims of violence would
help, as would security sector reform whereby the
number of trained women police officers should be
increased. We thus share the Secretary-General's call
for increased funding to enable humanitarian
programmes to prevent and respond to sexual violence.
We appreciate the assurance that United Nations-
managed funds will pilot a system to allow decision-
makers to track gender-related actions.

Third, victims should be given better medical and
psycho-social assistance. They should be ensured
socio-economic rehabilitation and empowerment, as
well as economic compensation and support when
taking their cases to court. We would support a
proposal to establish a fund to address these issues.

Fourth, expertise and capacity to address sexual
violence in the field must be strengthened through
systematic training of personnel.

Fifth, while United Nations organizations make
important contributions to all these ends - and we
commend the work done by United Nations Action
against Sexual Violence in Conflict and the Gender
Standby Capacity project in this regard - we clearly
see the need for stronger and more proactive ownership
of this issue in the leadership of United Nations
organizations and departments to ensure coordinated
action, not least at field level.

We therefore support the appointment of a special
representative of the Secretary-General on women,
peace and security to provide a strong and visible hand
in the United Nations to drive and coordinate system-
wide prevention of and response to sexual violence in
conflict and to front the broader agenda of women's
equal participation at all levels of peacebuilding and
conflict resolution.

Sixth, we would welcome the establishment of a
commission of inquiry to investigate and report on
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law, with a particular focus on Chad, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Sudan. The
commission would present recommendations to the
Security Council on the need for improved or new
mechanisms to ensure maximum accountability.

Seventh, we support the establishment of a
mechanism of the Security Council to monitor how
parties to armed conflict comply with obligations under
international law, including addressing rape and other
forms of sexual violence.

Lastly, resolution 1882 (2009) on children and
armed conflict highlights and condemns rape and other
forms of sexual violence against children. The
possibility of listing the parties in conflict that commit
rape and other forms of sexual violence against
children is the right step to take, but if it is to fulfil its
mandate, the Security Council Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict will need increased
support and resources.

Before closing, let me underscore that the
challenges presented by the issues of women, peace
and security and of the fight against sexual violence in
armed conflict are among my Government's highest
priorities. Our policy benefits greatly from the valuable
input of humanitarian and civil society organizations,
which often provide the most relevant experience and
policy recommendations.

Sexual violence in situations of armed conflict is
also a political and security question. It requires a
political and security response. Members of the
Security Council should therefore make sure that the
issue remains prominent on the Council's agenda, and
Norway would welcome a resolution to this effect. We
look forward to the Secretary-General's annual
reporting on the implementation of resolution 1820
(2008).

