Mr. Mukerji (India): I would like to join others
before me in thanking our briefers for this open debate.
I would also like to thank the delegation of Chile for
having circulated the concept note to guide our debate
(S/2015/32, annex).

As a country whose representative, Hansa Mehta,
introduced the focus on women in the text of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights in 1948, India
is strongly committed to the rights of women globally.
My delegation speaks on the subject of our debate
today on the basis of extensive experience in United
Nations peacekeeping operations over the past six
decades. India, as the single largest contributor to these
operations, having sent over 180,000 troops to 43 of
the 68 peacekeeping operations mandated so far by the
Council, is deeply conscious of the significance of the
topic of this open debate today.

We are committed to a zero-tolerance policy
on violence against women. When the first United
Nations peacekeeping operations were mandated by the
Council, we contributed our troops to ensure that these
operations were successful and that they would result in
keeping the peace. This objective of keeping the peace
was the best guarantor of the protection of civilians,
especially women, caught up in armed conflicts.

Until a few years ago, our experience was that the
traditional mandate of United Nations peacekeeping,
anchored in the three principles of consent of parties
to the dispute, impartiality and the non-use of force
except in self-defence and defence of the mandate, were
sufficient to keep the peace and ensure the protection of
civilians in the area where United Nations peacekeepers
were deployed.

However, the threat faced by civilians in armed
conflict situations has undergone a significant
change in recent years, especially due to the change
in the nature of armed conflicts. Whereas earlier, our
peacekeepers were deployed to keep the peace between
States, we are now witnessing a steady increase in
the deployment of United Nations peacekeepers in
situations of internal conflict within Member States.
It is a matter of concern that most of these situations
appear to be open-ended, often due to the breakdown
of national governance structures within the country,
as well as to the evident inability of the Council to
address and nurture sustainable political solutions to
such conflict situations. The impact of this instability
and violence has been felt by the most vulnerable ofthe
civilian populations, especially women and girls.

As the concept note points out, the increased
participation of women in redressing such situations
could make a significant difference in finding a
solution to this problem. The participation of women in
all aspects of the prevention and resolution of conflicts
is an important policy measure that the Council should
encourage when mandating peace operations.

India was the first State Member of the United
Nations to implement such a policy when we contributed
an all-female formed police unit to the United Nations
Mission in Liberia in 2007. As former United States
Secretary of State Hilary Clinton told the Council in
2009, we have set an example that must be repeated
in United Nations peacekeeping missions all over the
world. The Council should make an assessment of
whether this has actually happened since then, or not.

Our experience in Liberia showed that the actual
requirements for addressing issues confronting women
in armed conflict were related to the concept of
peacebuilding, rather than peacekeeping. We believe
that the time has come for the Council to disaggregate the
complex multidimensional nature of its peacekeeping
mandates and focus on addressing issues confronting
women in armed conflict situations through focused
peacebuilding activities, so that the transition to a
post-conflict society can be sustainable. Such an
approach would give greater scope to humanitarian
and development actors to take appropriate action
against the exploitation and abuse of women caught
in situations of armed conflict. The concept note
stresses the importance of women's empowerment in
this context. We would underscore the inherent linkage
between women's empowerment and development in
order to sustain the peace.

In conclusion, we would like to refer to the recent
establishment of the High-Level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations by the Secretary-General, who has
made a conscious effort to enable the Panel to focus on
women's issues. We would recommend that the Council
forward the conclusions of this open debate, including
the views expressed by Member States not members of
the Council, like us, to the Panel for its consideration.

