Mrs. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to congratulate you, Sir, upon your management of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month.
We are pleased that Japan has decided to convene this
open debate a few days before 31 October - the sixth
anniversary of the adoption by the Security Council of
resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace and security.

We thank Ms. Rachel Mayanja, Special Adviser
to the Secretary-General on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women, for her presentation of the
report of the Secretary-General on women, peace and
security. The report notes the progress in the
application of the System-wide Action Plan for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) throughout
the entire United Nations system, and the difficulties
that were encountered, including those relative to the
analysis of gender problems and the incorporation of a
gender perspective within the Organization. The
commitment to agree on and coordinate action within
the United Nations system and among Member States
is essential to achieving the goals of resolution 1325
(2000).
Resolution 1325 (2000) has the firm support of
Colombia, one of the countries that promoted it and as
a member of the group of friends that drives its
implementation and dissemination. Colombia presented
a report to the Secretary-General in 2004 on the
progress made in its implementation.

Aware that the main responsibility in the
implementation of the resolution falls on Member
States, Colombia has moved ahead with its
implementation in legislation and through special
programmes that have the cooperation and support of
the United Nations system. The United Nations
Development Fund for Women has been an important
ally since Colombia's peace and security programme
was created in 2003. Colombia has also adopted laws
to protect women and promote their participation.
Colombia's legislation favours female-headed
households and guarantees that women will fill 30 per
cent of public posts at decision-making levels in the
different branches and organs of public administration.
The legislation has had an incremental effect on their
participation.

The dissemination and promotion of resolution
1325 (2000) has been a constant priority in the
coordinated work of the Presidential Advisory Office
on the Equality of Women, and the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs.

My country actively participated in the first
training course on gender, conflict and peacebuilding
in the Andean region, which was held in Lima in
October 2005, under the auspices of Women Waging
Peace. One month later, a similar event was held in
Bogota, with the wide participation of the public sector
and representatives of civil society and academia in
order to promote resolution 1325 (2000) and highlight
elements that can incorporate the gender perspective
into peacebuilding programmes, policies and actions.

The democratic security policy applied in
Colombia is based on a comprehensive vision that
involves not only the security aspect, but also
components of social equity and human development.
Within that framework, Colombia has a social reform
policy that works towards, among other objectives,
greater gender equality.

We deploy seven tools to that end: educational
revolution, social protection, the promotion of
economic solidarity, the social management of rural
areas and public services, the democratization of
property possession, and a guaranteed quality of life in
urban areas. Each of those mechanisms includes a
follow-up mechanism.

As the result of legislation adopted by Congress,
the Presidential Advisory Office for the Equality of
Women created the post of observer on gender issues
that is responsible for incorporating the gender
perspective in the analysis of the results achieved in
the aforementioned areas.

In order to implement Security Council resolution
1325 (2000), our National Development Plan, set out in
the chapter on social equity, is mandated to carry out
policies in favour of women pursuant to cross-cutting
gender criteria coordinated by the Presidential
Advisory Office for the Equality of Women. The
Advisory Office - the guiding entity for governmental
policies in that field - has outlined a policy on women
as peacebuilders and promoters of development. That
is the starting point from which to articulate objectives,
strategies and actions aimed at the elimination of all
forms of discrimination against women.

The Advisory Office also promoted a national
agreement on equality between men and women. That
agreement has special significance to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) as it not only
advances the incorporation of a gender perspective into
public policy, but also strengthens the participation of
women based on conditions equal to those of men in all
areas of society.

The Government of Colombia is firmly
committed to the achievement of the goals of women,
the promotion and protection of their rights, and the
advancement of their full participation in public life.
One of the goals for the period 2006-2010 is the
inclusion of a gender perspective in the foreign policy
and international cooperation agenda, with an emphasis
on social development issues.

Since 2002, my Government, through the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Presidential
Advisory Office for the Equality of Women, has
coordinated efforts to implement resolution 1325
(2000). One of those initiatives was the creation of a
framework on women, peace and security that
ultimately adopted a common agenda on the issue of
women and their incorporation into priority actions for
peace in Colombia.

I would like to stress that, for the Government of
Colombia, building and maintaining peace should not
be limited to reaching peace accords with illegal armed
groups. The Government has always kept in mind the
need to maintain and strengthen peace through social,
economic and political reforms in order to achieve
greater rates of economic growth and employment, and
thus to greater access to, and opportunities for
education, health and social security. We are convinced
that this is the only way to build societies that are more
just and democratic and to give women the place they
deserve within the framework of development and
social equality.

