Mr. Yamazaki (Japan): I thank the Deputy
Secretary-General, the Executive Director of
UN-Women and the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations for their informative
briefings. We also thank the representative from civil
society and welcome her participation here today.

Japan welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2012/732), which demonstrates the clear
commitment of the Secretary-General to the issue
being discussed today. We are very much aware that
the Secretary-General announced "Working with and
for women and young people" as one of the five priority
agenda items for his second term.

We are very encouraged that, under the strong
leadership of Ms. Bachelet, UN-Women has been
resolutely promoting the agenda of women and peace
and security as one of its priorities. It is with great
satisfaction that we note that, during her recent visit
to Japan, Ms. Bachelet had an opportunity to meet and
exchange views with members ofJapanese civil society,
political leaders, including the Prime Minister, Foreign
Minister and Minister for Gender Issues, and leaders of
the private sector, the press and youth groups.

The security of women and girls is an indicator
of peace and stability. In that regard, we note that
the Secretary-General's report refers to the fact that
Afghan women's groups have voiced concerns over
the potential for a peace deal to be made at the cost of
women's hard-fought rights. On that point, we would
like to mention that, in July, Japan hosted the Tokyo
Conference on Afghanistan, which reaffirmed and
further consolidated the international community's
partnership with the Afghan Government in the
Partnership for Self-Reliance in Afghanistan from
Transition to the Transformation Decade (2015-2024).
Thirty Afghans from civil society, half of whom were
women, were invited to the Conference. It should
be noted that, the Tokyo declaration which resulted
from the Conference, stressed the importance of
the participation of civil society organizations and
women's groups in support of the peace process and the
culture of peace and human rights in Afghan society, in
particular in the light of resolution 1325 (2000).

Relief and recovery initiatives for women in
conflict or post-conflict situations are also key when
conflict prevention efforts unfortunately fail. As an
example, in close collaboration and consultation with
a wide range of women's civil society organizations in
the Sudan, Japan supported finding employment for
women in poverty, including widows, women in rural
places and women with disabilities.

As to refugees and persons displaced as a result of
conflicts, Japan supported the efforts to prevent sexual
violence in Ivorian refugee camps located in Liberia by
providing lighting and electricity in common areas of
the camps, as well as vocational training that included
awareness-raising activities. That effort also included
our support to establish a relief and recovery system,
including legal support and mental care to victims
of sexual violence. In the Republic of Uganda, Japan
implemented awareness-raising activities for sexual
violence prevention in communities of refugees from
neighbouring countries, and over 10,000 people
participated.

As we move towards the fifteenth anniversary
of the adoption of the resolution, Japan, for its part,
will continue to exert its utmost efforts towards the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in cooperation
with our partners, and in particular with women's civil
society organizations.

