Mr. Argiiello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin by thanking the United States
presidency for having organized this open debate,
which clearly reflects the Security Council's
commitment to full implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and, in particular, the growing concern
regarding the use of various forms of sexual violence
against the civilian population, particularly women and
girls, in conflict and post-conflict situations.

In the framework of a human rights perspective,
Argentina places high priority on the situation of
women and girls in conflict situations, and on the
participation of women as key protagonists in peace
processes and in peacebuilding.

Resolution 1325 (2000) provides a legal
framework which allows for the effective participation
of women at the national and international levels,
within the broader and indispensable legal framework
comprising the Beijing Declaration and Platform for
Action, the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women, the outcome
documents of the twenty-third special session of the
General Assembly, on women 2000: gender equality,
development and peace for the twenty-first century
(General Assembly resolutions S-23/2 and S-23/3), as
well as other relevant resolutions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly, specifically
Assembly resolutions 58/185, on the in-depth study on
all forms of violence against women, and 62/134 on
eliminating rape and other forms of sexual Violence in
all their manifestations, including in conflict and
related situations.
As a reflection of this deep commitment,
Argentina is one of four countries carrying out the pilot
programme for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and has started to take concrete actions,
including the first regional workshop for the
development of a gender policy for peace operations,
held in our country in May with a View to
strengthening alliances at all levels to move forward on
gender mainstreaming in peacekeeping operations.

In this regard, we would like to note that
Argentina has fully incorporated United Nations
recommendations on gender in all aspects of its
participation in peacekeeping operations. The
Argentine Joint Peacekeeping Operations Training
Centre has also incorporated a gender perspective in its
doctrine, both at the administrative level and in the
curricula of its training programmes.

As of January 2008, 26 Argentine women were
participating in peacekeeping missions, particularly the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti and
United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus. In
2007, 36 per cent of our participants in White Helmet
humanitarian missions were women, a figure which is
expected to reach 43 per cent in 2008.

Increasing numbers of reports from the field alert
us on the use of sexual violence as a political or
military tool in some current conflicts. A regrettable
chapter of our past has shown us that rape and other
heinous forms of sexual violence can be used by agents
of the State as a tool to spread terror, and to torture and
degrade those whom it considers their "enemies".

Sexual violence as a method of warfare is
categorically prohibited. The widespread and
systematic use of sexual violence is a grave violation
of international law, particularly in the light of the
Rome Statue of the International Criminal Court and
by the Geneva Conventions and their Additional
Protocols.

Considering these realities, Argentina is
persuaded of the need urgently to adopt effective
measures to prevent and respond to such acts of sexual
violence against civilian populations, which will
significantly contribute to the maintenance of
international peace and security. Such measures should
include, inter alia, the protection of civilians, in
particular women and girl children; the training of
military and security personnel; the adoption and

08-3908]
effective enforcement of appropriate legislation; and
community-based work and care for the victims.

In order to ensure that effective measures are
adopted, we consider that a report of the Secretary-
General would be particularly useful. It should
organize and analyse the information available to the
United Nations system, with a specific focus on the
shocking phenomenon of sexual violence as a political
and military tool.

Lastly, Argentina is of the view that any effective
response to this question must be two-pronged:
promotion of full respect for the human rights of
victims and an end to impunity for perpetrators. In this
regard, we believe that the draft resolution before the
Council today would have benefited from a
strengthened legal framework, particularly with a firm
reaffirmation of the Rome Statue of the International
Criminal Court, the main tool available to the
international community today to ensure that nobody
can with impunity commit heinous crimes, such as
those which we are considering today.

