Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): I thank the
presidency of Russia for putting the spotlight on
the women and peace and security agenda, and the
Secretary-General for his insightful recommendations
in his annual report (S/2016/822). We express our warm
appreciation to the UN-Women Executive Director
and her team. We also thank Ms. Rita Lopidia, a civil
society representative.

We commend the ongoing mechanisms set in place
after the 2015 high-level review panels on peacekeeping
and peacebuilding and the 15-year review of resolution
1325 (2000), which powerfully highlighted the women
and peace and security agenda. Notable among these
mechanisms are the Security Council's new Informal
Expert Group, the Global Acceleration Instrument
for Women and Peace and Security and Humanitarian
Action, the network of women and peace and
security national focal points and the Peacebuilding
Commission's gender strategy.

At the same time, despite laudable strides made,

there is still insufficient participation and leadership by
women, both in times of conflict and of peace. As the
Secretary-General underscored in his report, the overall
share of women is either at the same level or has even
regressed in many key areas. It is therefore essential to
bridge the gap between intent and implementation and
between word and action. There is a need to increase the
availability of gender-disaggregated data and of reports
on progress towards implementing and monitoring these
commitments, to step up intense capacity-building
and to formulate strong new pro-women policies and
legislation. We need women to be engaged in mediation
and conflict resolution and in post-conflict and recovery
phases, with closer coordination by the relevant United
Nations entities.

Global processes are effective only when they
become strongly rooted on the ground. Allow me to
elaborate the steps taken by Kazakhstan to support
global efforts.

In collaboration with the Multi-Country Office
of UN-Women in Almaty, regional organizations,
the Parliament and civil society, Kazakhstan has
formulated its 1325 National Action Plan with a
designated budget, to be adopted this December. We
will enhance training on gender equality for the armed
and security forces, promote the participation of
women soldiers in peacekeeping operations and strictly
implement the zero-tolerance policy towards sexual
violence. We will ensure that women are present on
mediation teams and will appoint gender advisers, or
focal points, in the relevant ministries and departments.
We will work to achieve the global target of earmarking
15 per cent of our official development assistance for
women and peace and security. In 2017, we will set
out monitoring frameworks with progress indicators to
assess these targets.

We recognize the vital role of women in United
Nations peacekeeping and conflict resolution. We
are presently contributing by deploying our highly
qualified military observers with gender competence
to the United Nations Mission for the Referendum
in Western Sahara and the United Nations Operation
in Cote d'Ivoire. Kazakhstan has signed the London
Communique, which, among other topics, highlights
the role of women in peacekeeping. We also support
the new United Nations initiative for the appointment
of more women in senior United Nations leadership
positions and, at the same time, doubling the number of
women in the United Nations peacekeeping operations
by 2020.

We welcome the close links between peace, security
and sustainable development in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development - the nexus that is essential
for conflict prevention. We are focusing on Afghanistan
with a multidimensional approach of conflict prevention
and resolution, recovery, reintegration and humanitarian
assistance, through our official development aid
program, KazAID. In cooperation with Japan and the
United Nations Development Programme, in August
2016 we launched numerous interventions for gender
equality in Afghanistan, including providing policy
support and capacity development to its Ministry of
Women's Affairs.

Kazakhstan pledges its unfailing support to the
women and peace and security agenda when it takes its
non-permanent seat on the Security Council, and would
like to see it kept as a cross-cutting priority item in the
Council's deliberations. My country can be counted on
to be a strong voice on behalf of women's protection
and empowerment.

