Mr. Mendoza-Garcia (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): Costa Rica thanks the Chilean for having
convened today's open debate on the protection of
civilians, focused particularly on protection challenges
and needs faced by women and girls. The twentieth
anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action provides us with the most fitting framework
for this debate. We welcome the input of civil society
on this item, and we commend Chile for having
invited Ms. Ilwad Leman to address the Council. We
hope that this practice will continue in the future, as
recommended by the Secretary-General.

We align ourselves with the statement made by
the representative of Austria on behalf of the Human
Security Network, and wish to make the following
points in our national capacity.

Costa Rica is deeply concerned by the content of
the concept paper before us, which states that in many
settings, "control of women's rights is at the very
centre of the armed conflict" (S/2015/32, annex, p. 2).
We are alarmed by the deliberate campaigns against
women and the restrictions and conditions placed on
the human rights of women and girls by extremist
groups, as well as in the tragic evolution of terrorist
activities targeting women and girls. We must reject
any violation of the human rights of women and girls
through the strict imposition of sumptuary codes, and
attacks on women in public employment, schools, girls
and teachers. We recognize the interlinkage of such
practices with extremist violence. In that regard, the
report of the Secretary-General on women and peace
and security (S/2014/693) demonstrates that violence
against civilians often accompanies restrictions on
the rights of women with respect to clothing, travel,
education and employment.

In societies with greater gender equality, extremism
is less likely to thrive and women are less exposed to
its impact. We categorically condemn any form and
manifestation of terrorism, given its destructive impact
on civilian populations, societies and international
security. Costa Rica deplores the activities carried
out by the group known as Boko Haram, particularly
the abduction of school girls, and self-styled Islamic
State, which undermine the rights of women and girls.
We call on the Security Council to redouble its efforts
to combat such barbaric acts within the framework of
international law, to consider the more effective use of
sanctions committees to that end, and to bring those
responsible to justice.

We also express our deep concern at the ongoing use
and widespread impact of weapons against civilians,
including men, women and children. Against this
backdrop, we would like to raise the following issues.

First, it is important to sign, ratify and fully
implement the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT), including
its provision relating to the criteria for gender-based
violence. The devastating impact of cluster bombs on
civilian populations is well known, and we must put a
definitive end to their use. Despite the 2008 Convention
on Cluster Munitions, which Costa Rica has the honour
of presiding, we have unfortunately seen the continued
use of these weapons in recent conflicts. We call on
the signatories to ratify the Convention and on all
other States to join. States parties to the Convention
are legally obligated to stop using them, but given the
impact of these weapons on civilians, it is a moral
obligation for everyone else. Costa Rica therefore also
supports an international commitment to ending the
use of explosive munitions in densely populated areas.

Finally, we note the importance of including in
all mandates of United Nations missions provisions to
promote gender equality and women's empowerment,
as stated in resolution 2122 (2013), including specific
provisions on the protection of women and on zero
tolerance for sexual exploitation and abuse. As we
have indicated in other forums, extremist violence is
not representative of humankind or of any particular
culture or religion. It is an affront to the rule oflaw and
to our common humanity. Respect for human dignity,
the bedrock of human rights, is present in all cultural
and religious traditions. We must combat the culture
of hatred and foster a culture of peace that will build
inclusive and cohesive societies that respect human
rights in their entirety.

