Mr. Swe (Myanmar): At the outset, I wish to
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this important
meeting to commemorate the fourth anniversary of the
adoption of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), a
resolution that has drawn the international
community's attention to the crucial role of women in
conflict prevention and conflict resolution.

My delegation commends the efforts of the
Secretary-General and the United Nations entities to
broadly disseminate resolution 1325 (2000). We
particularly welcome the initiative taken by the
Department of Economic and Social Affairs by
establishing a task force on conflict prevention, peace-
building and development to elaborate a working plan
that will look into the underlying causes of conflicts,
such as poverty, socio-economic and gender
inequalities and endemic underdevelopment. It is
necessary to understand the root causes of conflicts and
the dynamics that perpetuate them so that they can be
seriously addressed in efforts to prevent or end
conflicts. We also applaud all the important work that
the United Nations Development Fund for Women has
been doing in the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).

Resolution 1325 (2000) calls on all actors to
ensure the full participation of women in peace
processes and to adopt gender perspectives when
negotiating peace agreements. My delegation could not
agree more. Peace is not everything, but without peace,
everything can become nothing, and nowhere can this
phrase be better understood than in this Council, which
has the primary duty of maintaining international peace
and security. The efforts of the Security Council have
brought peace and security to millions, and yet there
are still many places in the world besieged by conflict,
despite the Council's best efforts.

It takes many factors to bring about peace and
stability. We know this only too well. My country, after
experiencing many decades of internal strife, has in the
past decade been able to achieve peace and stability.
Myanmar had to face armed insurgency barely a few
months after regaining its independence in 1948. Until
recently, there were 18 major insurgent groups, but
because of the national reconciliation efforts of the
Government, 17 of them have now returned to the legal
fold. The only remaining group is the Karen National
Union. The Government and the Karen National Union
have already been able to reach a ceasefire
arrangement. Peace and stability now prevail.

We fully share the Secretary-General's view that
gender-based violence is entirely unacceptable and
must be effectively addressed. In this regard, two
delegations have made politically motivated and
unsubstantiated allegations against Myanmar regarding
gender-based violence. The Secretary-General's report
dealt comprehensively with gender-based violence and
listed a number of countries in which it occurs. My
country was certainly not among them.

The most effective means to protect civilians -
particularly those who are most vulnerable, women and
children - is to end conflict through peaceful
solutions. At present, my country has embarked on an
historical path by convening a national convention that
brings together delegates from all strata of society and
representatives from 17 major armed ethnic groups.
Many women delegates are taking part in this historic
process, which will bring about lasting peace, stability,
development and democracy for all peoples of
Myanmar, both women and men.

The Secretary-General has rightly maintained that
the goals set out in resolution 1325 (2000) require
political will and concerted action on the part of the
entire international community. My delegation fully
subscribes to that View. For our part, we will join hands
with others so that the promise held out to women
across the globe that their rights will be protected will
be fully realized.

