Ms. Mejia Velez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank you and your country, Madam
President, for bringing us together in this open debate.
As many have said before me, it could not have been
held on a more significant date than the anniversary of
Boko Haram's abduction of girls, and I would like to
express our solidarity with the people of Nigeria at this
difficult time. I would also like to thank Ms. Zainab
Bangura for the enormous effort she has put into her
work on this issue, and to Ms. Hamsatu Allamin for her
words this morning. Colombia is also grateful to Spain,
Chile and the United Kingdom for their recognition of
my Government's commitment to acting to address this
serious problem.

Although it has been under very different
circumstances, my country, too, has been affected by
this phenomenon, the result of an internal conflict that
has afflicted us for more than half a century, despite
the fact that we are on the way to reaching a negotiated
solution. As Ms. Bangura saw at first hand on her visit to
Colombia, we are still facing enormous challenges, but
in that raw and painful confrontation we have learned
lessons and taken preventive measures that have been
described as pioneering at the international level. The
challenge lies in effective implementation, and with
that commitment, we have developed initiatives on zero
tolerance and prevention, and on the care and protection
of women who are victims of sexual violence, based on
collectively formulated policies that elicit best practices
and lessons learned that we can now share with other
States dealing with similar challenges.

I would like to point out that Colombia's strategy is
founded on two key areas - first, legislatively, through
two laws, the first of which, enacted in 2008, provides
standards for raising awareness of, preventing and
punishing every form of violence and discrimination
against women, while the second, enacted last year,
incorporates international standards into the area of
conflict-related sexual violence. The second area is
our endorsement of the State's commitment to Victims,
supporting them so that from the judicial point of
View they cannot be subject to re-victimization or
fear impunity for the perpetrators. As Ms. Bangura
said eloquently in her press conference yesterday, the
survivors of these violent acts want to be heard. They
are ready to stand up and get on with their lives, and the
Colombian Government will be there to support them.

In the past few years, my country has developed
and implemented actions that have had an immediate
impact on the protection and promotion of the
rights of women, of which I will mention just a
few - a monitoring mechanism through a national
violence observatory for monitoring various types of
sexual violence; an information system that enables
us to identify potentially vulnerable populations; an
early-warning monitoring system for detecting possible
cases and a single registry of Victims that enables us to
identify men, boys and members of minority groups, as
well as women and girls, who have also been Victims of
such crimes.

We support Spain's proposal to play an active
role, perhaps at the highest level, in commemorating
the fifteenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), in
October. Concerning the peace process that is under
way in Havana, I would like to assure the Council that
the parties have understood that this is a cross-cutting
issue that will be reflected in the peace agreement and
in future post-conflict policies.

