Mr. Liden (Sweden): Sweden fully aligns itself
with the statement made by the representative of the
Netherlands on behalf of the European Union.

It is urgent that we enhance our collective
capacity and determination to prevent and respond to
gender-based violence and to end impunity.
Observations from the Sudan and elsewhere are as
horrendous as they are clear. This debate and its focus
on protecting women and girls from being victims of
gender-based violence, including systematic rape and
abduction, is as timely as it is necessary. We must
ensure that women have the opportunity to participate
in all decision-making processes on equal terms with
men. The capacity, experiences and influence of
women are essential for equitable and sustainable
solutions to armed conflict, for the prevention of new
conflicts, for respect for human rights and for long-
term development.

We welcome the recommendations put forward
by the Secretary-General, and we call for their urgent
implementation and adequate financing.
Implementation is a shared responsibility of Member
States, the United Nations system, non-governmental
organizations, regional organizations and others. In the
statement just made on behalf of the European Union,
several recommendations were put forward. Let me
offer some additional ideas.

First, with regard to the question of women as
actors, the Secretary-General could consider
instructing United Nations mediators or facilitators to
promote the inclusion of women in peace processes
and transitional decision-making forums. The specific
target of at least 30 per cent women could be set where
appropriate. Actions should be evaluated and followed

up.

Secondly, we must redouble our efforts aimed at
the protection and security of women and girls from
gender-based violence and at ending impunity. We
should consider awareness-raising and training that
include the role of men and boys. Every effort should
be made to prosecute the perpetrators of war crimes
and crimes against humanity, including sexual
violence. The International Criminal Court should be
further strengthened. Abused women must have an
opportunity to interact with female members of
peacekeeping missions. However, the proportion of
women in such missions is still very low. One
possibility to be further explored is to include civilian
observers in military observer teams, which are often a
peacekeeping operation's only presence in certain
regions. Civilian observers could facilitate a better
gender balance and would also diversify the team's
competence, thereby strengthening its ability to carry
out its core tasks. Perhaps synergies could be found
with the general civilian monitoring capacity that is
now being developed within European Union civilian
crisis management.

Thirdly, accountability is lacking, and resolution
1325 (2000) must be implemented in a systematic way.
We would like to suggest the development of a
comprehensive United Nations action plan with
specific timelines and resource implications and clear
targets and responsibilities. In that context, increasing
female representation within the United Nations should
be examined. The Security Council could consider
designating a focal point - possibly supplemented by
a working group - with a particular responsibility to
monitor the work done. Another proposal is to
establish the post of a gender adviser in the Department
of Political Affairs.

Fourthly, as Member States, we must shoulder
our responsibilities. Sweden has established a working
group in the Swedish Government offices that brings
together the security, defence and development
communities to continue the systematic
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). The
resources for research and policy studies on issues
related to the resolution have been augmented. We will
develop a national plan of action, and we hope that
other Members will undertake similar efforts and
develop and report on their own plans.

We must make every effort to ensure that our
commonly agreed objectives of the full inclusion of
women and their enhanced protection from gender-
based violence are translated into tangible progress.
That will be achieved only when the daily lives of
women and girls in conflict-stricken and transitional
countries have improved. We have the opportunity, and
it is our common responsibility to make use of it. For
that, we need commitment, resources and firm political
will.

