Mr. Vencel (Slovakia): Slovakia thanks the
presidency of Chile for initiating this important open
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
We think that it is important that this issue remain under
the periodic consideration and review of the Security
Council and all United Nations agencies.

Slovakia fully aligns itself with the statement made
by the observer of the European Union. In addition
I would like to raise a few points that we consider
important when addressing this topic, namely, the
significance of adapting to the new emerging threats,
accountability and the contribution of security-sector
reform.

First of all, we share the concern of the Secretary-
General that, despite the progress achieved with respect
to increased resources, structures and more robust
and complex mandates for peacekeeping missions, we
are still seeing inconsistent results with regard to the
effective protection of civilians in challenging conflict
environments. In fact, we are seeing a continued rise
in the number of civilians who are victims of armed
conflicts. Part of the challenge is that new and emerging
conflicts are themselves becoming more complex, and
our traditional responses and approaches are therefore
becoming less effective.

In that regard, we can see from the recent conflicts
involving Boko Haram in Nigeria and the Lake Chad
Basin region, as well as the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant in Iraq and Syria, that the new security
challenges are increasingly transnational in nature,
yet our strategies for the protection of civilians still
remain constrained by traditional national approaches.
We need to continue to adapt and strengthen our tools
and approaches to deal with such new emerging threats,
and to become more proactive in identifying them. We
also need to ensure our ability to respond quickly and
effectively, as well as to develop more coherent and
coordinated approaches to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.
Although it is the primary responsibility of each
State to protect its own citizens, we must admit that
host States quite often fail to fulfil their obligations,
owing either to a lack of resources or, unfortunately,
to a lack of political will. In that regard, we urge the
Security Council to be mindful of all violations of
international humanitarian law and to make sure that all
of the relevant resolutions dealing with the protection
of civilians are fully implemented. Most important,
we need to promote the continued development of both
international and national accountability mechanisms
that could better deter such violence against civilians,
end impunity and ensure that all victims have effective
and timely access to justice. That also includes
more consistent application of the United Nations
due-diligence policy, so that we can ensure that we
develop the proper vetting mechanisms for the partners
and actors whom we support and so we do not end up
reinforcing actors who are responsible for violations of
human rights and violence against civilians.

Over the past decade, the United Nations has made
significant progress in enhancing its capacities to
provide protection to civilians whose lives are in danger,
as the Council has shifted peacekeeping well beyond
its traditional role of monitoring the implementation of
peace agreements. Today's peacekeeping missions are
multidimensional and are more often mandated to play
an active role in the physical protection of civilians.
Although that United Nations function is critical in the
early phases of United Nations interventions, we need
to ensure, in parallel, that we build more sustainable and
durable preventive measures in the longer term. In that
regard, we need to develop more effective approaches
to building State institutions, which will gradually
decrease dependence on international support aimed at
ensuring basic protection for civilians. Going forward,
in order to ensure that national security institutions
become more responsive, effective and proactive in
protecting civilians, we must ensure that we build
efficient, professional, responsive and accountable
State institutions through a national security-sector
reform process.

Slovakia strongly supports the full implementation
of resolution 2151 (2014), on security-sector reform. We
have to revisit the effectiveness of the security-sector
reform processes that we are supporting and gauge
whether we are in fact applying good practice in the
area of security-sector reform.

First, the foundation of any security-sector reform
process should be an inclusive approach and local
ownership. Too often, we see that the most vulnerable
groups, which are also the most susceptible to
violence, and the most affected by insecurity are also
marginalized in the process of shaping, managing and
overseeing security-sector reform. Representative and
inclusive security institutions in which there is balanced
staffing at the operational level, but also in management
and in oversight capacities, should be promoted. That
should include full consideration for strengthening the
involvement of women in all aspects of the security-
sector reform process, especially in management and
oversight capacities.

Secondly, we cannot simply focus on training and
equipping activities, but we must also focus on building
effective oversight, management and accountability
mechanisms. We are seeing, in places such as Iraq,
Libya and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where
the international community has provided substantial
support to building the capacity of State or even
non-State institutions, that such capacity has been used
to harm the civilian populations because there is no
system of accountability or oversight in place to deter
such institutions from abusing their power. Similarly,
better trained and equipped military or police services
have also sometimes proven to be ineffective, or without
any noticeable impact on security, simply because the
growth in capacity is not matched by a similar ability to
manage and direct that capacity.

Thirdly, we need to review the skills and training
that are to be expected from security personnel. In that
regard, in addition to basic training, we need to ensure
that we sensitize all security personnel, both national
actors whom we help to train and peacekeepers whom
we deploy, on the key concepts of human security. Such
training also needs to integrate and mainstream the
issues of human rights, child protection and gender.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize the
importance of ending impunity for violations of
applicable international humanitarian law and human
rights law as part ofa comprehensive approach to seeking
sustainable peace, truth and national reconciliation. We
believe that ending impunity is also an instrumental
part of preventing future violations. In that regard,
we would like to stress the need for a comprehensive,
independent and impartial investigation of all
abuses and massive attacks against civilians and the
indiscriminate destruction of civilian infrastructure, in
accordance with internationally recognized standards
and procedures.

