Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland would like to congratulate and thank the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, as well as her entire team,
for the work that provided the basis for the Secretary-
General's report (S/2013/149).

We welcome the Special Representative's
commitment to continuing the work started by her
predecessor. We think that recognizing sexual violence
as a tactic and a consequence of war remains vital
to undertaking the real preventive action that is so
urgently needed.
The Human Security Report Project, in its report
entitled "Sexual violence, education and war: beyond
the mainstream narrative", provides a valuable
recommendation in that regard. It highlights the need
to better understand what causes the differences in
wartime sexual violence rates from one conflict to
another.

We furthermore welcome the fact that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General has added
to her priorities the fostering of national ownership,
leadership and responsibility in combating sexual
violence.

We note with interest the important link that the
report makes between sexual violence and active
population displacement. It brings to light the link
between sexual violence and forced displacement and
the exploitation of natural resources. The Secretary-
General makes useful recommendations. Allow me to
highlight three of those.

First, we strongly welcome the fact that the
Secretary-General expresses the need for the women
and girls who have been victims of rape to have access
to emergency contraception and safe abortion services.
They should not be forced to continue a pregnancy as
a result of a serious crime against them. All too often,
they receive no reparation or any kind of support
from their own communities or from the international
community. At the same time, where women and girls
who have decided to continue their pregnancies cannot
look after their children, steps to protect the rights
of those children, including providing for national
adoption, must be taken.

That leads me to my second point, on reparations.
They can have a transformative effect and should be
an integral part of post-conflict transition initiatives.
As UN-Women explained in a recent document,
reparations are the most victim-centred transitional
justice measures. In that connection, we are obliged to
think beyond the traditional approach. Humanitarian
aid, peacebuilding and development must be effectively
linked in order to achieve a real impact, namely, the
empowerment of women.

Thirdly, and finally, Switzerland heeds the
Secretary-General's call for the recruitment of
women's protection advisers as members of United
Nations assessment teams. We draw attention
to the Justice Rapid Response initiative. It is an
intergovernmental support mechanism that can provide
the international community and the Security Council
with rapidly deployable expertise. In cooperation with
UN-Women and the Institute for International Criminal
Investigations, the initiative has set up a roster of
sexual and gender-based violence experts from various
backgrounds. Switzerland is one of the countries that
initiated the Justice Rapid Response initiative, which
can contribute to the implementation of obligations
arising from resolutions 1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010).

In conclusion, I would like to recall the significant
thematic connection between the discussions on
sexual violence in armed conflict and the protection
of civilians. We commend the fact that the Security
Council takes into account the link between those two
topics through a consistent approach.

