Mr. Sinhaseni (Thailand): Let me first commend
India, as the President of the Security Council for the
month of November, for convening this important open
date on women and peace and security. We also thank
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2012/732) and Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson
and Under-Secretaries-General Bachelet and Ladsous
for their statements.

Thailand is a country where women have long
played a role in peace and security. Today, Thai women
can be found in executive and leadership positions in
every area of activity, including business, education,
charity, non-governmental organizations, civil society,
and of course, politics. Thailand has also been active in
promoting the role of women in society.

In implementing resolution 1325 (2000), Thailand
established a subcommittee on women and the promotion
of peace and security. A wide range of activities have
been carried out, from raising awareness of women's
rights to the exchange of views on legal issues aimed
at ensuring equal access by women to justice and
sound legal advice. In that connection, we are grateful
to UN-Women for co-organizing a workshop on the
subject of women and peace and security in Bangkok
on 15 October. It was a valuable opportunity for
representatives of UN-Women and Thai participants to
engage in an extensive exchange of views, experiences
and best practices.

Thailand shares the view of the Secretary-General
that we should move from a culture of reaction to a
culture of prevention. To that end, we have established
the Thai Women's Empowerment Fund to address the
lack of economic opportunities for women by offering
low-interest loans to help women develop their skills
and careers. The Fund can also be used to strengthen
women's civil society networks and enhance women's
role.

When the situation demands it, Thai women can
also be effective agents ofpeace, as caring peacekeepers
and peacebuilders. We were pleased to see the role of
female peacekeepers mentioned in several parts of the
Secretary-General's report. Thailand also attaches great
importance to enhancing the role and participation of
women in peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations.
There are currently many Thai female military
observers and officers serving in various United
Nations missions. They are well trained in international
humanitarian law and international law with regard
to the rights and protection of women and children.
Pre-deployment training for our peacekeepers, with the
assistance of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, also focuses on the issue of gender sensitivity in
order to facilitate the building of trust.

Another milestone for women in Thailand was the
admission of female cadets, in 2009, to the century-old
Police Cadet Academy. After graduation, the first batch
of female cadets will be assigned the important task of
dealing with cases involving violence against women
and children. Those female cadets were also inspired
by the great work of their senior female police officers
who participated in nation-building processes in Haiti
and Timor-Leste. It is our fervent hope that those Thai
female cadets will join United Nations missions in
different parts of the world.

Finally, let me emphasize the necessity of the
universal implementation of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) and relevant resolutions and
their translation into practice. For our part, Thailand
reiterates its readiness and commitment to join the
efforts of the international community aimed at
ensuring that the voices of women will be heard, their
rights respected and protected, and their concerns
and needs addressed. Their role and contribution with
respect to peace and security must be both enhanced
and recognized.

