Mr. Guehenno: The ambassador of Singapore
asked a very pointed question: how can we make sure
that gender mainstreaming gets the priority and
attention it deserves? He correctly stressed this is more
than a question of procedures and having the right
administrative unit here or there. It is a mindset and an
issue of the core values the United Nations should
always embody.

We must begin from the top if we want to get it
right. The Special Representative of the Secretary-
General (SRSG) in each mission must set the example.
When we have women SRSGs there can be a natural
awareness that is not always there when we have only
men. Until recently, there were no women SRSGs in a
peacekeeping mission. I am pleased that our Mission in
Georgia is now led by a woman and that we are also
beginning to have Deputy SRSGs in missions.

However, that is certainly not enough. It is
fundamental that men who run a number of our
missions must have the right awareness, sensitivities
and the right priorities. In order to make sure this
happens, it is important that they be engaged at the
highest level, that we have senior gender advisors in
the office of the SRSG. I emphasize the word "senior"
because I think that although our people often have the
right values, a lot of ignorance still exists. The issue is
not always understood, because it is not always put in
concrete terms and because we have to fight centuries
of neglect and, in some cases, arrogance.

If we want to win the battle, it is essential that
there be a dialogue at the senior level and at
Headquarters, where it is important that the issue of
gender mainstreaming not be taken as just one of the
many tasks that have to be performed, like managing
planes, like a sort of technical issue or an afterthought
in a myriad of issues. It is something that has to cut
across and therefore must be addressed at the senior
level.
Ignorance means there is a need for a lot of
training at all levels, beginning with the briefing
packages and briefings organized for SRSGs and the
senior staff at the missions and continuing through all
levels of staff, as well as the military and the police. A
lot of work has already been done. There is now a
training module that has to be systematically
implemented with our troops and police. It also has to
be shared with the troop-contributing countries so that
the mindset we need to create in missions can be
prepared through a joint effort with the Member States.

To conclude my answer to Ambassador
Mahbubani's question, I would say it is essential that
we have a partnership on this issue with the Member
States. In that respect I commend the efforts of Chile,
with its regional initiative. This kind of initiative
moves things forward. As pointed out by several
delegates, Member States also need to have the right
resources at the right level so that the issue is
addressed more systematically, not as isolated
examples in different missions. We must learn from our
successes so that we can transfer what has been done
right in, let's say, East Timor, to what could be done
better in this or that mission. This requires engagement
at the highest level.

