Ms. Banks (New Zealand): May I first commend
the President for the presidential statement that will be
adopted at the conclusion of this debate. We
particularly welcome the request to include in relevant
reporting of the Secretary-General greater
07-55957
disaggregated data on the impact of armed conflicts on
women and girls. May I also welcome the recent
appointment of Ms. Ellen Loj as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Liberia,
which makes her the only woman among the more than
20 Special Representatives of the Secretary-General
across the political and peacekeeping missions of the
United Nations. So, it is indeed a cause for celebration.

New Zealand recognizes the important role that
women play in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts and in peacebuilding, and we strongly support
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000). Our
commitment to the resolution is reflected in our
national, regional and international approach to
peacebuilding, conflict prevention and conflict
resolution.

We welcome the advances that have been made in
those areas by the United Nations system and by
Member States. We appreciate the Secretary-General's
2007 report on women and peace and security
(S/2007/567) and the many positive examples it
describes of the progressive work happening in this
field. We are pleased to note the work done to
restructure the Organization's implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) under the 2008-2009 United
Nations System-Wide Action Plan, as well as the Plan's
increased focus on accountability, monitoring and
reporting.

New Zealand is taking a number of concrete steps
to reinforce its support for resolution 1325 (2000).
First, we are committed to encouraging women to
undertake assignments on peacekeeping missions.
Women from the New Zealand Defence Forces, the
New Zealand Police and our wider society are an
integral part of New Zealand's participation in
regional, United Nations and other international
peacekeeping efforts. That includes women working in
high-risk areas, such as Afghanistan, and in our
operational missions, such as that in Timor-Leste. Up
to 30 per cent of all our police peacekeeping
deployments are female - among the highest rate in
the world. New Zealand recognizes, too, that diversity
assists peacekeeping missions in reaching out to a
wider sector of the community, which is a fundamental
element for effective peacebuilding.

Secondly, this year New Zealand was proud to
withdraw its final reservation to the Convention on the
5
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women, which concerned women in the armed forces.

Thirdly, I should like to say that the New Zealand
Defence Force recently approved a diversity strategy,
which we call "Valuing Diversity: Leadership in
Action". The strategy recognizes the value of the full
integration of women, the positive effect that it has on
morale and the sense of belonging to a wider team in
which all members can make meaningful contributions.
This approach also recognizes the benefits of having
more women at senior levels of the Defence Force. We
have worked hard to ensure the integration of women
at all levels and in all areas of the New Zealand
Defence Force, including combat. We are increasing
the number of women in the higher ranks, and we are
becoming more effective in retaining women in the
Force throughout their careers.

New Zealand's response to resolution 1325
(2000) is proactive. We appreciate the fact that, even in
peacetime, it is important to ensure the security of
women. New Zealand is currently involved in the
Pacific Prevention of Domestic Violence Programme, a
joint initiative of New Zealand's International Aid and
Development Agency (NZAID), the New Zealand
Police and the Pacific Islands Chiefs of Police
organization. Members of the New Zealand Police
deliver advice, training and operational support on
domestic violence to police forces and communities
across the Pacific. This initiative focuses on regional
coordination and benchmarking, police capability,
relationship-building, the strengthening of Government
policy and legislation, a whole-Government approach
to domestic violence and ways to influence social
change.

In closing, I would like to assure the Security
Council that New Zealand, through its development
cooperation programmes, peacekeeping efforts and
domestic policies, will continue to seek ways to
enhance and strengthen the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).

