Mr. Davide (Philippines): Thank you, Sir, for
giving the Philippines this opportunity to address the
Council on the ninth anniversary of the landmark
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000). My
delegation congratulates Viet Nam on its presidency of
the Council and for giving priority to a debate on the
issue of women and peace and security with the theme,
"Responding to the needs of women and girls in post-
conflict situations for sustainable peace and security"
and for circulating a concept paper in relation thereto
(S/2009/490). This debate will make a valuable
contribution to the forthcoming commemoration of the
fifteenth anniversary of the Fourth World Conference on
Women.

The Philippines submits that any debate in the
United Nations concerning women must always be
rooted in the solemn declarations in its Charter that
reaffirm faith in the equal rights of men and women
and in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
which recognize that the inherent dignity and the equal
and inalienable rights of all members of the human
family is the foundation of freedom, justice and peace
in the world. This is the only strategy that removes us
from mere sound and fury on so crucial an issue as
women.

The role of women in matters of peace and
security is particularly significant to the Philippines. It
was under the leadership of our recently departed
President Corazon Aquino, a woman and a housewife,
that the Philippines emerged from a long dictatorship.
She was a standard bearer for those who suffered under
tyranny, and, having survived, became a symbol of
strength and hope. This experience is enshrined in the
provision of the 1987 Constitution of the Philippines
that reads:

"The State recognizes the role of women in
nation-building, and shall ensure the fundamental
equality before the law of women and men".

This spirit continues to permeate the public
sphere. The incumbent President is a woman, our
second in approximately 25 years. The Supreme Court,
during my tenure as Chief Justice, undertook
unprecedented moves to ensure that women benefit
equally from and participate directly in the judiciary's
structures, processes and development programmes and
activities. Just last August, the Congress of the
Philippines passed a Magna Carta for Women, which
mandates the representation and participation of
women in policymaking.

We are currently conducting field consultations
for a National Action Plan on Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008) in various
regions of the Philippines. These consultations will
culminate in a national consultation in Manila on
19 October 2009. The Philippine Action Plan on
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008) will be the
blueprint that various stakeholders will use to ensure
that women are able to participate meaningfully in all
peace processes and in decision-making on peace and
security issues in both the formal and the informal
realms.

We know that, in this time of asymmetric
warfare, the use of sexual violence against women and
girls as a weapon of war is a source of even more
fundamental and pernicious concern. It is a weapon
that is intended to humiliate and destroy women, both
as individuals and as the heart and soul of social order
and the foundation of family and community life. It
should then follow that, within the peace and
09-54249
reconstruction processes, women's voices must be
indispensable in all phases. Women are often the
primary figures in the education and upbringing of our
children, and, therefore, the primary carriers of the
effects of conflict through the generations. Without
their voice of stability and sense of community,
children grow up knowing only war as their livelihood.

Our present debate must not just be an occasion
to celebrate the role of women. It must be a celebration
of a shift in the international community's approach to
post-conflict situations, from narrow humanitarian and
relief activities to more comprehensive efforts towards
sustainable peace. This means a greater focus on the
concerns and roles of women in bridging the gap
between conflict and post-conflict development. For
my delegation, gender sensitivity in a post-conflict
environment would mean paying due attention to
women's access to employment opportunities and
productive assets, such as land, capital, education and
training and health services. It also means looking at
the role of women in ensuring food security in the
community, and making conditions at refugee
settlements a priority. In short, the rehabilitative
approach to post-conflict situations involves a serious
consideration of the short- to long-term development
needs of the community concerned.

My delegation welcomes the resolution that was
just adopted by the Council. We are encouraged by,
among other things, the efforts to improve the resource
allocations for gender issues within the United Nations
by enhancing the monitoring of spending for gender-
related activities, similar to the system pioneered by
the United Nations Development Programme. We are
happy to note at last that, as evidenced by paragraph 19
of resolution 1889 (2009), a systematic assessment of
the needs and challenges facing women and girls in
post-conflict situations is being undertaken by the
United Nations, whose report will also recommend
possible responses, including in the area of effective
financing.

It took a whole nine years after the passage ofthe
landmark resolution 1325 (2000) for the Council to
request a study on women's participation and inclusion
in peacebuilding in the aftermath of a conflict. My
delegation believes that such a report is long overdue
and should therefore be given the promptest attention,
if the United Nations is to urgently address the
situation of the millions of women affected by the
ravages of war.
09-54249
I should like to conclude with these lines by a
poet:

"All true trophies of the ages

Are from mother-love impearled;
For the hand that rocks the cradle
Is the hand that rules the world".

