Mr. Saikal (Afghanistan): We thank the delegation
of the Plurinational State of Bolivia for convening
today's meeting on women and peace and security. We
are pleased that this important issue continues to gain
prominence on the agenda of the Security Council.

No other country knows it better than Afghanistan,
which has faced nearly four decades of imposed
conflict, resulting in weakened State institutions and
severe collective trauma for our people. The impact
of the conflict has been borne disproportionately by
women, who saw their rights obliterated and voices
repressed during the violent years of Taliban rule.
Since 2001, Afghanistan has secured tremendous
gains towards the promotion and protection of human
rights, particularly those of women. We have prioritized
women's empowerment as a strategic objective in our
overall efforts to achieve lasting peace, security and
stability. Today, many women are the vibrant voice of
our society. Our core efforts in advancing the rights of
women are primarily based in key national frameworks,
including the national action plan on resolution
1325 (2000) and the national priority programme for
women's economic empowerment. Their successful
implementation is reinforcing the continued effort
towards turning our women into drivers of peace. We
wish to also highlight the fact that our action plan and
national priority programme are embedded in the Self-
reliance through Mutual Accountability Framework,
as the overarching umbrella for our partnership with
the international community. The advancement of
women will be discussed at the Novemeber ministerial
conference on Afghanistan, in Geneva.

In July, we submitted our second report on our
national action plan on resolution 1325 (2000). Through
the plan, we seek to enable women to actively participate
in shaping the future of our country by implementing
various measures to reach the following objectives:
first, increase the meaningful participation of women
in the decision-making process and executive levels of
the civil service, security, and peace and reintegration;
secondly, protect women from all kinds of violence
and discrimination through the implementation and
amendment of existing laws and policies; thirdly,
prevent violence and discrimination against women by
raising awareness and public outreach; and fourthly,
increase economic security for vulnerable women.

Although we are in the early implementation stages
of the plan, our second report indicates continued and
steady progress. In the past year, our efforts to fully
implement the anti-harassment law and the penal code
have enabled us to address the societal barriers that
inhibit women from participating in the civil service.
As a result, we have witnessed the emergence of a
prominent presence of women in this field. Today,
around 27 per cent of Government employees are
women. Moreover, nearly 18 per cent of the High Peace
Council's members are women, with four women at
the executive leadership level actively taking part in
decision-making processes in order to end the conflict
and secure stability and lasting peace.

We have made a concerted effort to substantially
increase women's role and contribution in senior
Government positions across various ministries and
agencies. We currently have a large number of women
serving as senior-level officials in different sectors. As
such, they are undertaking a proactive engagement in
Afghanistan's long-term stability and development.
This dynamic will continue to progress in a positive
trajectory. Last week's parliamentary elections saw the
vibrant participation of women both as candidates and
voters, offering a glimpse of the way in which they are
helping to consolidate democracy in the country. Some
28 per cent of seats in our new lower house will soon be
occupied by women.

Yet, women's empowerment extends beyond the
political sphere alone. Over the past two years, we have
increased the number of senior positions for women
to serve in our security institutions. Women are a key
part of our national security forces and police, and
have demonstrated exemplary courage and sacrifice in
countering international terrorism and upholding the
rule of law. Women recruits have joined the ranks of
our forces in large numbers, thereby bolstering our aim
of achieving gender equality in all sectors.

In the area of protection, we have undertaken
concrete steps to introduce legislation on violence
against women. We have amended existing laws and
implemented a law on eliminating violence against
women through our courts and other judicial institutions.
Family guidance centres have been established in
provincial capitals to provide legal advice, health and
psychosocial services for survivors of gender-based
violence. In addition, we have created specialized units
within the Attorney General's Office in more than half
of all provinces.

Such measures are positively impacting overall
efforts to protect Afghan women. Initiatives such as
public awareness campaigns, the establishment of
provincial committees and military personnel trainings
are all under way to mitigate and prevent gender based
violence. Through the national priority programme for
women's economic empowerment, we are increasing
women's access to economic assets and providing them
with support in owning businesses and assisting them
in enhancing their job skills and financial literacy.
Additionally, we have also implemented and amended
policies to remove legal and societal barriers to women's
economic participation.

Despite our progress, we have a number of
challenges ahead ofus. The biggest impediment to fully
implementing our national plans is insecurity, caused
by violent proxies exported from outside Afghanistan.
The worsening security situation has prevented us
from delivering our objectives to all provinces and
consolidating the gains of the past 17 years. We once
again urge the Council to take appropriate action
against the orchestrators of such insecurity, based
on international legal commitments and core values
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.

To conclude, women's empowerment and their
active participation in strengthening peace and
security are among our core priorities. In recent years,
we have strengthened this national will by expediting
the implementation of our national programmes to
advance and strengthen the rights of women. Although
we recognize the need for further progress, we will
remain steadfast in this noble endeavour to consolidate
our achievements. It is only through our persistent
efforts that Afghan women will become agents of
sustaining peace.

