Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I thank the delegation of
Argentina for convening this open debate and for the
excellent concept note (S/2014/73l, annex) provided
to guide our discussions. I also thank our briefers for
their informative briefings. It is befitting that your
delegation, Madam, should preside at a debate on the
subject of women and peace and security, considering
the fact that Argentina was a non-permanent member
of the Security Council when landmark resolution 1325
(2000) was adopted, in October 2000.

The presidential statement we have just adopted
(S/PRST/2014/21) underscores the determination of
the Council to take forward the women and peace and
security agenda, with a welcome focus on the situation
of displaced women. It builds on the gains of resolutions
1325 (2000), 1820 (2008) and 1889 (2009) and reaffirms
the leadership role of the Council in addressing issues
pertaining to the welfare of women in situations of
distress.

According to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), women and
girls comprise about half of any refugee, internally
displaced or stateless population. UNHCR has also
determined that in many societies women and girls face
specific risks related to their gender and that those risks
can be exacerbated in situations of displacement. The
UNHCR further notes that displaced women and girls
who are unaccompanied, pregnant, disabled or aged
face particular challenges.

Responding effectively to the problems faced
by refugee and displaced women requires a holistic
approach that combines preventive strategies, responses
and solutions. It is also essential that gender perspectives
be integrated into policies across all sectors related to
refugees and displaced persons in accordance with
the relevant international law, including international
refugee law, international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. In order to be effective,
such policies must address all four pillars of the women
abd peace and security agenda, namely, participation,
conflict prevention, protection and relief and recovery.
They must also ensure that refugee and displaced
women are involved in all protection, prevention,
participation and relief and recovery efforts.

In October 2009, the African Union adopted
the Convention for the Protection and Assistance of
Internally Displaced Persons in Africa, also known as
the Kampala Convention. That landmark instrument,
which entered into force on 6 December 2012, marks a
significant step towards strengthening the national and
regional normative and legal frameworks for offering
protection and assistance to displaced persons in Africa.

Nigeria embraces the Guiding Principles on
Internal Displacement, which stands as an important
international framework for the protection of
internally displaced persons. Nigeria has ratified key
international and regional instruments on refugee
protection, including the 1951 Convention Relating
to the Status of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol, as
well as the Organization of African Unity's 1969
Convention Governing the Specific Aspects of Refugee
Problems in Africa. We have passed into law the key
international and African refugee conventions through
an act ofparliament establishing a national commission
for refugees and providing a legal and administrative
framework for refugee management in Nigeria. It also
sets guidelines for determining the status of refugees
in the country.

In line with its commitment to protecting and
assisting displaced persons, our Federal Government
has accelerated the process of adopting a national
policy that will define a framework for its actions in
that regard, part of its efforts to fulfil its obligations
under the Kampala Convention. It also signifies our
commitment to respecting, protecting and promoting
the human rights of displaced persons in Nigeria.

Finally, Nigeria supports the global study on women
and peace and security that the Secretary-General has
commissioned. It should tell us what we have achieved
in the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
What remains to be done. We look forward to the high-
level review in 2015, and we take this opportunity to
re-state our commitment to the agenda for women and
peace and security.
