Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): We live in a world
where violence, inequality and injustice are obstacles
to peace. Global military spending amounts to
$1.6 trillion, and therefore greatly exceeds global health
spending - $37.6 billion - let alone global education
spending, at $6.8 billion. Gender equality helps prevent
conflict, and women's voices are particularly relevant
in the field of peace and security. Ironically, the budget
of the global women's rights movement is less than
the cost of two F-35 fighter planes. Past decades have
brought some progress in reducing gender inequality.
Yet women's economic and political empowerment
remains one of the major challenges of our time. We
welcome that today's open debate is dedicated to that
important topic.

Women human rights defenders, political leaders,
justice and security-sector actors, peacekeepers and
mediators, journalists, activists and civil-society
leaders all significantly contribute to a more peaceful,
sustainable and prosperous world. Yet, in order to
enable women to be agents of change, we need to
create an environment that is enabling and free of
discrimination, unfair social norms and attitudes, and
does not deprive them of their rights and opportunities.
We welcome progress in integrating gender perspectives
and promoting women's meaningful participation and
representation in the Organization's work on conflict
prevention, conflict resolution and sustaining peace,
including in mediation teams and leadership positions.

There is evidence linking gender inequality and
gender-based violence to the greater vulnerability of
societies to civil and inter-State war. Sexual and gender-
based violence is highly prevalent in conflict situations
and continues to be used as a weapon of war. Harmful
gender stereotypes and abusive power dynamics form
the basis on which systemic and widespread sexual
violence can thrive. We are particularly concerned about
the devastating trend ofconflict-related sexual violence,
with 800 cases documented by the United Nations last
year, amounting to a 56 per cent increase from 2016. In
the past year and up until July 2018, the Human Rights
Council received reports from independent human
rights investigations in Burundi, the Kasai region of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Myanmar, South
Sudan, Syria and Yemen that document grave endemic
sexual and gender-based violence, including sexualized
torture, rape and mutilation of sexual organs.

Women and girls have been disproportionately
affected. However, there are also numerous men and
boys among the victims. A recently published report
by the All Survivors Project documents the use of
rape and other forms of sexual violence and torture
by Syrian authorities and associated militias against
male detainees. Sexual violence against men and boys
continues to be underreported, owing to cultural taboos
and the fear ofbeing stigmatized. Only ifwe understand
the underlying factors of those crimes - irrespective
of the victim's gender - can we find comprehensive
and sustainable solutions for all.

Accountability is an essential part of the fight
against conflict-related sexual violence. International
criminal-justice mechanisms - including the
International Criminal Court, which reflects the
very progressive stance on sexual and gender-based
violence enshrined in the Rome Statute, adopted 20
years ago - have done ground-breaking work. The
accountability mechanism for Syria has supported
investigations into sexual violence and gender-based
crimes. We have high hopes for the accountability
mechanism newly established for Myanmar by the
Human Rights Council to investigate sexual and
gender-based violence committed against the Rohingya
and other minorities, and we value the work of Justice
Rapid Response aimed at strengthening accountability.

However, justice, peace and equality remain utopian
concepts for many women and girls around the world.
There are still discriminatory laws and practices that
prevent them from enjoying full and equal protection
under the law and from achieving just outcomes for
violations of their human rights. Structural inequalities,
poverty and discrimination in both conflict and
non-conflict contexts reduce the opportunities for
women and girls to be informed of their rights and to
access justice before, during and after conflict. Women
remain unevenly represented in transitional justice
and rule-of-law institutions. Only if we address those
disparities can we achieve Sustainable Development
Goal (SDG) 5, on gender equality, SDG 10, on reduced
inequalities, and SDG 16,, on peace, justice and strong
institutions, all of which are not merely end goals in
themselves but also preconditions for the successful
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development as a whole.

