Ms. Gayflor (Liberia): Liberia is pleased to be
participating in this open debate on women and peace
and security. We commend the delegation of Uganda
for convening this discussion in commemoration of the
tenth anniversary of the landmark United Nations
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) during its
presidency of the Council.

We are heartened and very encouraged by the
increasing global recognition of the important role of
women in all facets of national life, from peacebuilding
to recovery and development. We have also utilized
resolution 1325 (2000) as a tool for promoting the
involvement of Liberian women in all sectors of
society.

The Liberian national action plan for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) is a response
by the President, Ms. Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf, and the
Government of Liberia, to the Secretary-General's call
for the development and implementation of action
plans. The plan complements initiatives such as the
poverty reduction strategy and the joint programmes of
the Government of Liberia and the United Nations
already in place, focusing on additional and specific
actions needed to promote and advance gender
mainstreaming and ultimately to promote sustainable
development. The Liberian national action plan
strengthens efforts to advance gender equality,
including Millennium Development Goal 3. Liberia has
made significant efforts with great impact in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), including
the national action plan.
We Liberians are proud to have been among the
first to develop a national plan through a collaborative
effort of the Government, United Nations agencies,
local and international non-governmental organizations
(NGOs), civil society organizations and other partners.
Our plan was launched in 2009 during the International
Colloquium on Women's Empowerment, Leadership
Development, International Peace and Security.

We would like to thank our partners, who were
very supportive of us in this endeavour. In particular, I
would like to thank the International Research and
Training Institute for the Advancement of Women, the
United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM) and, of course, the United Nations family
in Liberia and other partners from the international
community.

We have also set up a national steering committee
on the Liberian national action plan, comprising the
Ministers of Gender, Justice, Defence and Foreign
Affairs, United Nations agencies, civil society, and
local and international NGOs to guide the
implementation of the plan and provide oversight and
accountability. The implementation of the plan is not
limited to the actions included therein; additional
activities and measures can be initiated as necessary,
bearing in mind the need for coherence.

Discussions with different stakeholders in Liberia
highlighted the importance of implementing the
Liberian national action plan at the local, national and
subregional levels over four years. The implementation
periods are thus designed as short term, lasting
18 months; medium term, lasting 30 months; and long
term, lasting 36 months. The plan also acknowledges
that the roles and responsibilities for its full
implementation must be clear and involve all relevant
actors.

Further, the plan identifies the roles and
responsibilities of the Government of Liberia, United
Nations partners, civil society, and international and
national NGOs, donors, the private sector and
beneficiaries. It places lead responsibility for the
promotion and implementation of the plan on the
Government.

To make specific roles and responsibilities clear,
the Liberian national action plan delineates a lead
agency and collaborators for each activity, in addition
to ensuring coordination for the implementation of the
activities. A secretariat has been established, county
steering committees have been set up in five counties,
and a civil society observatory group is being set up to
monitor and evaluate the implementation of the plan
and to prepare a shadow report.

The Government has also taken measures at the
institutional, political and legal levels to ensure the
plan's implementation, including an amendment to the
penal code extending the legal definition of rape,
making it a non-bailable offence, and increasing its
penalty to life imprisonment. We have also established
a criminal court to specifically adjudicate sexual
offence cases, and established a sex crimes unit at the
Ministry of Justice to prosecute sexual offence cases.
In addition, and among others, a national commission

on disabilities has been established and a national
gender policy has been launched and is being
implemented.

We also have undertaken the training of border
security officials in handling gender-based violence
issues, including sexual exploitation and abuse, and the
development and current implementation of a national
gender-based violence plan of action to prevent and
respond to gender-based violence issues. Presently, the
action plan is under review to ensure that those
emerging issues are captured.

A gender equity in politics bill, designed to
increase women's participation in governance, political
parties and other institutions, has been introduced in
Parliament and is awaiting approval for passage into
law. A civil service code of conduct - proposing that
all public institutions establish an environment
conducive to the meaningful participation and
advancement of women through the adoption of
policies and procedures to address gender inequalities,
including language on sexual harassment - has been
developed and is currently under review.

We have also established a national rural
women's structure to ensure that rural women's
participation in the development and reconstruction
process is part of the development agenda. We also
held a conference on women in cross-border trade to
recognize the role women play across borders as they
help to sustain our economies. We have also
established community policing forums nationwide,
mainly headed by women, to improve citizen-police
relations.

However, some challenges remain, and I will
name a few that militate against the effective
implementation of the plan. These include the
challenges of harmonizing international, regional and
subregional instruments with national laws; capacity-
building and training; recruiting and retaining women
in the security sector, particularly in the armed forces;
the passage into law of the gender in politics bill; weak
traditional peacebuilding structures and mechanisms; a
high maternal mortality rate due to inadequately
trained health practitioners and limited health care
facilities; and women's limited access to microcredit
and control over resources.

However, we have taken some concrete steps, and
the plans for the next two years include the development
of a strategy to ensure 20 per cent participation of
women in the security sector by 2011. Presently, women
constitute 30 per cent of immigration officers and 15 per
cent of the national police. We also plan to earmark
funding for long-term plans and the sustainability of the
programmes; develop a fund-raising exercise and
strategy and a donor roundtable to raise funds for the
effective implementation of the plan; develop and
implement a comprehensive communications strategy;
initiate affirmative action processes that will address the
gaps in women's participation at all levels; and promote
strong partnerships and strategic linkages.

We have also taken steps to work with UNIFEM
to develop indicators. We note that this is an important
subject here, and we support the recommendation
contained in the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2010/22) to incorporate the indicators as a
measurement of progress. Furthermore, this positive
experience has led us to support the indicators annexed
to the Secretary-General's report on women and peace
and security (S/2010/498). We believe that these
indicators constitute a work in progress and that the
Secretary-General should be requested to continue to
support the development of a comprehensive
framework that can be used as a yardstick for
assessment of global progress. Liberia would further
support the elaboration of guidelines for data collection
and analysis, as well as for a reporting template
involving appropriate training opportunities.

We would also like to commend the Under-
Secretary-General for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women and Executive Director of
UN Women, Ms. Michelle Bachelet, and thank her for
her presence here today. We pledge our full
commitment to the process and ask Governments to
wish us well as we strive to improve the condition to
women around the world.

