Ms. Giammarinaro: It is a great honour for me
to be able to address the Security Council today. This
is the first time that my Office has been invited to
contribute to an open debate, and I thank the Council
profusely for that. I am encouraged to see that the
issue of trafficking in persons in armed conflict and
post-conflict situations continues to be addressed by
the Security Council, including through presidential
statement S/PRST/2015/25, of December 2015, and
today's open debate.

Since assuming the functions of my mandate
as Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons,
especially women and children, in August 2014, I
have identified the impact of conflict on trafficking in
persons for purposes of sexual, labour and other forms
of exploitation as an issue that warrants further research
and international attention. I will report on this issue to
the Human Rights Council in a few days.

Trafficking in persons - and this is the first message
I would like to convey to the Security Council - is
without a doubt underreported in the context of recent
conflicts. What is trafficking? Trafficking is actually
an umbrella concep that encompasses various forms
of exploitation, and exploitation is the essence
of trafficking.

Recent reports - such as those published by the
International Organization for Migration and Caritas
Internationalis, and other initiatives, such as the
Migrants in Countries in Crisis Initiative, led by the
United States and the Philippines, have shown that
trafficking in persons in conflict and crisis situations
is not a mere possibility or isolated incident; rather, it
happens on a regular basis as a consequence of conflict.
That is what suggests that we have to do better and we
have to do more.

Why is trafficking a consequence of conflict on
a regular basis? It is because conflict is accompanied
by a breakdown in public institutions and a collapse
of the rule of law. Existing vulnerabilities of minority
groups i for example, of women and children-become
more significant and new vulnerable groups emerge.
This is a situation in which traffickers and exploiters
can take advantage to enslave and exploit people.
Conflict-related violence, such as sexual violence, can
itself be a driver of forced internal displacement, which
in turn increases vulnerability to further exploitation,
including through trafficking.

We must also deal with trafficking as a consequence
of a large influx of people fleeing conflict. We have
seen, for example, how many pregnant women are
crossing the Mediterranean Sea every day - and
they are pregnant as a consequence of rape and sexual
violence and exploitation borne in transit countries.
For the millions of people who are forced to flee their
countries because of armed conflict, the journey
of escape has become increasingly expensive and
hazardous. The Syrian conflict in particular is causing
a massive exodus that should be considered a global
humanitarian crisis. Unfortunately, we have to admit
that the European Union (EU), EU countries and the
international community at large have mostly failed
in addressing this crisis. The result is that hundreds of
people, including many children, have lost their lives
in the Mediterranean Sea and, as we speak, people
continue to be at risk of losing their lives.

We must also consider that, for those surviving their
perilous journey, there is a tangible risk of trafficking-
related exploitation. Throughout their journey and at
their destination, migrants, including refugees and
asylum seekers, who have sold all their possessions to
pay for their travel, are highly vulnerable to physical
violence, sexual assault, extortion and trafficking. For
such migrants, the clandestine nature of their journey,
the often unscrupulous and corrupt conduct of their
facilitators and collaborators and the extent to which
some States will go to prevent their departure, transit or
arrival all operate to create or exacerbate opportunities
for traffickers who prey on their precarious situation.
Therefore, even if they were not trafficked from the
very beginning of their journey, they can become
trafficked during the process. For instance, Rohingya
from Myanmar typically embark on maritime and
overland journeys, often via Thailand, to irregularly
reach Malaysia. Initially smuggled across borders,
some are subsequently trafficked to fishing boats and
palm oil plantations for labour exploitation, ending
up in bonded labour to repay the debts incurred from
the transport. Others are held captive and abused in
Malaysia until ransom is paid by their relatives.

The conclusion is clear: not all people fleeing
conflict are victims of trafficking in persons, from a
legal point of view at least. However, trafficking in
persons for the purpose of exploitation, even extreme
exploitation, be it sexual or labour or other forms of
exploitation, can occur any time. Recently, an egregious
pattern of abductions from their homes or schools of
women and girls who are subsequently forced to marry
and/or serve as sex slaves has been reported in conflict-
affected settings. Those violations are perpetrated by
groups such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
and Boko Haram, but I will not comment on this
because the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General touched upon it.

Let me say a few words about peacekeeping
operations. Peacekeeping operations, unfortunately,
continue to be theatres for shameful incidents of sexual
violence and abuse, which undermine their vital role
in protecting communities, including women and
children, from the violence and exploitation that is
common in post-conflict situations. However, abuse
and exploitation by peacekeepers again has been
underreported when it amounts to trafficking, in
contrast to other conflicts occurring in the past, such
as the Balkan conflict. Again, we have to think that it is
imperative to better identify and detect cases of sexual
exploitation amounting to trafficking in this area.

Let me very briefly highlight some linkages
between trafficking and conflict or post-conflict
situations that are much less known or investigated.
For example, the trafficking of migrant workers into
conflict zones for the purpose of labour exploitation is
so far a completely hidden issue. While not all cases of
contracting and subcontracting involve trafficking for
labour exploitation, there have been cases where large
firms that hold the primary contract with States and
their militaries hire migrant workers through smaller
subcontractors or local employment agencies to perform
tasks, including cleaning, construction, cooking and
serving, and haircutting.

Often the conditions of trafficking for labour
exploitation also favour sexual violence and
exploitation. Out of the reach of workplace protections,
discrimination, harassment, unsafe conditions, and
the exploitation and abuse of women are common. In
such situations, women and girls are often subjected
simultaneously to labour and sexual exploitation .

Secondly, persons fleeing conflict could also be
vulnerable to trafficking for the purposes of organ
removal. Cases of that nature have been detected.

Thirdly, Syrian refugee women and girls are
trafficked for sexual exploitation through the practice
of temporary marriages, child marriage or forced
marriages. The girls and women concerned are
often forcibly married by their parents. Through
such marriages, they may be trafficked for forced
prostitution, and marriages with foreign men can also
lead to situations of forced prostitution and trafficking.

Fourthly, in the post-conflict climate, the
vulnerability of women and girls to trafficking-related
exploitation is heightened by their relative lack of access
to resources, education, documentation and so forth.

Fifthly, after fleeing conflict, children may be
compelled to work to sustain themselves and to support
their families. Iraqi and Syrian refugee children
in Lebanon, for example, work in textile factories,
in construction, in the food-service industry, in
agricultural labour or as street vendors. That is, of
course, not limited to Lebanon, which has generous
policies for accepting refugees from Syria. It is just
an example of the fact that children in such situations
can become primary breadwinners and therefore
particularly vulnerable to exploitation.
What can be done to address the issue of
trafficking? I have just a few comments. I also want to
touch upon issues related to peacekeeping because, of
course, Ms. Bangura elaborated on that. Let me just say
a few words concerning trafficking in persons for the
purpose of labour exploitation.

I think that the same level of attention and initiative
that has been devoted to sexual exploitation should be
attached to labour exploitation by the entire United
Nations system. In particular, State-contracting
agencies should exercise due diligence when employing
workers, including migrant workers. They should
employ workers directly whenever possible, ensure
that private individuals or the companies they have
contracted or subcontracted with protect the rights
of workers, including decent working and living
conditions, their right to return and their freedom of
assembly and association. They should also establish
a zero-tolerance policy for violations of those workers'
fundamental rights.

Last but certainly not least, the protection of people
during conflict and of people fleeing conflict is now
the top priority, Anti-trafficking measures should be
incorporated into all humanitarian interventions in
conflict zones. In particular, United Nations agencies
and programmes, and international and humanitarian
organizations should include the prevention of
trafficking in persons as part of their life-saving
protection activities from the outset ofa conflict-crisis,
whether or not trafficking incidents have been detected.

In reception centres for migrants, hot spots,

and centres for asylum seekers and refugees and
in administrative detention centres for migrants,
appropriate procedures should be established and carried
out by trained personnel, preferably in cooperation
with civil-society organizations, aimed at assessing
the grounds for international protection, the grounds
for child protection, the indications of trafficking
and the risks of trafficking and exploitation. Where
such indications have been found, tailored solutions
should be identified in every individual case, based on
international protection grounds or on other protection
grounds, including the granting of assistance, residence
permits and compensation for trafficked persons and
job opportunities for trafficking victims and people
at risk of trafficking and exploitation. In that context,
the protection of children is paramount. Children must
never be detained on immigration grounds, and a
durable solution must be identified on a case-by-case
basis in the best interests of the child.
I look forward to an open and fruitful debate.

