Mr. Govender (South Africa): We congratulate
Rwanda on assuming the presidency ofthe Council and
express our appreciation to Ms. Louise Mushikiwabo,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation, for
joining us today. We join others in commending the
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, for the contributions she
has made in such a short space of time since taking up
her position.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2013/149)
underscores the reality that sexual violence in armed
conflict and post-conflict settings remains systemic
and widespread, where women and girls continue to
bear the greater burden of the consequences of conflict.
It is with that in mind that my delegation reaffirms our
commitment to the full and effective implementation
of resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009),
1889 (2009) and 1960 (2010) as the building blocks for
advancing the women, peace and security agenda.

My delegation notes with concern the emerging
challenges highlighted in the report of the Secretary-
General. They include, among others, increasing
incidents of sexual violence committed against men
and boys, particularly in the context of detention, the
practice of forced marriage by armed groups, and the
linkages between sexual violence and illicit natural
resource extraction.

My delegation is pleased at the progress made on
the monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements
and on their potential to serve as an early-warning and
conflict-prevention tool. A continuous review of the
impact that women protection advisers make in the
field would be instructive for closing the protection
gaps in the context of sexual violence in conflict. It is
also our view that women protection advisers could add
value to peacekeeping mission assessment visits.

My delegation supports the recommendation by the
Secretary-General that sexual violence in conflict be
reflected in all the relevant country resolutions, as well
as in authorizations and renewals of the mandates of
peacekeeping and special political missions. Equally,
we will continue to advocate for the inclusion of
sexual violence in the definition of acts prohibited by
ceasefires and that it be monitored as part of ceasefire
monitoring mechanisms. In that regard, we also
highlight the important contribution that women can
and must make in all processes of conflict resolution
and in post-conflict settings.

We also reaffirm our commitment to support efforts
by the Secretary-General towards the implementation
of the policy of zero tolerance for sexual exploitation
and abuse in United Nations peacekeeping operations.

Justice for the victims of serious violations
of international human rights law is an essential
requirement for the sustainable peace, security and
development of States emerging from armed conflict,
where the rule of law must enjoy primacy and be
scrupulously upheld. Therefore, my delegation supports
efforts by the Council to continue fighting impunity for
the most serious crimes committed against women and
children through the work of the International Criminal
Court, ad hoc and mixed tribunals and specialized
chambers in national tribunals.

We recognize the importance of women's access
to justice in conflict and post-conflict settings,
including through gender-responsive legal, judicial and
security sector reform and other mechanisms. In that
regard, my delegation appreciates the commendable
work undertaken by the Team of Experts on the Rule
of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict. However,
we believe that significantly more needs to be done
by all the relevant actors in supporting countries
to increase women's participation, leadership and
expertise in transitional justice, as well as in advancing
accountability measures for serious offences committed
against women and children.

We support efforts undertaken by the Council
towards ensuring that more systematic attention be
given to the implementation of women, peace and
security commitments in its own work. The integration
of appropriate gender perspectives into the mandates of
the relevant peacekeeping missions, as well as in other
thematic areas of peace and security, would positively
advance that objective.

Much work needs to be done to narrow the
substantive implementation deficits that still remain.
The burden of responsibility rests on the stakeholder
community, including the Council, to ensure measurable
progress on the implementation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions in the broader context of the women,
peace and security agenda and the laudable objectives it
aspires to achieve.

