Mr. Haidara (Nigeria): I thank the delegation of
France for having convened this open debate and for the
excellent concept note (S/2016/496, annex) provided to
guide our discussion. I commend the Secretary-General
for his remarks earlier this morning. The Secretary-
General's latest report (S/2016/361) presents an
operational context for conflict-related sexual violence.
My commendation also goes to Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Bangura, Ms. Giammarinaro
and Ms. Davis for their informative briefings.

In recent times, the myth that only men suffer from
the scourge of war has been broken. Contemporary
violent extremism in all parts of the world has rendered
women and girls exceedingly vulnerable. In today's
armed conflicts, women living in areas of conflict,
who are essentially non-combatants, suffer as much, if
not more, than soldiers in active service. It is therefore
essential to include in our search for answers broader
questions about the prevalence of conflict-related
sexual violence.

In our quest to proffer enduring solutions to the
issue, we must focus our searchlight beyond situations
of active conflict and onto all human situations. As
conflicts do not exist in isolation, it is unlikely that
we can understand sexual violence outside the larger
context of human society. We must seek a full, moral
and helpful understanding of the correlation between
sexual violence in societies on either side of the conflict
divide. Preventing sexual violence is a critical element
in fighting this ugly phenomenon, regardless of the
context. We therefore commend United Nations Action
against Sexual Violence in Conflict for having adapted
its framework of early warning indicators of conflict-
related sexual violence for use in several countries.

Acts of terrorism have today become a major cause
of displacement of persons, both within nations and
across borders. Through their actions, terrorists have
endangered the well-being of thousands of women
and girls. We condemn, in the strongest terms, the
abduction, trafficking and mistreatment of women and
girls by extremist groups. That underscores the urgent
need for the international community to fight violent
extremism and the ideologies that fuel it.

The date 14 April 2016 marked the second year of
the infamous abduction of 276 Nigerian school girls
by the terrorist group Boko Haram. The Nigerian
Government, as well as the Nigerian people, is united in a
strong determination to find and free them all and other
victims of sexual violence perpetrated by that terrorist
group. To date, remarkable success has been recorded.
Together with our neighbours Chad, Cameroon and the
Niger, we are winning the war against Boko Haram. We
are confident that the group will be crushed and that
its leaders and members will be held accountable for
the war crimes and crimes against humanity that they
have committed.

Nigeria takes note ofthe recommendations contained
in the Secretary-General's report and expresses its
support for them. We note that, in resolution 2242
(2015), the Security Council recognized sexual violence
as both a tactic of war and of terrorism. That is evident
in the actions of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham,
Boko Haram and other extremist groups. We therefore
see merit in aligning efforts to address conflict-related
sexual violence with efforts to prevent extremism.
As part of the efforts of the Nigerian Government to
counter violent extremism, steps are being taken under
a multidimensional approach that encompasses peace,
security and development. The main focus of that
approach is de-radicalization, countering the extremist
narrative and advancing economic regeneration.

We are convinced that the United Nations remains
the central forum for addressing the women and peace
and security agenda. We acknowledge the progress
made to date through the continuous, concerted efforts
of various United Nations mechanisms in addressing
conflict-related sexual violence. Nigeria stands ready
to continue to work with our United Nations and
international partners in this important endeavour.

