Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): My first words must be to
commend you, Mr. President, for convening this
auspicious debate to mark a decade since the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000). I must also thank the
Secretary-General for his report in document
S/2010/498 and indeed for his earlier report in
document S/2010/466, on women's participation in
peacebuilding. We believe that both reports
exhaustively consider how we can together better the
situation of women at every stage of the conflict cycle.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
welcome the presence of several ministers, Economic
and Social Council President Hamidon Ali and others
who have joined us to mark the anniversary. I
congratulate and welcome in particular Ms. Michelle
Bachelet in her new role as Executive Director of
UNWomen. Nigeria recognizes the value of pooling
the efforts of the various United Nations actors in this
area. We are certain that Ms. Bachelet and her team
will make a major contribution to mainstreaming
gender perspectives in the area of women, peace and
security.

It is a well-known fact that women rarely initiate
violent conflicts, yet they suffer its worst consequences
on multiple fronts: physically, psychologically,
economically, socially and politically. Too often,
women fall victim to predatory warlords, who
systematically use rape and sexual violence as a
weapon of war. Their suffering is compounded by their
exclusion from key decision-making processes that
might lead to peace and stability.

As sombre as that background may be, there is
reason to celebrate the modest progress made in the
first decade of resolution 1325 (2000).

At the global level, the Council has devoted more
attention to the issue of on women and peace and
security, leading to the adoption of resolutions 1820
(2008), 1888 (2009) and 1889 (2009). The appointments
of Ms. Wallstrom as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and
of Ms. Bachelet to head the newly created UN Women
combine to give greater impetus to the efforts to place
women at the top of the global agenda. Taking into
account the work of other United Nations actors, the
Organization's collective effort on resolution 1325
(2000) this past decade has been very significant.

Nigeria is pleased to count its achievements as
part of that modest progress. Our priorities on women
can be summed up in four words: empower, prevent,
protect and promote. We acknowledge the pivotal role
that women play in conflict prevention, and we pay
particular attention to their unique vulnerabilities in
time of conflict.

In all aspects of Government, including our
military and policing strategies, we have worked to
ensure that women are adequately represented. We
have eight female ministers in the Federal Executive
Council, eight female senators and 280 female judges,
including three on the Supreme Court of Nigeria. The
highest-ranking police officer in Nigeria's centralized
police force is a woman. In 2007, a Nigerian woman
was elected for the first time in Africa as Speaker of
the House of Representatives, Nigeria's fourth highest
political office.

As a signatory the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) Dakar Declaration of last
month, Nigeria has committed to accelerate the
national and regional implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). The Declaration calls for a regional
action plan within ECOWAS to support national action
plans. ECOWAS will coordinate and collaborate with
the United Nations Office for West Africa and with
UN Women in this process.

With 373 female peacekeepers, Nigeria ranks first
among troop-contributing countries in the number of
women among its military and police personnel
wearing the Blue Helmet in ongoing peacekeeping
operations. We believe that female peacekeepers have a
comparative advantage when liaising with local
communities on matters such as sexual exploitation,
abuse and violence. In this regard, we applaud the
production this year of the analytical inventory of good
practices used by military peacekeepers to prevent
sexual violence against women and girls, and the
overall increase in the number of women police
officers and gender advisers in United Nations
peacekeeping operations and political missions.

In spite of the hard work and oft-expressed
commitments of the international community to the
principles of resolution 1325 (2000), serious challenges
remain. The Secretary-General observes in his report
that "10 years after the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), significant achievements are difficult to
identify or quantify" (5/2010/498, para. 3). The July
mass rapes in the Walikale region of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo reminds us of how ineffective
our efforts in combating sexual violence still are. This
is a failure not of one country or organization, but of
our collective international response.

Nowhere is this failure more pronounced than in
many of our decision-making structures, which
underrepresent women in conflict prevention and
peacemaking processes. Not only do we lose out on the
unique contribution that women can make to peace and
stability, but we also render ourselves complicit in their
marginalization. It is little wonder that these omissions
have contributed to poor social cohesion, fragile social
value systems and the culture of impunity.

The Secretary-General's report highlights areas of
strength and weakness in our current approach. His
recommendations, if supported, can enhance
coordination and effectiveness. The problem of
fragmentation and overlap in the United Nations
system demands a framework for implementation and
accountability. Given that the System-wide Action Plan
has not resulted in measurable improvements in that
contribution of the United Nations system to the
empowerment of women in conflict situations, it is not
a model for replication at the country level. We
recognize the need for the further elaboration of the
envisaged reporting template and guidance for data
collection in order to ensure that the indicators
contained in the Secretary-General's report can be
applied in order to truly monitor and appraise the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) worldwide.

The members of the entire United Nations family
are accountable for the change that we all seek today. It
is therefore vital that the Security Council take forward
the indicators and remain apprised of the ongoing
challenges in implementing the resolution. I would
encourage countries that are yet to do so to develop
and deploy their national action plans in line and in
consonance with resolution 1325 (2000), and indeed
make efforts to infuse gender perspectives into
policymaking at all stages of the conflict cycle.

We believe that true peace can be sustained only
when each individual human being achieves freedom,
secures dignity and leads a fulfilled life. This is the
ultimate aim of resolution 1325 (2000).

