Mr. Baja (Philippines): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this important
meeting on Security Council resolution 1325 (2000).
We are also grateful for the three excellent briefings
that were given this morning.

Reports and discussions on this question show
that there are a number of consensus points insofar as
the item "Women and peace and security" is concerned
which need to be recognized and elaborated.

First, women play an important role in building
sustainable peace and security. Secondly, there is a
need to ensure the full participation of women and the
incorporation of a gender perspective in all conflict-
prevention and peace-building missions. Thirdly,
women indeed have a vital role in reconstruction
processes. Fourthly, there is a need to address urgently
gender-based violence in situations of armed conflict.
And fifthly, civil society contributes significantly to
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) means a
lot of things to a lot of people, especially women. It
has been hailed as a landmark resolution because of the
breadth of issues it addresses and the depth of the
political and operational challenges to its
implementation. Thus the first question and challenge
is to find out whether the expectations of women,
which have risen since 2002, have been met, partially
met, or, in some cases, not met at all. We had a very
comprehensive presentation on that aspect of the issue
from Under-Secretary-General Guehenno this morning.

Whatever the assessment may be, our delegation
believes that the strategy for further implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) must take several factors into
consideration.

First, to strengthen the United Nations response
to gender-based violence in conflict and post-conflict
situations - the particular theme of our discussion
today - a comprehensive system-wide strategy and
action plan for gender mainstreaming in the
Organization's work is necessary. We therefore
welcome the Secretary-General's intentions towards
that end, particularly the strategy to mainstream a
gender perspective in all peacekeeping activities and
operations and to interface that strategy with the
policies and plans adopted by the General Assembly -
especially the commitments concerning women and
armed conflict that were adopted at the Assembly's
twenty-third special session - as well as with those of
the Economic and Social Council related to
mainstreaming a gender perspective in all policies and
programmes in the United Nations system, including in
political decision-making and conflict prevention and
resolution. We also endorse the recommendations of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the Executive Director of the United
Nations Population Fund on how to eliminate gender
violence as they relate to particular situations of armed
conflict.

Secondly, there should be a conscious effort made
to ensure that gender sensitivity at the Headquarters
level is translated into gender sensitivity in the field. I
have been informed that only 15.6 per cent of Security
Council resolutions adopted between January 2000 and
June 2004 have been gender sensitive. It might be even
more disappointing to find out exactly how much of
the substance of those resolutions has actually been
implemented on the ground. Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno cited some sobering statistics on that subject
this morning. It will therefore be essential to put in
place a system of monitoring and reporting on the
progress of United Nations implementation of gender
concerns in the field.

The Philippine Government's strategies to
implement resolution 1325 (2000) are mainly carried
out in the context of the peace processes in the
southern region of our country. There, women have
been involved in dialogues and workshops that
integrate their perspectives in settling hostilities in
their communities. As an example, two of the major
initiatives being undertaken to promote peace in the
southern region of Mindanao are the Muslim Women's
Peace Conference and the Women and a Culture of
Peace Programme. The Mindanao Commission on
Women has just conducted consultations to formulate a
Mindanao women's position paper on a peace
agreement between the Government and the Moro
Islamic Liberation Front peace agreement, which will
be taken into account in peace talks. The Government's
peace panels also include women negotiators. Our
National Commission on the Role of Filipino Women
and the Office of the Presidential Adviser on the Peace
Process are in constant coordination on how to enhance
strategies to enable more women to systematically
participate in conflict prevention, management and
resolution, as well as in the rehabilitation of their
communities. In addition, we recently activated our
Inter-Agency Committee against Traffic in Persons, in
implementation of the Philippine Anti-Trafficking in
Persons Act of 2003.

At the regional level, in June 2004 the
Philippines, together with its neighbours, signed a
Declaration on the Elimination of Violence Against
Women in the ASEAN Region. The Declaration
emphasized that gender-based violence is an obstacle
to peace and development in the region.

Still looking at this second area, we are interested
to know whether there is an inventory of existing
United Nations resources available for implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). Implementation depends on
Member States' action plans, the effectiveness of
which, in turn, depends on their capacity to implement
them. There is, therefore, a need to ensure that
sufficient information on available resources flows to
Member States to enable national action plans to be
translated into action in the field.

Thirdly, the United Nations may not be able to
bear the full responsibility of implementing resolution
1325 (2000). Governments have the primary
responsibility for keeping peace in their territories. The
United Nations, therefore, must use its unique and
important position to enable Governments to make full
use of resolution 1325 (2000) in leading the peace
efforts in their countries. One of the sad realities is that
while Governments may be willing to use the
resolution as a tool for peace, because of poverty, lack
of good governance and other reasons, they may not
have the necessary capacity and means to make
effective use of it.

The United Nations could be the fulcrum to rally
the support of the international community, civil
society and international organizations to cooperate
with Governments in increasing the focus on gender
concerns. International cooperation needs to be
enhanced in order to increase the success of resolution
1325 (2000) in every conflict area. Effective
coordination and partnerships with members of civil
society and non-governmental groups, especially those
present at the sites of conflict, will be a crucial factor
in the resolution's success. In most instances, members
of those groups interact with affected communities and
are able to reach out directly to people, especially
women. Coordination among civil society groups will
therefore ensure a greater impact of assistance on the
ground.

We believe that Member States and the United
Nations system should establish systematic
coordination with civil society groups and together
implement innovative approaches and best practices in
resolving conflicts and focusing attention on the gender
dimensions of all peace efforts.

