Ms. Chidiac (Lebanon) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate of
the Security Council on a theme that deeply affects
all of humankind, our collective conscience and
human values.

We also thank all the briefers for their remarks and
their commitment.

On this occasion, we welcome the presence among
us of the man who repairs women, Dr. Mukwege, and
the women who speak on behalf of all of us, Ms. Nadia
Murad and Ms. Inas Miloud.

Often, war is not simply a sordid machine gun, a
crude grenade or a criminal tank. Terrorism cannot be
reduced to a deceitful and deadly ideology. Conflicts,
wars and terrorism are also synonymous with women
who suffer unthinkable violence and indelible trauma
to their flesh and bodies. When their own bodies are
turned into assault weapons against themselves, we all
face the moral and ethical imperative to act.

We must act as a moral obligation and collective
responsibility. We must act to defend and protect,
prevent and deter, investigate and hold accountable,
denounce and judge and never again allow State and
non-State actors alike to brandish women's bodies as
weapons against themselves or use rape as a weapon of
terrorism and sexual violence of any kind as a tactic of
war. But we must also act to guarantee the rights of all
survivors of sexual violence, including their sexual and
reproductive health rights.

To that end, we call for full respect for the norms of
international law and international humanitarian law in
times of war and the implementation of all the Security
Council's resolutions on the women and peace and
security agenda, the cornerstone of which is resolution
1325 (2000). In that context, it should be recalled that
this resolution and all those that have followed highlight
the evidence that women are a vital partner for peace
and security in the world and that their involvement in
negotiations and peace efforts would pave a clear path
towards lasting peace.

In the national context, we emphasize the
importance of establishing inclusive and gender-
sensitive inquiry and communication mechanisms
and the introduction of relevant legislation that seeks
to bring to trial the forces behind and any individual
responsible for acts of sexual violence not only against
women, but also against men and children. To that end,
specialized funds should be mobilized to promote and
strengthen the institutions responsible for monitoring,
investigating and prosecuting these wrongdoings.
In addition, improved conditions of access to justice
remain a basic component of the process.

Lastly, let us not forget the need to ensure the
participation of civil society and of male and female
human rights defenders in the women and peace and
security agenda and to recognize the fundamental role
they play, often at the risk of their lives.

In brief, what we will now have to consider is how
to move from denial to confession; from bullying and
stigma to empowerment; from the silence of humiliation
to the courage of the truth; from indifference to
compassion; from impunity to justice; from injustice
to atonement; and from words to actions, because this
world is not for those men who wage war but for all of
the women who want peace!

