Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): The delegation of Nicaragua wishes to
commend you, Mr. President, the Permanent
Representative of the fraternal country of Ghana, for
the initiative of holding this open debate in the
Security Council. Likewise, I wish to thank the
Secretary-General for his report on women and peace
and security, which described the achievements in
implementing resolution 1325 (2000) and the
institutional and organizational difficulties that need to
be overcome in the next plan of action in order to fulfil
that resolution.

Women throughout the ages have played a very
important role in the decisions that have changed the
course of history. Many of those women have been
forgotten, omitted from historical accounts by
chroniclers who disregarded their participation in the
transformation of ideas and societies. Some years ago,
the words "women and peace and security" would only
bring to mind women as victims of conflict and the
objects of sexual violence. Now, they must be
recognized as a decisive factor in peace negotiation
processes, peacebuilding and post-conflict
reconstruction.

In Nicaragua, women have held a key role,
despite the difficult situation in which they have lived,
in the most important decisions that have affected our
society. They have been a vital element in the
reconciliation of family members and of members of
society that fought on opposing sides in the war of
foreign aggression. Nicaraguan women have
distinguished themselves as leading actors in achieving
peace and reconciliation. As companions, mothers,
sisters and members of society in general, they have
succeeded in moving towards full participation in the
decision-making process on projects and programmes
that affect their community and their own lives, at all
phases of the process, from diagnosis and planning to
monitoring and evaluation. That has been a key factor
in the successful reconstruction process in our country.
That experience proves that it is possible to provide
women with the space in which to work to achieve
lasting peace and sustainable development.

We are grateful to all the specialized agencies,
programmes, funds and entities of the United Nations
system involved in the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), and we urge them to continue to
incorporate the gender perspective in all of their
activities, so as to ensure that women participate in
decision-making processes at all levels on matters of
peace and security.

We are exceedingly concerned by the complaints
regarding rape in peacekeeping operations, and we
would invite all the actors involved to comply with the
policy of zero tolerance for acts of sexual exploitation
and abuse. We join in the call for an end to be put to
impunity. Nicaragua believes that the Secretary-
General must continue to step up his efforts to increase
the presence of women at all levels in peacekeeping
operations, including the highest ranks. We are sure
that such measures will help to reduce crimes of a
sexual nature.

We urge that more effective measures be
considered by both the General Assembly and the
Security Council aimed at implementing resolution
1325 (2000). We join in the appeal to the international
community to play a leading role in seeking to ensure
that women participate in international peace and
security processes, while at the same time recognizing
that States bear the major responsibility for promoting
and implementing national policies that allow for the
empowerment of women in that area. Without the
inclusion and participation of women in all decision-
making processes, we will never attain the
international peace and security for which we all yearn.

