Mr. Plasai (Thailand): At the outset, my delegation
would like to congratulate the Hashemite Kingdom
of Jordan for assuming the presidency of the Council
for the month of April. I welcome this opportunity
to discuss the important issue of sexual violence in
conflict, an issue that deserves close attention on the
part of the Security Council and the entire international
community. We also thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report on conflict-related sexual
violence (S/2015/203), and the Special Representative
ofthe Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
and the representative of the Non-governmental
Organizations Working Group on Women, Peace and
Security for their informative briefings.

Thailand aligns itself with the statement of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations to be delivered
by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam later in
this meeting.

The significant increase of systematic sexual
Violence in conflict settings, particularly that
perpetrated by non-State actors and extremist groups
in many areas, as stated in the Secretary-General in his
report, is alarming. It requires an immediate response
from the international community. To address the issue,
a holistic approach must be adopted that encompasses
political, social, economic and legal aspects. On the
political front in particular, we must work together to
strengthen the role of national Governments in ensuring
security and the rule of law so as to prevent and protect
their people from all forms of sexual violence. National
policy in that regard must combine effective preventive
measures with robust enforcement action in order to
end the impunity of the perpetrators of sexual violence.
On the international level, the same must be ensured
in action plans to combat terrorism and extremism
and in any ceasefire or peace agreements. Monitoring
mechanisms must also be put in place.

At the same time, the role of women peacekeepers
and female humanitarian staff of the ground must be
enhanced. Through our own experience in international
peacekeeping, we have learned that the presence of
female personnel can significantly help create a safer
environment for women and children. Against that
backdrop, we have been making consistent efforts to
increase our number of female peacekeepers and to
provide specific training on gender sensitivity to our
peacekeeping personnel before deployment. We also
support the efforts of the United Nations to appoint more
gender advisers and to integrate a gender perspective
into the implementation of peacekeeping mandates at
the policy and operational levels alike.

(spoke in French)

Another aspect of the issue deserving our particular
attention is the provision of assistance to survivors of
sexual violence - be they men, women, boys or girls.
These people need multidimensional support, including
immediate medical assistance and psychological care,
as well as access to justice and reparations. Above all,
they need social and economic assistance to rebuild
their strength, resilience and dignity.

It must also be underscored that survivors of sexual
Violence in conflict are not mere victims; they can
become effective agents of change. It is therefore our
shared responsibility to protect them, to help them and
to build their capacity to take control of their lives. In
that regard, I welcome in particular the important role
played by non-governmental organizations, civil society
and women's organizations, which work tirelessly to
assist those in distress following sexual assault and to
prevent sexual Violence in conflict.

In conclusion, allow me to underscore that
international law, in particular international humanitarian
law and human rights legal norms, must be respected.
The use of sexual violence as a weapon of war and
terrorism constitutes a war crime and a crime against
humanity. Those who perpetrate such crimes must face
justice.

I take this opportunity to assure the international
community of the determined commitment of the
Kingdom of Thailand to contribute actively to efforts
seeking to bring all forms of sexual Violence to an end.

