Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Allow me to thank you, Madam President, for
convening this meeting. I would also like to express my
gratitude to all the briefers for their detailed statements
on this important topic.

Resolution 1325 (2000) was adopted 15 years ago
and has lost none of its relevance. It provides guidance
on increasing the role of women in the prevention
and resolution of armed conflict, in post-conflict
reconstruction and even in the protection of women
during conflict.

We read carefully the Secretary-General's report
prepared for this meeting (S/2014/693). We share the
concern regarding new trends of growing numbers of
acts of violence against women and violations of their
rights, including those related to terrorism, violent
extremism and transnational organized crime. Women
are usually victims of violence during armed conflict.
The killing and wounding of women and children,
including through indiscriminate or excessive use of
force against civilians, is a serious concern. Today that
also happens in Europe. It is inadmissible to ignore such
crimes or justify them as inevitable collateral damage.

One guarantee of the effectiveness of Council
action on resolution 1325 (2000) is its work in the
context of specific mandates and its consideration of
women's issues in the context of the maintenance of
peace and security and with respect to those situations
included on the Council's agenda. The issue of violence
against women comes under the authority not only of
the Security Council but also of the General Assembly,
the Peacebuilding Commission, the Human Rights
Council and the Commission on the Status of Women.
The efforts of those various bodies will obtain the best
results insofar as they respond to the principle of the
division of labour and the non-duplication of authority.
We therefore continue to doubt the advisability of
including in the report appraisals of situations of women
that are not directly linked to issues of international
peace and security.

Regarding the idea of drafting national plans of
action for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
we think such plans should be prepared on a voluntary
basis, first of all by those States that are in a situation
of armed conflict or in post-conflict peacebuilding. We
call for an approach to that issue that takes into account
the specificities of the situation in each particular
country.

The rise in the numbers of refugees and internally
displaced persons, the majority of whom are women
and children, means there is a need to take effective
measures to protect those individuals. we express our
satisfaction that the presidential statement adopted
today (S/PRST/2014/21) pays due attention to that very
issue. We are convinced that there is a strong advantage
offered by the participation of women, refugees and
internally displaced persons in various aspects of
resolving armed conflict and post-conflict rebuilding.
Their active participation is a means of preventing and
overcoming violence against women and girls.

A year ago, the Russian Federation was faced with
the task of providing massive assistance to refugees
from south-eastern Ukraine. Currently, approximately
830,000 Ukrainian citizens are hosted on Russian
territory, 450,000 of whom have requested official
status, which would allow their extended stay in Russia
and grant them the status of refugees or temporary
refugees. The overwhelming majority of them are
women and children. Given the continuing shelling of
residential areas in south-east Ukraine, the numbers
that I have cited could increase.

Refugees are hosted in 66 Russian regions.
Specialized emergency-service personnel work with
them and provide medical and psychological aid. Free
meals are organized, and one-time allowances are
paid. Employment specialists help newcomers to find
jobs. Spaces are made for children in kindergartens,
schools and institutions of higher learning. Necessary
medical assistance is provided to children and pregnant
women, among others. There are 24-hour hotlines.
According to representatives in Russia of the Office
of the High Commissioner for Refugees, the Russian
Government is fulfilling 100 per cent of the refugees'
needs. Volunteers and non-governmental organization
are lending a hand as well.

It is encouraging that preparations for next year's
celebration of the fifteenth anniversary of the Security
Council's adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) have
now started to take shape. We hope that the Council's
request in resolution 2122 (2013) for a global high-level
review of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
will galvanize States' efforts to fill gaps and identify
priorities for further action in ensuring the equitable
and full participation of women in the prevention and
settlement of armed conflicts. For that process to be
effective, all States must participate actively. Taking
into account the position of all States, and not just of
Security Council members, can ensure that further
measures regarding women and peace and security
are genuinely effective. We call for a transparent and
open process of preparation for the review, in close
cooperation and consultation with States. We await with
interest the results of the review, which the Secretary-
General is to present during his yearly thematic report
to the Council.

