Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
you, Madam President, for holding this debate today
and for coming to New York to give added impetus to
this important issue. The huge number of those wanting
to speak in this debate is a visible demonstration of its
importance and topicality. I join others in thanking
the Secretary-General and his Special Representative
Zainab Hawa Bangura for their valuable briefings today.
I also thank Ms. Kei'ta Diakite for her moving words on
behalf of the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace
and Security.

The United Kingdom is deeply committed to
addressing sexual Violence in conflict, which is one of
the most persistent and neglected injustices in the world
today. Last week, the Group of Eight (G-8) Foreign
Ministers, under the presidency of the United Kingdom,
agreed a historic declaration on preventing sexual
violence in conflict. They pledged to work together and
with others in a concerted and comprehensive campaign
to address that crime. The G-8 declared for the first
time that rape and serious sexual violence in conflict
were grave breaches of the Geneva Convention, as
well as being war crimes. That decision recognizes our
responsibility to actively search for, prosecute or hand
over for trial anyone accused ofthose crimes, regardless
of nationality, wherever they are in the world.
Today's debate is an opportunity to reinforce that
message and to send a strong, shared message that there
is no safe haven for perpetrators of rape and sexual
Violence. The statements we have heard thus far in this
debate are very encouraging on that point.

The United Kingdom welcomes the Secretary-
General's timely report (S/2013/149). A key objective
of the United Kingdom's Preventing Sexual Violence
Initiative is to strengthen United Nations and other
international efforts to eradicate that scourge.

We wholeheartedly support the work and mandate
ost. Bangura, especially her efforts to build coherence
and coordination in the United Nations response and
her focus on national ownership and responsibility.
The report provides an important opportunity to assess
progress and to consider what more needs to be done.
It is clear that there is a huge amount still to be done.

I would like to highlight the following three critical
areas that we must address.

First, the United Kingdom would like to commend
the Secretary-General for recommending that all
country resolutions and mandate renewals for United
Nations peacekeeping and special political missions
systematically address sexual violence and include the
specific language of resolution 1960 (2010). We agree
that peacekeeping mandates should include language
on the cessation of sexual violence, on dialogue with
parties to conflict to seek protection commitments
and on the deployment of women protection advisors,
and that we should ensure, in particular, that they are
funded from peacekeeping mission budgets. We must
be rigorous and consistent in our approach on this issue.

Secondly, we recognize that a focus on the difficult
issues surrounding security sector and justice reform is
critical: providing training for national security forces;
ensuring the principles of no amnesty for perpetrators
of grave human rights violations, including sexual
violence; and ensuring that the security sector is
accessible and responsive to all. In the justice sector,
work to train the police, magistrates and judges and
more training for female lawyers will result in more
effective investigations and prosecutions. That is also
very welcome.

Thirdly, we welcome calls to ensure that the Security
Council, mediators, envoys and Member States actively
engage in dialogue with parties to conflict on conflict-
related sexual violence. That is central to ensuring that
the issue of sexual Violence as a method or tactic of
conflict is explicitly recognized in subsequent peace
processes and ceasefire agreements. As my Foreign
Secretary said on 11 April, we need such commitments
to end the treatment of rape and sexual violence as a
secondary issue and to put women and women's rights
front and centre in conflict resolution.

Finally, as the representatives of China and
Luxembourg, among others, have highlighted, let us
not forget that women's full and equal participation
is fundamental to combating sexual violence. Women
must not be seen merely as passive victims, but as active
participants who are central to all efforts to combat that
horrific phenomenon.

Let me end as I began, by thanking you, Madam,
for holding this debate and reinforcing the Council's
continued commitment to tackling this issue. As you
know, my Foreign Secretary is personally committed
to this issue. Together, we absolutely must deliver on
our promises to those devastated by those appalling
and life-shattering crimes, wherever they take place.
A strong resolution that demonstrates this shared
commitment is both timely and critical, and we intend
to use a further debate in June, during our presidency
of the Council, to keep attention focused on the need to
end these crimes.

