Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): We would like to
thank the delegation of Japan for organizing this very
important meeting. We are also pleased by the
participation of Ms. Noeleen Heyzer, Executive
Director of the United Nations Development Fund for
Women (UNIFEM), a body that has already been
involved in the implementation of this important
resolution. We also welcome Ms. Carolyn McAskie,
Assistant Secretary-General, Peacebuilding Support
Office. We look forward to the further strengthening of
the work that has been done on this important issue.

My delegation is indeed pleased to address the
Security Council on the occasion of the sixth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
on women and peace and security. We associate
ourselves with the statements to be made later on by
the representative of Lesotho on behalf of the Southern
African Development Community group, and by the
representative of Slovenia on behalf of the Human
Security Network.

With the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), we
came to realize the important contribution made by
women in the maintenance of peace and security. We
have also come to accept that women are not simply
victims of war and conflicts, but important role-players
in the resolution of those same conflicts. Since the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), we have seen a
growing demand for the inclusion of women in peace
negotiations. Women are gradually finding a place in
the implementation of peace agreements, post-conflict
rehabilitation, reconstruction and disarmament. What
remains is a lack of much-needed political will to allow
women to fully participate in, and contribute to, the
resolution of conflicts.

Promoting the role of women in the consolidation
of peace underscores the four main principles of
resolution 1325 (2000). First, there is a need for the
full and unrestricted participation of women in all
decision-making and peace processes. Secondly, it is
important to integrate gender perspectives and training
into peacekeeping operations. Thirdly, there is an
obligation to protect women and girls from human
rights abuses, including gender-based violence in
conflict zones. Fourthly, there is a need to mainstream
the gender perspective into United Nations reporting
systems and programme-implementation mechanisms.

The Beijing Platform for Action long ago stated
the need to include women in decision-making and to
ensure that policies were gender-sensitive, as a
fundamental process towards the acceleration of
women's emancipation. In recent years we have seen
women coming together by themselves in the Great
Lakes region and in the Mano River Basin to decide on
their own future and to organize their participation in
the national reconstruction of their countries. The
South African Women in Dialogue initiative has
organized consultations with women from several
African countries emerging from conflict to forge
strategies that seek to make certain that women's
concerns are taken into account in peacebuilding
efforts.

Yet, it remains disheartening that sexual and
gender-based violence, including trafficking in
persons, continues in conflict areas. In some parts of
the world, gender-based violence has reached almost
epidemic proportions. Every effort must be made to
halt that inhuman practice and to bring the perpetrators
to justice. Efforts to monitor and report gender-based
violence in situations of armed conflict must be
complemented by practical measures at the national
and international levels to end impunity and to bring
those who are responsible for crimes against women
and girls to justice. In that regard, South Africa
supports the efforts of the United Nations to fully
implement codes of conduct and disciplinary
procedures that prevent and respond to sexual
exploitation, while enhancing monitoring and
enforcement mechanisms in peace missions.

The full achievement of the goals contained in
resolution 1325 (2000) can become a reality only
through better information, coordination and
cooperation, as well as strengthened commitment and
accountability at all levels of the United Nations
system. Enhanced cooperation with regional
organizations, as well as with civil society and
women's national machineries, is also essential. My
delegation therefore notes with appreciation the
progress made in the implementation of the United
Nations System-wide Action Plan proposed just last
year.

Finally, the Peacebuilding Commission also
presents an opportunity for the integration of the
gender perspective in all phases of consolidating peace.
We urge the Peacebuilding Commission to pay
particular attention to the knowledge and
understanding that women can bring in peacebuilding
processes. That is the least we can expect from that
newest and important organ of the United Nations.

