Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin, Sir, by congratulating you and your delegation on
Viet Nam's assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I would like also, through
Ambassador DiCarlo, to thank Ambassador Rice and the
United States delegation for a very productive and
distinguished presidency of the Council last month.
Ambassador Le Luong Minh has our best wishes for
the often delicate task of presiding over the Council
and discerning the balance of views among its
members.

I would also like to thank you, Mr. President, for
personally chairing this debate on a very important
issue. We are delighted to welcome you to lead us in
this effort. We are also very grateful to the Deputy
Secretary-General, to the Secretary-General's Special
Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of
Women, to the Executive Director of the United
Nations Development Fund for Women and to the
representative of the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security for their insights and their advice
and encouragement to us this morning.

We have a saying in the United Kingdom that
sometimes you can stand for ages and ages at a bus
stop waiting for a bus to come, and then suddenly two
or three come at the same time. And it feels a little bit
like that on this issue in the Council at the moment.
But nine years on from the adoption of the landmark
resolution 1325 (2000) we are glad to see the issue of
women and peace and security receiving renewed
attention in this Chamber with debates on different
aspects two weeks in a row. We have come a long way
since 2000. The resolution we have adopted today is an
indication that these issues are acknowledged as central
to many areas of the Council's work.

But our consideration of these issues has also
been prompted by the lack of implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). During last week's debate on
sexual violence in armed conflict (see S/PV.6195), we
again heard heartbreaking and harrowing stories. At an
Arria Formula meeting which I chaired in June, we
were reminded of the fact that women and women's
civil society groups are all but excluded from peace
processes and mediation. The Secretary-General's
report (S/2009/465) provides a depressing analysis of
the many obstacles and challenges to women's
participation.

But we are heartened by the excellent effort led
by the Secretary-General to address the lack of women
in senior United Nations positions. He himself has
appointed three of the nine women who have ever held
the post of Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, and he, of course, also appointed the Deputy
Secretary-General, who is with us today. The numbers
of women are growing steadily amongst key United
Nations leadership functions in the field. But there has
still never been a female special envoy.

Today's debate, however, is about the particular
contribution of women to peacebuilding. It is about

seizing what has been called the golden-hour window
of opportunity at the point of emergence from conflict:
the point in time when it is all too easy for a fragile
peace to break; the point in time when we must ensure
that all actors in society are empowered to contribute
fully to the search for sustainable peace; the point in
time when women could make such a huge and lasting
difference if enabled to do so.

The Security Council has agreed that we need to
focus more attention on the linkages between
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Ensuring the
engagement of the local female population is one
obvious such link: empowered women both make
peace and build it. And incidentally, this is not a new
insight - very far from it. The playwright
Aristophanes dramatized it for war-weary Athenians in
his comic play Lysistrata nearly 2,500 years ago.

Women have a pivotal role to play. Although
often survivors of some of the worst effects of conflict,
women are usually relied upon to form the foundation
of a post-conflict society. They frequently perform this
role with neither say over the peace process nor voice
in any post-conflict planning.

In resolution 1888 (2009), the Council took
further steps to end impunity for the barbarous
perpetrators of sexual violence against women and
children in conflict. We now need to identify practical
ways to assure women a central role in peacekeeping
and post-conflict peacebuilding. That is, we need to
improve our record in implementing resolution 1325
(2000).

We have one year remaining before the tenth
anniversary of that resolution. That will be an
important moment for the Council. We will want then
to take stock of progress and set an ambitious forward
agenda. To ensure that there will be real progress to
take stock of, in the year ahead we will need to, first,
generate imaginative solutions to the many obstacles to
implementation, making use of the whole United
Nations system. The steering committee to be
established under the chairmanship of the Deputy
Secretary-General, which we have welcomed in
resolution 1889 (2009) this morning, will play a vital
part in this.
We must see linkages across the system and fit
responses to the gaps which are identified. The
composite United Nations gender entity will also help
achieve that goal. In its resolution 63/311, adopted last

month, the General Assembly gave strong support to
the establishment of the entity. We hope that that will
now be taken forward expeditiously.

Secondly, we must increase the number and
standard of national-level implementation strategies,
drawing upon peer experience and the excellent
examples set recently by Liberia, Uganda and Chile.

And thirdly, we must finalize and agree indicators
to measure progress. We need data on success or
failure in implementing specific provisions. We need to
know what works and what does not. Today's
resolution should help kick-start those efforts.

For our part, the United Kingdom is currently
reviewing our national action plan for implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), one of only 16 of such
national plans as the Deputy Secretary-General noted
earlier. Our review is designed to ensure that our
policies not only remain consistent with that resolution
but also promote its implementation around the globe.
We urge other Member States to do the same.

We all have a role to play in ensuring that a full
and effective contribution can be made by women
during peace processes, that their needs are met as
survivors of conflict, that their voices are heard in local
civil society and that greater numbers of talented
women are appointed to senior peacekeeping and
peacebuilding positions.

As a Council, we need to ensure that we are
doing whatever we can to enhance women's vital role
in conflict resolution and peacebuilding, a role without
which real and lasting peace will often be
unachievable.

