Mr. De la Fuente Ramirez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I thank the German presidency for convening
this debate and extend my gratitude to those who have
enriched the discussion today.

Sexual violence is always an aberrant crime and a
flagrant and unacceptable violation of human rights.
When it occurs in the context of a conflict situation,
it becomes a war crime as well, one that contravenes
international humanitarian law and, as a result,
sanctioning it and providing redress become a matter
of interest to the international community.

This year marks the tenth anniversary of
the establishment of the mandate of the Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Armed
Conflict. Since then, remarkable progress has been
made, particularly with regard to the international
community's recognition that sexual and gender-
based violence in armed conflict constitute a threat to
international peace and security. However, important
challenges remain, not only in terms of accountability
and the fight against impunity, but also in terms of the
definition of the phenomenon itself.

Member States must strengthen their national
capacities in order to have the legal and institutional
frameworks in place to ensure the investigation and
prosecution of those who are guilty of these crimes.
To that end, our national laws must be based on the
application of fundamental principles, such as equality
before the law, respect for human rights, and fair,
effective and non-discriminatory access to justice
systems that incorporate gender and intercultural
perspectives in a cross-cutting manner.

For the timely prevention and effective combat
of conflict-related sexual violence, it is necessary to
recognize and address at least three inescapable factors:
first, structural gender inequalities; secondly, historical
discrimination against women and girls; and, thirdly,
marginalization, especially of vulnerable groups. All
these factors are a fundamental part of the origin of
these crimes. If we also add to all of the foregoing
weak institutions of justice, fear of denunciation, fear
of reprisals, the rejection of families and the prejudices
of the communities themselves, we can surely better
understand what are some of the main obstacles that
victims face in accessing justice.

That is why it is urgent to change the social norms
that continue to perpetuate as equal the impunity of
the aggressors, on the one hand, and the suffering of
the victims, on the other. It must also be recognized,
however regrettable it may be, that victims often do not
find satisfactory answers to their most pressing needs,
hence the importance of redoubling efforts. Achieving
effective gender equality is unavoidable if the goal is
the sustainable development of our societies. Women
must participate fully and effectively in political,
economic and social life. That is the only way to build
just, inclusive and peaceful societies that lead justly to
sustainable peace.
There is concern that the term "sexual violence"
may not be properly codified in international law. It
should be recalled that this term was not explicitly
included in the Declaration on the Protection of Women
and Children in Emergency and Armed Conflict,
adopted in 1974 by the General Assembly in resolution
3318 (XXIX). It is worth asking whether the definition
agreed upon so far is really sufficient for the required
approach to all manifestations or acts of violence of a
sexual nature perpetrated, especially against women
and children, in the context of armed conflicts. We
therefore take this opportunity to endorse the relevance
of the Geneva Conventions, in particular common
article 3 and article 27 of the Fourth Convention, which
incorporate an express reference to the protection of
women against rape, forced prostitution or any form of
indecent assault.

We very much appreciate that the Secretary-General
places the rights of victims and survivors at the centre
ofhis strategy as a response to this serious problem. We
hope that all necessary measures will be implemented
in order to prevent survivors from facing situations of
revictimization and to provide them with the necessary
comprehensive support to ensure their rehabilitation
and strengthen their resilience. We therefore call on the
Council to support the recommendations put forth by
the Secretary-General in his latest report (S/2019/280),
in particular the following recommendations.

First, it must include in a timely manner sexual
violence as a specific criterion for imposing sanctions.
Secondly, it should systematically include the prevention
of conflict-related sexual violence in the mandates of
peacekeeping operations and include early warning
indicators on sexual violence as part of their civilian
protection structures. Thirdly, it should promote the
participation of victims and civil society, in particular
women's organizations, in all activities to prevent
and counter that scourge. Fourthly, it should promote
greater participation by women in peace and ceasefire
negotiations and ensure the inclusion of provisions on
sexual violence in such agreements. Fifthly, it should
further strengthen prevention by supporting efforts to
ensure that perpetrators included in the annex to the
report of the Secretary-General are held accountable
for their crimes. On that last point, we must underscore
the fundamental role that the International Criminal
Court can play in combating impunity for such atrocity
crimes when they constitute war crimes and crimes
against humanity.

The protection of and respect for the human rights
of women and their participation in the prevention and
peaceful settlement of conflicts are crucial to ensuring
more peaceful and secure societies. Communities
cannot be healthy, fair or inclusive when the needs of
large sectors of their populations are ignored. The issue
that we are dealing with today must therefore remain a
priority on national agendas and, of course, on that of
the Security Council.

