Mr. Moussa (Djibouti) (spoke in French): At the
outset, the Djiboutian delegationjoins previous speakers
in congratulating the United Kingdom delegation on
having quickly organized the resumption of the debate
on the women and peace and security agenda so early
on in its presidency. This demonstrates the United
Kingdom's deep commitment to the matter.

We welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution
2493 (2019). We also express our gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his annual report on resolution
1325 (2000) (S/2019/800) and for his keen interest in the

women and peace and security agenda. We take note of
his recommendations at the end of the report.

(spoke in English)

Long before the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
Djiboutian women, as well as many other African
women across the continent, had demonstrated great
political leadership and powerfully articulated a
vision for women's rights and gender equality. We
deem it important to memorialize and document their
meaningful contributions to peace in Africa for the
benefit of future generations.

The participation of women in peace processes
was crucial to the Somalia National Peace Conference,
or the Djibouti Conference, which was held in Arta,
a resort city in the south of Djibouti, six months
before the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). At the
initiative of His Excellency Mr. Ismael Omar Guelleh,
President of the Republic of Djibouti, and in contrast
to previous reconciliation conferences on Somalia, the
Arta Conference included the extensive participation
of Somali women. The inclusion of women concerned
was likely to further the outcome of the Conference.
In fact, the Arta declaration enabled the formation of
the transitional Government and then the rebirth of the
Somali Government in 1991, which allowed Somalia
to reoccupy its seat at the United Nations and in
regional bodies.

In the Horn of Africa, we pride ourselves on being
a Member State active in the inclusion of women in
political leadership through reforms to eradicate the
obstacles that women face. This year began with the
enactment of a bill increasing the quota of Djiboutian
women from 10 to 25 per cent in the National Assembly.
Quotas make questions of inclusion more visible and
constitute an effective and meaningful way of ensuring
that equality is taken seriously within political
institutions. Today, women represent 3 per cent of
Djiboutian military personnel deployed in peacekeeping
operations in Somalia, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Darfur. We are cognizant of the fact that it
is a modest number, but we are committed to further
implementing the agenda and measures to increase the
number of women in future peacekeeping operations
are being considered.

We welcome the recent joint United Nations-
African Union (AU) women and peace and security
solidarity mission to Djibouti, led by Deputy Secretary-
General Ms. Amina Mohammed and the AU Special
Envoy for Women, Peace and Security, Ms. Bineta
Diop, which took stock of achievements in the area
of women's empowerment. The tenth AU high-level
retreat on the promotion of peace, security and stability
in Africa also took place in Djibouti last month. It
was focused on identifying concrete actions to ensure
good governance in the security sector and its effective
reforms, which are critical to the achievement of peace
and security in Africa and to the women and peace and
security agenda.

Conflict in Africa has been one of the main drivers
of forced displacement overall. Women are the main
victims of human smuggling and trafficking as a result
of these movements. A recent publication by the Africa
Center for Strategic Studies raises concerns about
the fact that violent extremist groups and criminal
networks have sought to control these trafficking routes
and revenues, estimated at $765 million annually for
the trans-Sahara route.

