Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Togo for convening this open debate. I
welcome the presence of His Excellency the Foreign
Minister of Togo to preside over this meeting. I would
also like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Wallstrom, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations Ladsous and Ms. Amina
Megheirbi for their briefings and statements.

China condemns all Violence against women in
armed conflicts, including sexual violence. We urge all
parties to conflict or intervening parties to abide by
international humanitarian law and other relevant
international law. In that regard, I would like to
emphasize the following five points.

First, to avoid and lessen the harm suffered by
women in armed conflicts, we should first of all
prevent wars and reduce the number of conflicts. The
Security Council bears the primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security. To
safeguard the rights and interests of women, the
Council should actively engage in preventive
diplomacy and promote the settlement of disputes by
peaceful means, including dialogue and consultations.
The mandates of the Council's resolutions should be
comprehensively and strictly implemented. They must
not be abused and, even less so, exceeded. Actions to
provide protection for civilians should pay particular
attention to avoiding further casualties among women
and children.

Secondly, Governments bear the main
responsibility for protecting women and combating
sexual violence, as well as for implementing
resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009), 1960 (2010) and
the relevant presidential statements. While the
international community can provide constructive
assistance, external support must comply with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and fully respect the sovereignty of the
countries concerned.

Thirdly, it is necessary to strengthen the
participation of women in all stages of the peace
process, pay attention to their status and roles, and
further tap their potential. China supports women in
playing a greater role in preventing and settling
conflicts and in rehabilitation and reconstruction.
China supports the United Nations in appointing more
female senior officials, special representatives of the
Secretary-General and special envoys, and especially
in increasing female representation from the
developing countries.

Fourthly, the issue of women is that of
development. In order to fundamentally solve various
problems, including sexual violence, attention should
be paid to promoting economic and social
development, eradicating the root causes of conflicts
and achieving the comprehensive development of
women. The United Nations should actively promote
the implementation of the Millennium Development
Goals, increase support and assistance to developing
countries and, in particular, pay greater attention to the
reconstruction and development of post-conflict
countries.

Fifthly, in addressing questions related to women,
peace and security, including sexual violence, there

should be a division of labour among the relevant
United Nations organs, which should collaborate with
each other. In accordance with its Charter mandate, the
Security Council should concern itself with situations
that constitute a threat to international peace and
security. At the same time, full play should be given to
the role of other United Nations organs and bodies,
such as the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council, the Human Rights Council and
UN-Women, which should endeavour to generate

synergy.

We hope that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General will work strictly in accordance with
the mandate of the Security Council and play a
constructive role in appropriately addressing the
problem of sexual violence in armed conflicts.

