Mr. Rivas (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to commend the President for
organizing this debate and for his excellent concept note
(S/20l4/32, annex), as well as to express our gratitude to
all those, especially women, who work on a daily basis
to promote peace and security and to protect civilians. I
should also like to thank those who delivered briefings
at the beginning of this meeting.

Uruguay associates itself with the statement made
by the representative Switzerland on behalf of the
Group of Friends on the Protection of Civilians in
Armed Conflict.

I must begin by thanking the President for allowing
us to address in this open debate a topic that is so
important. Uruguay is strongly committed to the agenda
for the protection of civilians in armed conflicts and
acknowledges its inherent link to the agenda of women
and peace and security and children in armed conflict.
These are part of the priorities of our foreign policy.

Unfortunately, in spite of the legal and normative
strides forward recorded in the past few years, we as
a troop-contributing country can testify to the fact
that civilians, in particular children, women and girls,
continue to be the main victims in situations of armed
conflict and post-conflict situations. They also account
for the greatest number of victims, as is witnessed by
the sad situation in Syria and in what recently occurred
in the Gaza Strip. In particular, we observe with deep
concern the violence against specific population groups
and against the human rights of women and children by
terrorist groups such as Boko Haram and others.

The use of sexual violence as a weapon of war for
terror and revenge in order to obtain the subjugation or
support of entire communities, or to cause humiliation
or used to destroy the culture of a group or community
that is considered an enemy, is clearly a constant
feature of a certain type of armed conflict. That is
why it is essential to create the conditions that provide
an opportunity for women who have been expelled to
be reintegrated into their communities and to be able
to bring up the children that are the products of rape
without any impediments. The horrors witnessed by
girls and boys against their mothers and sisters will
continue to affect them throughout their lives, almost
certainly to be manifested in a brutal way sooner
or later unless they are adequately addressed. It is
therefore necessary that we halt the cycle of violence
wherein the immediate consequences of violence often
become causes that generate more violence in the next
generation.

My country attaches particular importance to
the prevention of sexual violence in conflict. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, where Uruguay
has approximately 1,000 soldiers who fulfil many
tasks for the protection of civilians, joint protection
and vigilance teams are operating in order to monitor
violations and to ensure the protection of human rights
in remote areas. In that regard, we are aware of the fact
that it is essential to identify emerging signals from the
field, as well as to send appropriate early signals to the
stakeholders concerned as to the obligation to respect
the moral and physical integrity of people. That is why
it is also crucial to strengthen the role of communities in
ensuring their own protection, not only for immediate
physical protection but also for preventing, alerting
and acting against attempts at aggression, as well as
for establishing cultural criteria at the level of the
family and the community that ensures that the rights
of women and girls are respected.

In line with that goal, Uruguay has undertaken
various timely initiatives to seek to create spaces for
integration in various communities, such as in Pinga,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, where Uruguayan
personnel established a football school where both
boys and girls of different ethnic groups who found
themselves in areas of armed conflict could share
activities together that allowed them to overcome
differences and barriers and thereby contribute to
building a peaceful environment.

Refugees, asylum seekers, the repatriated, stateless
persons and persons displaced during conflict face
enormous vulnerability to sexual and gender-based
violence. The Government of Uruguay has sought to
provide a humanitarian response in the face of the
refugee crisis in Syria, having committed to receive
120 Syrian refugees. To date, five families have arrived
in our country, including 33 boys and girls.

The obvious mutual connection between
participation and protection is a concept that is
central to resolution 1325 (2000). In the resolution,
the Council reiterates the important role played by
women in preventing and resolving conflicts and in
peacebuilding. The number of women deployed in
Uruguayan contingents to peacekeeping operations
demonstrates our commitment in that regard.

Promoting accountability is another fundamental
element to prevent the most serious violations of
human rights, in particular of women and girls. It is
also important to support concrete activities to combat
impunity, including designating experts to investigate
sexual and gender-based violence. By the same token,
special attention should be focused on the need faithfully
to comply with the code of conduct by all those who are
members of United Nations peacekeeping contingents
deployed on the ground, based on the zero-tolerance

policy.

In conclusion, in the course of its upcoming
substantive session, the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations will hold negotiations on the
issue of the protection of civilians, which I believe will
be an opportunity for all of us to work constructively in
order to strengthen our commitment to this noble goal.

