Ms. Krisnamurthi (Indonesia): I would like to
thank you, Sir, for chairing today's debate on a topic
that is difficult but nevertheless important to raise in the
Council. I would also like to congratulate you assuming
the Council presidency for the month of May and assure
you of our support for a successful presidency.

I thank the Deputy Secretary-General, the Acting
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, and the representative of
Women's Refugee Route for their statements.

Sexual violence on its own is clearly a great moral
issue and is surely devastating to the victims. When
used as a tactic in conflict, the demoralizing effect it
has on the population is sure to exacerbate and deepen
tensions. There are long-term effects that we still
need to understand. However, a society thrives with
individuals who are healthy in mind and body, which
is one of the cornerstones of sustainable peace. For
that reason, Indonesia is deeply concerned about the
use of conflict-related sexual violence as a war tactic.
Women and children are especially vulnerable. The
international community must continue to condemn
such atrocious acts requiring greater efforts to get to
the root of the problem.

Indonesia applauds the efforts of the United Nations,
other multilateral organizations and civil society to halt
this human tragedy. The international community must
remain resolute and firmly committed to upholding the
principle of protecting human dignity and limiting the
effects of conflict on non-combatants.

The United Nations normative framework on
deterring atrocities against humankind in situations
of conflict should continue to be strengthened as
necessary. Four elements should be included in efforts to
end the culture of impunity for sexual violence in wars:
prevention, early detection, protection and punishment
for perpetrators, and justice for the victims.

Indonesia has taken an active role in United
Nations peacebuilding efforts and is committed
to strengthening its role in the United Nations
peacekeeping operations. At the moment, Indonesia has
female personnel in the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon and the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur, and we are committed to
increase the number of peacekeeping troops, including
the number of Indonesian female peacekeepers and
women military observers.

Mandatory training on addressing sexual violence
for all peacekeeping personnel should be continued
and supported. The Indonesia National Defence Forces
Peacekeeping Centre has included training on this
particular issue and will ensure the continuation as well
as the strengthening of this exercise.

Allow me to end by stressing that we should
not overlook civilian expertise. The pool of civilian
capacities can be broadened and deepened for
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict.
One way is to involve women survivors. They should be
encouraged to participate in peacekeeping operations
training so that troops on the ground are aware and
more in tune with the signs of sexual violence and
exploitation. It should also include countries with
relevant experience in post-conflict peacebuilding or
democratic transition.

The protection of women in armed conflict should
be further strengthened; that much is clear. Ultimately,
our aim should be the prevention of armed conflict
itself. Here, the Security Council, in cooperation with
regional organizations, should play its role in promoting
the prevention of conflict and the maintenance of
international peace and security.

