Ms. Rahimova (Azerbaijan): I wish to thank you,
Madam President, for convening today's open debate
on women and peace and security with a focus on
sexual violence in conflict. Our appreciation also goes
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict and the representative
of the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and
Security for their insightful statements.

In the context of armed conflict, parties should
ensure respect for the obligation under international
humanitarian and human-rights law to protect innocent
civilians, especially women and girls, who continue to
suffer from rape, sexual slavery, forced prostitution,
forced pregnancy and other forms of sexual violence.
The continued practice of using gender-based violence
as a tactic of war is legally and morally unacceptable.
Azerbaijan reiterates its strong condemnation of all
acts of sexual Violence committed against women and
girls in situations of armed conflict. There can be no
tolerance for such acts, and all necessary measures must
be taken to bring the perpetrators to justice and put an
end to impunity. We note in that regard the efforts of
the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict, which was established pursuant
to resolution 1888 (2009), aimed at strengthening the
capacity of national actors with regard to the rule of
law and justice.

Unfortunately, not all grave violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law,
including acts of sexual violence, have received
due attention and a response at the international and
regional levels. Measures that are more resolute and
targeted are now required to end impunity in such
situations. Commitments to protection efforts must be
free of selectivity and politically motivated approaches
and preferences. In that regard, we note the role
played by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict pursuant to
her mandate. The involvement of women in peace and
security should be seen as one of the central elements
that can support conflict prevention and underpin long-
term stability. We look forward to the 2015 high-level
review in October and the outcomes of the global study
on the implementation ofresolution 1325 (2000). In that
regard, Azerbaijan appreciates the work of UN-Women
and its professional team and stands ready to contribute
to the review process.

At the national level, Azerbaijan has launched
regional projects, such as Women for Conflict Prevention
and Peacebuilding in the Southern Caucasus, aimed at
strengthening advocacy work calling for strengthening
the role of women in decision-making with regard to
conflict prevention and resolution at the national,
regional and international levels. Such initiatives can
be instrumental to the promotion of a culture of peace
and cooperation among interested actors.

Azerbaijan remains committed to the implementation
of the resolutions on the subject and is pleased to have
made a contribution to the work of the Council during
its presidency in October 2013, including the adoption
of resolution 2122 (2013). We look forward to the
high-level review on implementation and cooperation
with interested States, UN-Women and other relevant
entities in the process of the preparation of the global
study.

In conclusion, I would like once again to commend
the delegation of Jordan for convening this important
open debate.

