Mr. Sinhaseni (Thailand): At the outset, I would
like to thank Azerbaijan for convening this open debate
on women and peace and security, the Secretary-
General for his informative report (S/2013/525), and the
briefers who spoke this morning.

We are pleased that the Council has convened an
open debate on this issue for the third time, which
signals the importance the Council attaches to the
issue of women. Women account for more than half
of the world's population. Women's participation and
the recognition oftheir special needs are essential. The
issue of women and peace and security is multifaceted.
We welcome today's discussion, which focuses on the
role of women in transitional justice and the rule of law.

A situation of conflict creates particular challenges
in terms of human rights and upholding the rule of law.
As is rightly mentioned by the Secretary-General in
his report, rebuilding justice and the rule of law and
enhancing gender-sensitive legal and institutional
reform, in conformity with international standards,
is crucial to protecting women's equal and inviolable
rights in the aftermath of conflict. Measures to protect
women victims and to redress wrongs against them and
bring perpetrators to justice deserve particular attention
from the Security Council and the cooperation of the
international community.

My delegation is pleased to learn from UN Women
that transitional justice mechanisms are increasingly
responding to war crimes against women by providing
specific arrangements to protect women witnesses.
We also welcome the adoption of resolution 2106
(2013), in June, which focuses on accountability for
perpetrators of sexual Violence in conflict and stresses
women's political and economic empowerment.
Those mechanisms need to be effectively utilized.
The Council's resolutions and presidential statements
also need to be translated into actions if we are to be
successful in our attempt to protect women.

Just last month, Thailand joined other like-minded
countries in endorsing the Declaration of Commitment
to End Sexual Violence in Conflict, initiated by the
United Kingdom. We will continue to cooperate with
all partners to eliminate sexual violence in conflict and
bring the perpetrators to justice.

Although we do not have a situation of armed
conflict in Thailand, the Security Council resolutions
on women, peace and security have been applied as
domestic guidelines on how to best protect women
in our country. A Subcommittee on Women and the
Promotion of Peace and Security has been established
by the Ministry of Social Development and Human
Security. The Subcommittee is currently drafting
policies and strategies as a basis for our national action
plan, which hopefully will be adopted in the near future.

Enhancing women's access to justice is also one of
Thailand's main priorities. Our Independent National
Rule of Law Commission helps ensure that all State
organs perform their duties based on the rule of law,
without discrimination. The Council may be interested
to know that on 15 November Thailand will host the
Bangkok Dialogue on the Rule of Law: Investing in
the Rule of Law, Justice and Security for the Post-2015
Development Agenda. This meeting is yet another
example of Thailand's commitment to help promote
the rule of law, justice and security. Our decision to
co-sponsor resolution 2122 (2013) and all our efforts
are based on our strong belief that the rule of law at
the national and international levels is an indispensable
foundation for a more peaceful, prosperous and just
world.

Let me once again congratulate the Security
Council, UN Women and other bodies with regard to
women and peace and security and commend them for
their ongoing work. The Council and the international
community can count on Thailand's active engagement
in and contribution to that important issue.

