Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): This morning we
heard from Ms. Rita Lopidia that women in conflict
situations lacked protection, lived in fear, were at risk
of being raped on a daily basis, had almost no access
to justice, were economically disadvantaged and lived
with limited freedoms. I therefore believe that women
have to transition from being victims to establishing
themselves as active agents for peace and security. We,
together with the United Nations system, must help
them to that end.

Hungary aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union.

I would like to concentrate today on the need for
cooperation. The issues that form part of the women
and peace and security agenda are interrelated and
interconnected, and must be addressed as such. For
effective implementation of the women and peace and
security framework at the national and international
levels, Close and comprehensive cooperation is needed
among institutions and Governments. Hungary
welcomes the launching of the women, peace and
security national focal points network, and we hope that
it will effectively assist Member States to implement
the women and peace and security agenda. Moreover,
Hungary has already engaged in an interministerial
cooperation process to review how its national
contribution could be improved and has established
a women and peace and security national focal point
within the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade.

In order to successfully implement a holistic
approach, we need to use all the tools available
within the United Nations system. We need actionable
recommendations on women and peace and security
matters, not only from the Security Council but also
from all treaty bodies. In addition, we should find ways
to use the Universal Periodic Review to accelerate its
further implementation.

Hungary strongly supports the efforts to increase
the meaningful participation of women at all stages and
levels of peace processes. We also encourage Member
States to support women's engagement in local, national
and global decision-making structures, including the
participation of women in electoral processes. We have
heard today strong examples. They should inspire all of
us because they are examples for all of us and through
those examples we could create mechanisms that enable
the participation of women in conflict resolution,
peacebuilding and conflict prevention. In this period,
for example, Hungary financed a gender-based training
workshop in Kenya within the framework of its
international development cooperation strategy.

Women play a key role in areas affected by conflict
in ensuring the livelihoods of their families in the midst
of chaos, and are particularly active in community-
building and peace movements at the grass-roots level.
However, such women-led organizations are noticeably
fewer, or even absent, from formal peace processes.
We hope to see recognized the important role that
civil society and women-led organizations play in
peace processes. Similarly, the increased participation
of women in peacekeeping missions is of the utmost
importance. Their contribution could be particularly
useful in designing and implementing strategies for the
protection of civilians and humanitarian assistance.

The Security Council should also continue
to promote women's participation and gender
mainstreaming as part of making peacebuilding
processes and post-conflict recovery efforts more
inclusive. We do not only want women to be present in
decision-making at the negotiation table because it is
just; we want them to be included because history has

shown so many times that the participation of women is
vital to peacebuilding and the creation of peaceful and
inclusive societies.

