Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Chilean presidency for its
proposal to once again take up the issue of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. We are grateful to the
briefers for their assessments and their very useful
information.

The situation in the area of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict continues to leave room to
be desired. Women and girls, as well as other categories
of civilians, continue to be victims of various forms
of violence. The Council has repeatedly called upon
parties to conflict to fully comply with the provisions
of international humanitarian law with respect to the
protection of civilians. Nevertheless, we continue
to receive alarming reports from victims in Syria,
Afghanistan, South Sudan, Libya and other areas of
armed conflict. Despite the statements of the parties
to armed conflict concerning measures they have
undertaken, there is no end to the indiscriminate and
disproportionate use of force, leading to the death of
thousands of people, a great many of whom are women
and children, who are customarily considered to be the
most vulnerable parts of the populace.

In addressing protection of civilians, we cannot
overlook their situation in Ukraine. We are deeply
concerned by the dramatic deterioration of the situation
in the south-eastern part of that country and the
resumption of shelling of residential neighbourhoods in
cities of the region. We firmly condemn such actions
against civilians and call for careful, objective inquiry
into the tragedies that have occurred. Since early
January, the armed forces of Ukraine have been firing
almost continuously on the major city of Donetsk in
Donbas. Today, there have been further tragic reports
of people killed by artillery fire on the city. There has
also been rocket and artillery fire against Luhansk and
other cities of the region.

The number of victims in the conflict has already
exceeded 5,000 people and continues to grow. As in
other regions ofthe conflict in Ukraine, it is women and
children who suffer the most. Behind the dry numbers
and statistics of the victims among civilians lie their
ruined lives. The growth of these numbers must be
immediately ended. Clearly, this cannot be achieved
militarily but only via an inclusive, direct political
dialogue.

The Ukrainian authorities not only continue to
carry out a de facto blockade of the south-eastern part
of the country, but are essentially ratcheting it up.
Social entitlements are not being paid, and impediments
are being created to the delivery of humanitarian
assistance, medicine and food. The destruction of
infrastructure, hospitals, and water and electricity
sites continues. Restrictions are being tightened on the
movement of people, even in those cases where there
is a need for urgent medical assistance. Last week, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees expressed concern over recent decisions of
the Ukrainian authorities in that regard, noting that
they undermine the possibility for humanitarian agents
to help those in need. Doctors Without Borders and
other non-governmental organizations are sounding the
alarm, warning of the onset of humanitarian disaster.

In all armed conflicts, the belligerents bear primary
responsibility for full compliance with the standards of
international law and for taking all possible measures to
ensure protection of civilians. International institutions
and mechanisms are meant above all to assist national
efforts. The primary reference points here must continue
to be the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
and the basic principles ofUnited Nations peacekeeping:
consent of the host, neutrality and the use of force
only in accordance with the mandate. The efforts of
the international community must be comprehensive
and, above all, aimed at eradicating the root causes of
violence through a settlement of the conflict and the
restoration of law and order.

Peacekeepers plays an important role in protecting
women in armed conflict. Their mandates increasingly
include the functions relevant to that end. Clearly,
gender issues must continue to be taken into account
when forming peacekeeping contingents. This must
be done not generically but by taking into account the
particularities of each specific situation. A similar
approach should be applied with respect to instructions
to United Nations system entities to take into account
gender issues in their activities. It is important to recall
that each one has its own authorities, while ensuring
the protection of women is one component within the
framework of activities to prevent and settle armed
conflict and in post-conflict situations. It is necessary
to avoid redundancies of efforts in this area with bodies
in the United Nations system that have the relevant
remit, such as the General Assembly, the Human Rights
Council, the Commission on the Status of Women and
others.

Protecting the interests of women and children
in armed conflict has been a constant focus of the
Security Council in recent years. Resolution 1325
(2000) and subsequent documents on the issue of
women and peace and security are aimed, inter alia, at
enhancing the capacities for the participation of women
in varying aspects of settlement of armed conflict and
in post-conflict recovery. Resolution 1612 (2005) is
also crucial. It lays out the basis for the protection of
women in armed conflict. Actions to protect civilians,
including women and children, must be based on a clear
Security Council mandate and on full compliance with
it.

We support the activities of the Security Council
and the entire United Nations system aimed at fully
taking into account the needs of women and children
in policies and efforts in the area of peacekeeping
and recovery, including in education, health care and
the broadening of economic rights and opportunities.
Particular attention should be paid to the needs of
women and children refugees and internally displaced
persons and persons with disabilities, not to mention
the situation of elderly women. In general, women
and girls, for varying reasons, are more vulnerable in
armed conflict. It is therefore particularly important to
protect them within the overall activities to protect all
categories of civilians.

