Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): I should
like to start by thanking you, Mr. President, for taking
the initiative to hold this public debate on women and
peace and security. The French delegation appreciates
your presence here with us.

I would like at the outset to recall that France
fully aligns itself with the statement that will be made
shortly by the Portuguese Presidency of the European
Union.

The adoption, seven years ago, of resolution 1325
(2000) was recognition that the participation of women
on an equal footing with men in society and in
decision-making processes and the protection of
women from violence and violations of their rights
have an important impact on conflict prevention, on the
course of conflicts and on post-conflict stabilization
and reconstruction. It is thus not only legitimate but
essential for the Security Council, in the context of its
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, and complementing the actions
pursued by other United Nations organs, to continue to
concern itself with the situation of women in conflict
and post-conflict situations.

A great deal has been done in seven years,
especially in the United Nations system, to implement
resolution 1325 (2000). The Security Council has
integrated - not systematically enough, it must be
recognized - the approach advocated in resolution
1325 (2000) in the mandates of peacekeeping
operations and has tried to convince the parties
themselves to integrate this perspective in peace
processes. The Secretariat and the agencies, funds and
programmes, each in its own area, have increased their
activities to better protect women, ensure that their
specific needs are taken into account in transition
phases and involve them more in decision-making
processes.

My delegation would like, in that connection, to
warmly thank the Special Adviser on Gender Issues
and Advancement of Women, Ms. Rachel Mayanja, the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, and Ms. Joanne Sandler of
the United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM) for their respective contributions to the
implementation of the resolution and for their
statements in today's debate.

The report that the Secretary-General has
submitted on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) (S/2007/567) reflects the profusion of initiatives
to train personnel for peacekeeping operations, to
rethink the organization of refugee camps in order to
take into account women's specific needs, to support
women who are victims of violence and to fight
impunity.

Among those initiatives, I would like to draw
attention to the one carried out by UNICEF and
sponsored by France, which led to the adoption in
February 2007 of the Paris Guidelines on the
protection and reintegration of children associated with
armed forces or armed groups. One of the fundamental
underpinnings of the guidelines is to give more
consideration to the specific needs of girls, including in
all processes involving the demobilization and
reintegration into the community of children who have
been associated, in one way or another, with an armed

group.

Should we thus consider that seven years of
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) have met the
expectations it raised? The answer is no.

When Mrs. Rama Yade, Minister of State for
Foreign Affairs and Human Rights of the French
Republic, came to New York on 1 October to chair,
together with Mrs. Mary Robinson, an Arria-formula
Security Council meeting on the question of women in
conflicts in Africa, it was to awaken the consciences of
Security Council members to that subject. The
powerful testimony at the meeting on the extent of the
suffering of women and girls, in camps for displaced
persons in Darfur and in regions of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, where certain groups engage in
systematic sexual violence accompanied by acts of
barbarism that defy reason, reminded us that on the
ground the real situation for women has changed far
too little since 2000.

The Security Council and all the actors involved
in the implementation of the resolution must therefore
ask themselves a number of questions. How can we
claim that resolution 1325 (2000) is being implemented
when 27,000 cases of sexual violence were recorded in
2006 in South Kivu province alone? Again, those are
just the reported incidents. We can assume that the
reality was far worse. How could such a situation
develop? What new means can be used to put an end to
that situation - and all situations in which women are
victims of systematic violence? How do we explain the
fact that in spite of specific references in certain
Council resolutions and statements, many peace
processes still take place without the involvement of
women and without taking into account their concerns
and contributions?

In order to allow the Council to respond to those
among other questions and to develop new approaches
to ensure a more effective implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), especially with regard to protection,
France had been in favour of the speedy preparation of
a report of the Secretary-General on this specific issue.
We regret that such a basic proposal was not supported
by all Security Council members. We hope
nevertheless that the mechanism put in place to ensure
that the Council has more detailed information on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) with respect
to all the situations on its agenda, and that it can
engage in dialogue on this subject with the special
representatives of the Secretary-General. We hope that
that mechanism will make it possible for those
questions to be addressed more effectively and will
lead to concrete improvements in the situation on the
ground.

Before concluding, I wish to refer to a few areas
on which my delegation believes we need to focus our
efforts in post-conflict phases. The first is the
protection of women and the rehabilitation of victims,
especially victims of sexual violence. How can lasting
peace be restored when women who have already been
victims of violence in the conflict phase are then
ostracized within their communities? It is important,
inter alia, that disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes take fully into account the
fate of women who have been associated, most
frequently by force, with groups of combatants.

The second relates to the administration of
justice. How can women speak out and take part in
civic life if they have to remain in contact with their
former tormentors and to live in fear? How can we ask
them to seek justice if that is synonymous with further
humiliation, denial and, potentially, reprisal? The fight
against impunity and the adoption of a gender-specific
approach by the judicial system are indispensable.

The third area is the participation of women in
decision-making processes. Access by women to
elective office is an important element; one can only
welcome in that regard the examples of Rwanda,
Burundi and Liberia. But we must also ensure that
women, especially through their organizations, are
involved in all administrative processes.

Fourthly and finally, the establishment of
institutions committed to parity is necessary. The phase
of building institutions offers a unique opportunity for
countries emerging from conflict to establish
institutions in accordance with the most advanced legal
standards. Instruments such as the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women must be a point of reference for all actors
involved in reconstruction.

In conclusion, I wish only to say that we consider
the ongoing participation of civil society to be
extremely important in our collective efforts on this
subject. In that connection, my delegation listened with
great attention to the speech by Ms. Gina Torry,
Coordinator of the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security. My delegation thanks her for her
contribution, which will continue to spur and inspire
our actions in the Security Council towards the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

