Mr. Hassan (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): First of all,
I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We
would like to thank you for organizing this debate on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. We would
also like to thank you for the concept note (S/2015/32, annex), which has made it possible to structure the
debate on this very important topic.

You recalled rightly that 11 years ago the
Secretary-General submitted his first report on the
issue of the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
In fact, the Security Council adopted its first resolution
on that topic 15 years ago, in 1999. We continue to
hope that the successive discussions of the Security
Council on the topic will lead to the development
of a holistic methodology and an objective strategy
for the protection of civilians in armed conflict by
avoiding the twin traps of politicizing the notion
of the protection of civilians and selectivity in its
implementation. We endorse the concept note's content,
as we know that civilians continue to be the majority of
victims in armed conflict. However, those civilians are
generally targeted by insurgency movements who take
up weapons against women and children in order to
provoke the international community against national
Governments and to intervene in the conflict.

That is why we would like the message sent by
the Council to those movements to be entirely clear.
I would like to return to the statement made by the
representative of the United States with regard to
the situation in Darfur. Let us recall the facts. The
allegations raised were based on rumours spread by
Radio Banga, a radio station led by the insurgents. So it
is an outlet representing the views of those insurgents.
The United Nations conducted a field visit. A report
was drawn up rejecting those allegations. However,
we see that even today that some continue to recall
those allegations as though they were facts. It was a
radio station controlled by militias. It is not reliable,
especially when dealing with such serious issues. The
mission recalled, as Ijust said, that those allegations
were notjustified.

I would also note that many conflicts considered
by the Council claim hundreds of thousands of victims,
and the Council continues to not take any measures to
deal with them. That is why I do not think we should
be speaking of Darfur in discussing the issue of armed
conflict. There is a great deal of misinformation, even
among the parties to the conflict.

When we speak of the protection of civilians, I
think we should prioritize peace processes and political
settlements by forcing the armed movements to take
part in the political process and peaceful negotiations
in order to express their demands rather than resorting
to military action and seeking to make civilian victims.
I further recall that experience has shown that in
many countries where there is no peace to be kept on
the ground, peacekeeping operations are not able to
protect civilians and fulfil their mandate. What truly
protects civilians is peace for the entire population
and the subsequent implementation of development,
reconstruction, reintegration and disarmament
programmes that then enhance programmes for the
reintegration of returning displaced persons.

We have been speaking with the Council since
last August regarding the withdrawal strategy of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur. I recall that we have not yet received the third
United Nations delegation. Intense negotiations are
under way between the Government of the Sudan, the
African Union and the United Nations with regard
to that peacekeeping operation. We ask the Council
to support our withdrawal strategy, which would be
implemented jointly by the Government of the Sudan,
the African Union and the United Nations.

The principle of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict is a noble idea. However, we would like
to express our concern at seeing this concept used for
political ends, in particular in terms of promoting the
concept of the responsibility to protect. We would like to
recall that the principle of the responsibility to protect,
while it is part of the final outcome document of the
2005 World Summit (resolution 60/1), continues to have
different interpretations among Member States because
it is in contradiction with the fundamental principle of
the Charter of the United Nations concerning respect
for the sovereignty of Member States, their legitimacy
and their full responsibility for the protection of their
citizens. I recall that the right of civilians to protection
in armed conflict is just one among a number of rights
and obligations highlighted by the World Summit
Outcome, including the right to development, the fight
against poverty and the prevention of conflicts by
dealing with their root causes.

