Mr. anald (Norway): Norway welcomes the
Secretary-General's report including the system-wide
action plan. The document serves as a welcome follow-
up of the outcome of the 2005 world summit.

With the adoption of Security Council resolution
1325 (2000), the Council affirmed its commitment to
the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action. Much
has been achieved with regard to gender
mainstreaming. However, when it comes to
peacekeeping and post-conflict reconstruction and
reconciliation, much remains to be done to honour the
commitments made. There has not been a great
increase in women's participation in conflict
resolution, and the protection of women living in
situations of armed conflict is still a great challenge.

Despite the substantial efforts made by the United
Nations following the reports of sexual abuse and
exploitation by personnel in the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) last year, that continues to be a
problem. Sexual abuse and exploitation of civilians by
peacekeepers is unacceptable. It undermines the
credibility of the United Nations and erodes the moral
stature of the Organization. The troop-contributing
countries have a clear responsibility for the behaviour
of their troops and must ensure that codes of conduct
are enforced. Impunity for serious acts of violence
must end. Member States should make every effort to
contribute to systematic pre-deployment gender
training for military and police. We must help to
empower local women and assist women's networks
and organizations to conduct public information
campaigns to combat the culture of abuse and silence.

We cannot put the entire responsibility on the
troop-contributing countries. The full backing of the
United Nations Organization, including the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO), is needed to
reverse the negative trend. Norway has offered to
finance a study for the DPKO on lessons learned and
best practices regarding how effective implementation
of a gender perspective can contribute to the success of
a peace mission.

More importance should be attached to the
gender advisers. Only 10 missions have a full-time
gender advisory position, while what is needed is
teams of gender specialists to support the gender
advisers in dealing with the huge requirements and
scope of programmes undertaken as part of the
mission. Gender awareness must be recognised as the
basis for the successful design and implementation of
all post-conflict work. Only ten missions have a full-
time gender advisory position, while what is needed
are teams of gender specialists to support the gender
advisers in dealing with the huge requirements and the
scope of programmes undertaken as part of the
mission. Gender awareness must be recognized as the
basis for the successful design and implementation of
all post-conflict work.

To ensure that a gender perspective is
systematically integrated in policies and
recommendations to the Peacebuilding Commission,
Norway would support the inclusion of a senior gender
adviser in the proposed Peacebuilding Support Office.

It is particularly important to improve the gender
balance in peace missions. Norway supports the
Swedish proposal that the observer categories
participating in United Nations peace missions should
be expanded to include civilian observers. This would
broaden the recruitment base and make a better gender
balance in United Nations peace missions more
achievable. The experience from mixed military and
civilian Provincial Reconstruction Teams in the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) can
provide valuable input to the discussion on the
inclusion of civilian observers in United Nations peace
missions.

Norway welcomes the action plans on gender
mainstreaming and the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000) from each of the
peacekeeping missions. It is crucial that the United
Nations itself be a model for securing fair and balanced
representation between the sexes at all levels. The
under-representation of women in the United Nations
Secretariat, in particular at the senior level, is,
therefore, a serious cause for concern. Also important
is the notion that incorporating a gender perspective
into peacekeeping operations means ensuring that sex-
disaggregated data are included in the Secretary-
General's reports to the Security Council. This is
necessary in order to understand the reality
experienced in the field by women, men, girls and
boys.

Empowering women locally is an important part
of building lasting peace and laying the foundations for
development. Women are seriously under-represented
in negotiations, in constitutional commissions and in
political forums. Obviously, this is an important
challenge for the Peacebuilding Commission.

Enhancing political participation should be of
highest priority. The United Nations must be at the
forefront in promoting women's participation in
electoral processes. While there are no international
standards on quotas or targets for gender
representation, there is clear evidence that where
quotas are applied, either voluntarily or by law, they
are an effective way of securing women's
representation. The trend seems to be that many
countries receiving electoral assistance decide on their
own to apply quotas for the representation of women.
Norway is confident that the United Nations has the
necessary competence to assist countries in this
respect.

