Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, my country regrets that
the Security Council has been unable to denounce
the terrorist bombing in Damascus on Saturday. The
Council must assume its responsibilities and condemn
the two terrorist attacks that took place in Damascus
today. The Council's work is hampered by several of its
Western members. It continues to convey the message
that there are two types of terrorism - moderate
and extremist.

Today's meeting is an important one for my country,
Syria. Today's debate should be a genuine opportunity
for us to highlight trafficking in persons as one of the
most dangerous threats to humankind. It is linked to the
spread of terrorism, which exploits the most vulnerable
in communities, in particular women and children
who are victimized and fall into the trap of slavery,
sexual exploitation, forced labour and trafficking in
human organs.

Transnational organized criminal networks continue
to exploit hundreds of thousands of immigrants and
refugees who have left their homes. That is supported by
a number of Governments, particularly the Government
of Turkey, which continues to exploit internally displaced
persons and refugees as tools for political blackmail
and pressure. Before the current nefarious terrorist
war, my country, Syria, had achieved much progress in
the field of combating human trafficking. We became
a party to many international protocols, including the
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking
in Persons, Especially Women and Children, and the
Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land,
Sea and Air. We also promulgated our own laws, which
adhere to international standards.

However, the rights of hundreds of thousands of
Syrians are being violated in areas under the control
of armed terrorist groups, particularly Da'esh and the
Al-Nusra Front. The Governments of some Member
States continue to fund, arm and support those groups.
They overlook the fact that those groups adhere to a
takfiri Wahhabi ideology and they have a religious
doctrine that calls for killing others. I would like to
point to the recent report of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in
Conflict (S/2016/36l), which has documented the
crimes of the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant in
the fields of sexual exploitation and trafficking in
persons. But the recommendations of the report have
not been implemented.
Syrians in the areas under the control of armed
terrorist groups are enslaved. Women are being
abducted and are forced to marry terrorists, especially
foreign terrorist fighters. Those terrorist groups have
issued fatwas that allow for the sexual exploitation of
women. Children are abducted and recruited before
the eyes of their parents, and they become terrorists
and suicide bombers. Things are not better in the
refugee camps. Hundreds of thousands of Syrians live
in those camps without safety and security, and the
neighbouring countries that have opened those camps
have not lived up to their responsibility. They are not
providing a safe haven for those citizens of Syria who
have escaped from the armed terrorist groups and who
now are victims of human-trafficking networks.

United Nations reports, particularly the reports of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the International Organization for
Migration, have pointed out that there is a continued rise
in the activities of transnational organized criminals
within those camps involving human trafficking, rape,
the forced marriages of women and minors and organ-
trafficking networks that exploit children.

Ending the phenomenon of human trafficking, one
of the most heinous crimes against humanity, requires
a collective international stance and commitment to
dealing with the root causes of the phenomenon through
the implementation of Security Council resolutions,
especially resolution 2331 (2016), and the provision ofan
enabling environment, both socially and economically,
that would lead to the achievement of sustainable
development for all peoples without exception.

The international community, particularly the
United Nations, should shoulder its ethical and legal
responsibility to find a solution for Syria by taking
serious steps to implement the Security Council
resolutions on terrorism. The Governments of some
countries must end all support provided to armed
terrorist groups. They should close their borders to
mercenaries and terrorists, and we should seek an
inter-Syrian solution led by Syrians without foreign
intervention. We should also put an end to the unilateral
coercive economic measures that have been imposed
by a number of States against my country, Syria. We
should create human, economic, social conditions that
would enable Syrians to return to their country.

