Ms. Rice (United States of America): Let me also
thank the Secretary-General and Ambassador Wittig for
their leadership, as well as the Chairs of the
Peacebuilding Commission's country-specific
configurations for all they do to advance the
Commission's work both in the field and in New York.
The United States continues to strongly support the
Peacebuilding Commission's work, since promoting
sustainable peace lies at the heart of the United Nations
mission.

Today let me underscore four key points. First,
former Secretary-General Annan used to speak of the
"missing middle" between peacekeeping and
sustainable development. The Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) was created five years ago as an
important first step towards filling that gap. Supporting
sustainable peace requires linking many actors
together. Progress has sometimes been slower than we
would have hoped, but the Commission today is
delivering on the commitment it has made to the
countries on its agenda. Indeed, the addition of Liberia
to the PBC's agenda demonstrates growing faith in this
important new institution. And the United States
decision to take on a leading role in the PBC's recent
mission to Liberia is a signal of our commitment to
Liberia's recovery, as well as to the PBC's ongoing
development.

Much of the PBC's success will be judged by its
work in country-specific situations. And we are
therefore pleased that more countries are choosing to
become part of its agenda. This is a testament to its
potential for generating greater coherence among
donors and spurring frank dialogue on the underlying
causes of instability that so often mean tragic relapses
into conflict.

The Peacebuilding Commission is gaining
strength as an institution. It continues to play an
important role by bringing additional attention and
resources to countries emerging from conflict and
proposing strategies to build sustainable peace in the
wake of bitter conflict. But to truly serve as the leading
actor on peacebuilding, the Commission must do more
to link ambitions in New York with programmes in the
field. It must also coordinate better with international
institutions running programmes and assessing needs in
post-conflict countries.
The PBC should also encourage a range of actors
including United Nations funds and programmes,

traditional and non-traditional donors, the Bretton
Woods institutions and the peacebuilding community
of civil society, non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) and academia to support coherence in the field
through more inclusive dialogue, greater innovation,
stronger best practices and better coordination,
resource delivery and capacity-building.

Secondly, the success of United Nations efforts is
highly dependent on the experience and capabilities of
its field personnel. Sometimes the sacrifice of a
battalion of soldiers can be wasted, if it is not
accompanied and succeeded by the timely advice and
engagement of seasoned civilian peacebuilding experts.
But often these key civilian personnel are hard to find,
or take too long to recruit and deploy. We therefore
appreciate the Secretary-General's decision to launch a
high-level review of international civilian
peacebuilding capacities and look forward to its results
early in 2011.

Thirdly, if United Nations efforts to build peace
are to be truly sustainable, they must incorporate
women throughout the process. Where women's roles
are ignored, peacebuilding is more likely to fail.
Gender is not just a box to be checked. It is a key
ingredient in the planning phase, throughout
implementation and in the evaluation of plans.

The seven-part action plan laid out by the
Secretary-General pushes this process forward and
commits to the more systematic and substantive
engagement of women in peacemaking and planning
processes in the wake of armed conflict. We endorse
that commitment strongly, and we recognize the need
for adequate funding to support women's roles in
peacebuilding. But we must also remember that an
action plan means little, unless and until it is
implemented. The United Nations must therefore
commit itself to monitor, evaluate and adapt the
proposed action plan, lest we lose the very impact that
we seek.

Finally, each organ of the United Nations,
including every major fund and programme, should
embrace peacebuilding's cross-cutting nature. Efforts
to build sustainable peace can start with the arrival of
United Nations peacekeepers, aid workers or
diplomats, and they can continue through the longer-
term development efforts. But peacebuilding success
ultimately depends on leadership from the country
emerging from conflict itself. And the United Nations
must make it a top priority to build the capacities of
local leaders and communities.

With the right mandate, leadership and resources,
the United Nations can and should play an
indispensable role in helping post-conflict societies
find their footing on the path to lasting peace and
prosperity. So we must work together to develop the
critical peacebuilding capacities needed to fulfil the
Council's mandate to advance international peace and
security and to improve the prospects for lasting
progress in countries emerging from conflict and
chaos.

The United States is pleased as well to support
the draft presidential statement to be issued by the
Council today.

