Mr. Gutierrez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I wish
to thank you, Sir, for convening this debate and for the
opportunity it provides to continue to contribute to the
objective of achieving an Organization that is better
prepared to meet its primary responsibility of
maintaining international peace. My delegation
endorses what was said by Mr. Peter Wittig, Permanent
Representative of Germany and Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), of which Peru is
honoured to be a member. Likewise, my delegation
endorses the statement to be made by Mr. Abulkalam
Abdul Momen, Permanent Representative of
Bangladesh, on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Allow me to focus now on a few points. The
Secretary-General's plan of action and his subsequent
reports give us a clear guide as to where we should
direct our efforts in order to achieve sustainable peace
in a more prompt and efficient manner. We are aware
that we must enhance our efforts and use our available
resources more efficiently, which calls for better
planning and response capacity.

Therefore, in each case we must ascertain
priorities and needs for peacebuilding in the five
priority areas set out by the Secretary-General, and act
upon them in parallel. Those areas are basic safety and
security, including justice and respect for the rule of
law; confidence in the political process so as to restore
essential governmental functions and institutions;
support for the provision of basic services; support for
the functioning of public administration; and support
for economic revitalization. That analysis must be
undertaken with the direct and early involvement of
national actors along with the Peacebuilding
Commission. As the Secretary-General has stated in his
reports, peacebuilding is first and foremost a national
responsibility and a process of national empowerment,
and the response of the international community must
be channelled through a strategic, coordinated and
integrated approach, on the basis of national priorities.

That highlights two factors: the development or
strengthening of national capacity and the preventive
dimension. It is essential that from the initial
deployment of a United Nations mission in a post-
conflict situation, national capacity be developed or
strengthened. In this regard, it is important to
remember that strengthening or developing national
capacity - as is true of international civilian capacity -
should follow the need-driven approach, as was
pointed out by Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, Chair of the
Secretary-General's Senior Advisory Group for the
Review of International Civilian Capacities, when it
met last week with the PBC.

As the co-facilitators noted in their report on the
review of the PBC (S/2010/393, annex), the national
empowerment process is closely linked to the
horizontal and multidisciplinary reinforcement of the
national capacity for full involvement in peacebuilding
efforts.

The empowerment of women and the gender
perspective are a key element in generating capacity
and in the peacebuilding process, as the report of the
Secretary-General notes. It is no coincidence that, as
the Secretary-General points out, women's post-
conflict needs resemble the five recurring priorities
that we have just mentioned. An analysis of women's
needs and the strengthening of their overall
participation in peacebuilding processes will also
facilitate clearer awareness of the causes of the
conflict, which is significant in planning the response
strategy, mobilizing resources and identifying measures
to enhance the confidence of the local people to the
peace process and their commitment to it.

Hence, national capacity is important not only in
order to ensure the transition towards peace, but also as
a measure to prevent the recurrence of conflict. In that
context, particular attention should also be paid to
creating jobs and training the unemployed or under-
employed young people, who constitute a high risk
factor for disrupting the peace process.

We must also mention the links that exist between
the Millennium Development Goals and peacebuilding
processes, particularly with regard to the role of
women in peace processes and in priority areas. That is
because, as previously stated in this Chamber, progress
in implementing the Development Goals clearly
contributes to, and lays the basis for, lasting and
comprehensive peace, as well as avoiding resumption
of conflict.

In any peacebuilding process, I would like to
reiterate the fundamental role of the PBC in drafting
comprehensive regional strategies, including
prevention strategies. The PBC must retain its role as
an advisory and catalyzing body within the system, a
body that ensures the coherence, flexibility and
effectiveness of the work of the United Nations in
peacebuilding processes and in the implementation of
the Secretary-General's plan of action.

Finally, I would like to state that my country very
strongly supports the draft presidential statement that
you, Sir, intend to issue on this subject as a statement
of the Security Council.

