Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I would like to say that I am pleased that
the President has taken the initiative to hold this public
debate on the issue of sexual abuse and exploitation on
the part of peacekeeping forces.

I should first like to reaffirm my country's full
support for the steps taken by the Secretary-General to
combat those abuses. Those efforts will determine the
credibility of the Organization and of the values it
enshrines. I also welcome the resolve I noted from the
statement made by Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, which, I
am pleased to say, illustrates the extent to which his
Department is committed to combating sexual abuse
and exploitation.

I also wish in particular to thank Prince Zeid for
his statement, as well as to take this opportunity to pay
tribute to him for his efforts.

In a report he issued almost one year ago, he
proposed a comprehensive strategy aiming at the
elimination of sexual abuse and exploitation in United
Nations peacekeeping operations. That report provided
us with a blueprint to that end and remains our road
map. We must follow the course of action it sets out if
we wish to end such reprehensible acts that fail to meet
the basic duty to provide assistance that every member
of a peacekeeping operation has towards the local
populations they have been set to protect. Such a
policy is crucial to ensuring the full implementation of
the goals of the United Nations and, as I have said, to
guaranteeing that its values are upheld.

The Security Council has adopted several
important resolutions regarding children in armed
conflict, women and peace and security and the
protection of civilians. The revelation of the existence
of sexual exploitation and abuse in 2004 on the part of
a significant number of peacekeepers was a serious
blow to the Council's efforts and to how peacekeeping
missions are perceived. Such behaviour must be
resolutely punished. Prince Zeid's report was the first
step in establishing a zero-tolerance policy with regard
to such actions. For its part, France fully supports a
zero-tolerance policy, which we are seeking to put in
place at the national level.

It seems to us that we have two goals in
combating sexual abuse and exploitation. The first is to
protect those who have been the victims of sexual
abuse on the part of peacekeepers, while recognizing
the responsibility of the United Nations for the
behaviour of peacekeepers. Secondly, we should
strengthen the administrative disciplinary measures
taken by the Organization, as well as judicial
prosecution by States against those responsible.

In their briefings, both speakers were quite
correct to state that peacekeeping operations are
primarily comprised of dedicated, competent and
conscientious men and women, and that, while the
shortcomings of some should not cast a shadow on
peacekeeping missions in general, those shortcomings
must nevertheless be punished and a policy of
prevention put in place.

Much has been done since the publication of
Prince Zeid's report. As both speakers have pointed
out, much work remains to be done. We believe that the
strategy to be developed must be based on several
priorities. First, we must concentrate our efforts on the
most serious cases of sexual abuse, namely, those
involving paedophilia, rape, violence and human
trafficking. Such an approach may entail making a
more specific distinction between the various
categories of offences.

A second priority should be to expand protection
and assistance for those who file complaints. For
example, we may wish explicitly to include women in
teams investigating complaints. In terms of the
assistance to be provided, aid could predominantly take
the form of care, rather than financial assistance.

Regarding the financing of such measures, the
idea of a voluntary trust fund for victims should be
explored.

Finally, with respect to the institution of
mechanisms of inquiry - an idea that my delegation
fully supports - we must ensure that we articulate and
combine effectively procedures for an administrative
inquiry, which are up to the Organization, and judicial
procedures, which of necessity fall within the purview
of States.
In conclusion, I should like to go back to
something that Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno said earlier.
If I understood him correctly, he said - and, in any
case, this is my firm belief also - that in this matter
we require determination on the part of the Secretariat;
that there can be no respite in the process; and that
there must be a complete commitment on the part of
Member States. Those requirements are vital, because
we have a collective moral duty to the victims; to
safeguard the image of the Organization; and to ensure
the maintenance of international peace and security,
which is at the core of our Organization's mission and
is the major task facing the Council.

