Mr. Le Roy (spoke in French): Resolution 1325
(2000) has fundamentally changed the conduct of
peacekeeping operations over the past 10 years. As we
implemented a wide range of multidimensional
mandates to stabilize and support peaceful transitions
in every region of the globe, from Afghanistan to
Liberia to Timor-Leste, that landmark resolution
guided us in our efforts to support women's
participation in peace processes and to improve the
protection of women in post-conflict situations. It
placed women's participation at the centre of all efforts
for an inclusive and lasting peace.

Ten years on, we have made some progress, but
not as much as we would have wanted. We still face
immense challenges.

A few months ago, the Departments of
Peacekeeping Operations and of Field Support -
DPKO and DFS - launched a joint study to review

with our partners our implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) in post-conflict situations, the impact of
our efforts to date and the implications for our
workplan. That exercise has confirmed a certain
number of important lessons. Allow me to underscore
some of them here.

In Afghanistan, Darfur and Timor-Leste, we have
seen to what extent the leaders of our peacekeeping
operations can use their good offices to facilitate
women's participation in political processes. The
experience in the Democratic Republic of Congo
clearly shows that forming partnerships with women in
post-conflict situations greatly enhances our
understanding of the operational environment. It
should, therefore, enable us to further increase our
ability to protect women and children from sexual
violence in those countries, which is clearly vital
despite the very difficult circumstances of which we
are all aware.

We have seen in Liberia and Haiti how effective
the links of female peacekeepers with the local
population have been, particularly in internally
displaced persons camps, as in Haiti, for example.
Besides their professional qualities, those women
model the principle of gender equality.

With regard to police personnel, beyond the
presence of a woman - who is seated behind me - at
the head of our entire police force around the world, we
have set up a plan to enable us to achieve a 20 per cent
proportion of our worldwide police personnel being
female by 2014. As for our 15 peacekeeping missions,
three are now led by women, while none were a few
years ago. That is a proportion of 20 per cent - 20 per
cent of our peacekeeping operations are led by women.

Moreover, our multidimensional operations have
greatly benefited from the recruitment of gender
advisers in each of our missions. Those advisers have
provided valuable technical expertise in the Sudan, on
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration; in
Chad, on prison reform; in Burundi, on election
support; and in Afghanistan, on constitutional reform.
That helped gain significant percentages of female
representation in the parliaments, as Ms. Bachelet said,
in particular, 25 per cent in Afghanistan and more than
30 per cent in Burundi.

The development of manuals and training tools
for the Blue Helmets has promoted gender
mainstreaming in peacekeeping missions and in
predeployment planning and training of troops and
police.

Naturally, we know that peacekeeping missions
must cooperate closely with other United Nations
partners present in the country in order to deliver
coherent support that can be sustained when our
missions withdraw. Our common response should, of
course, demonstrate our unwavering commitment to
the rights of women.

(spoke in English)

In addition to those lessons, we can also cite a
number of developments on the broader global and
peacekeeping agenda in recent years that will influence
our future strategy.

In the first instance, there are many more actors
engaged in the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) at the field level today than was the case 10 years
ago. Besides the gender expertise available within
peacekeeping missions, many of our United Nations
partner entities are also deploying gender experts to
post-conflict countries. That requires that we strengthen
the coordination of our efforts on the ground. Too often,
actual strength on the ground to coordinate and
implement is weak.

The protection of civilians has assumed central
priority in the work of peacekeeping today. We have
initiated a broad policy and operational reform effort,
including training, guidance and planning. Together
with the Office of the Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Wallstrom, and other United
Nations partners, we are advancing a broad protection
agenda.

Drawing on lessons and emerging trends, I would
like to advance five key elements of our future
strategy.

First, the necessary financing must be in place to
support implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) 4
which has not always been the case.

Secondly, our focus in future must be on building
the capacities of women to build and sustain peace in
their own countries. We must invest more in
facilitating women's participation in political processes
and in newly restructured security sector institutions.
We must also work closely with local women to
identify and implement protection strategies. That
requires us to draw on local women's perspectives and
contributions in the planning and drawdown phases of
peacekeeping missions to ensure sustainable outcomes.

Thirdly, we will continue to engage closely with
troop- and police-contributing countries to help them
prepare military and police personnel with the
knowledge, skills, expertise and profile to effectively
implement resolution 1325 (2000). To ensure that
women are included among civilian peacekeepers, we
will also press forward with efforts to improve
conditions in the field and to realize the goal of
harmonized conditions of service across the common
system.

Fourthly, during the early post-conflict phases,
when peacekeeping missions have the largest presence
and resources on the ground, we will continue to
provide the leadership and coordination of an
integrated United Nations response. Like everyone
here, I am sure, we welcome the establishment of
UNWomen and the appointment of Under-Secretary-
General Bachelet, and we look forward to the promise
of strengthened field coordination to ensure that we
deliver as one.

Fifthly, we will actively support the strengthening
of accountability and monitoring mechanisms for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). The recently
developed standardized indicators are a welcome
development. The specific indicators related to
peacekeeping are, in fact, part of our existing reporting
templates and guidelines.

Our greatest indicator of success must remain,
however, the extent to which our collective energies
contribute to building a sustainable, nationally owned
platform from which local women, working with men,
can themselves define, shape and influence the course
of peace in their countries.

