The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bangladesh, Canada, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Egypt, El Salvador, Finland, Germany, Guatemala,
Guinea, Honduras, Iceland, Israel, Japan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Liechtenstein, Malawi, Mexico, Myanmar, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway,
Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Spain, the Sudan,
Sweden, the United Arab Emirates, Viet Nam and
Zambia, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, the Security Council has extended
invitations under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations;
Ms. Rachel Mayanja, Special Adviser to the Secretary-
General on Gender Issues and Advancement of
Women; and Ms. Joanne Sandler, Ad Interim Executive
2
Director of the United Nations Development Fund for
Women.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Ms. Gina Torry, Coordinator of the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security.

It is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2007/567, containing the report of the
Secretary-General on women and peace and security.

I should also like to draw attention to document
S/2007/598, which contains a letter dated 8 October
2007 from the Permanent Representative of Ghana,
transmitting a concept paper on the subject of this
meeting; and document S/2007/607, which contains a
letter dated 17 October 2007 from the Permanent
Representative of South Africa, transmitting the Report
on the Africa Regional Meeting on Gender Justice.

I welcome the participation of the Secretary-
General, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, at this
meeting and invite him to take the floor.


