Mr. Bliss (Australia): Australia welcomes the
convening of this open debate on women and peace
and security. We commend Guatemala and India for
bringing the Council's focus to the particular role
played by women's civil society organizations. We
thank Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson, the Under-
Secretary-General and Executive Director of UN-
Women, Ms. Bachelet, the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Ladsous, and the
representative of the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security, Ms. Diop, for their briefings to
the Council, and reiterate our support for continued
briefings on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). Australia looks forward to working with others
to move the women and peace and security agenda
forward during our term on the Council.

We join other States in condemning the ongoing
high incidence of sexual violence in conflicts, and
support all efforts to prevent such crimes and to put an
end to impunity for perpetrators of such crimes. That
must be a priority for the Security Council and other
parts of the United Nations system.

There is a clear consensus that the early involvement
of women in conflict prevention, conflict resolution and
peacebuilding promotes lasting peace and helps in the
realization of gender equality. The fact that the Council
has increasingly recognized that reality as it discharges
its functions is to be welcomed.

As the Secretary-General's report (S/2012/732)
makes clear, women's organizations play an
indispensable role in enabling women to prevent
conflict and to promote and build peace. But women's
organizations can only operate effectively in safety
and with support. In that regard, Australia strongly
supports the Secretary-General's call for the protection
of women's human rights defenders during conflict
situations, given their specific vulnerability.

Australia commends the increasing inclusion of
references in United Nations mission mandates to the
promotion of the rights, protection and empowerment
of women. The gender awareness and responsiveness
of United Nations personnel is critical, and Australia is
pleased to be supporting these efforts through provision
of training, a best practice toolkit for United Nations
peacekeepers on conflict-related sexual violence and,
in partnership with UN-Women, the development of a
documentary and toolkit for peacekeepers, civilians and
humanitarian personnel on women, peace and security.

In addition, such issues must not be overlooked
in mission drawdowns and during transitions from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding. Australia supports the
Secretary-General's calls for the embedding of sector-
specific gender experts, including in post-conflict
recovery programmes, in order to ensure that the rights
of women and girls are protected.

The importance of the United Nations leading by
example in the area of gender equality is essential.
Australia is concerned at the significant decrease over
the past 12 months in the share of women holding
senior positions in United Nations peacekeeping,
political and peacebuilding missions. We support the
Secretary-General's call for a review of this situation,
in consultation with UN-Women.

Women's participation in post-conflict
peacebuilding is also crucial. The international
community must work to facilitate women's full and
equal political participation in post-conflict election
processes, including by addressing the structural
impediments that discourage women's candidacies.
Ensuring women's safety during electoral processes
and addressing their particular socioeconomic
disadvantages are key factors in facilitating women's
participation in formal decision-making roles.

In our region, Australia was pleased to announce
in August our partnership with members of the Pacific
Islands Forum on a new 10-year Pacific women's
initiative. It aims at redressing the dramatic under-
representation ofwomen in decision-making settings, by
bringing Governments and civil society groups together
to develop policy and to help change perceptions about
women's and men's roles in communities.

In March, Australia launched its National Action
Plan on Women, Peace and Security. Women's
organizations played a pivotal role in shaping the
Plan, and we consider their ongoing role in monitoring
compliance to be central to the Plan's success. We
encourage all States who have not implemented such
plans to do so, and to engage women's organizations in
developing, implementing and evaluating these plans.
In recognition of the growing role of regional security
organizations to international peace and security
efforts, we urge them also to introduce strategies on
implementing resolution 1325 (2000).

Australia supports the United Nations efforts to
facilitate the sharing of best practices between States
and women's organizations. We also recognize the
leadership of UN-Women in coordinating global efforts
to promote and implement resolution 1325 (2000).

Our actions to pursue the women, peace and
security agenda do not occur in a vacuum. Work to
promote the participation of women and girls in peace
and security processes needs to take place within the
broader context of work to promote gender equality
and women's empowerment. The message is simple.
Women and girls need to be actively involved in
decision-making, not only to ensure that their human
rights are adequately protected, but to prevent the
outbreak of further conflict and to ensure that peace
endures.

