Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First of all, we would like to welcome you,
Madam, in presiding over this briefing of the Security
Council, and to thank you for organizing it. We listened
with interest to the briefers, Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed and Ms. Bineta Diop, African Union
Special Envoy on Women, Peace and Security, on their
recent visit to South Sudan, Chad and the Niger, with a
focus on women's participation in peace, security and
sustainable development processes.

More than 17 years after the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), the role of women in preventing and
resolving armed conflicts and in post-conflict
reconstruction has been expanded. However, the state
of affairs with regard to the protection of women
during armed conflicts is unfortunately very different,
including in this part of Africa, where the level of
threats to security and stability is unprecedentedly
high. We have already expressed our concern about the
fact that the terrorist groups that are entrenched in the
Sahel are intensifying their criminal activity and trying
to expand its geographic reach. Women continue to be
the victims of violence, and the atrocities and excesses
inflicted on them by terrorist groups are horrifying.
In that regard, our hopes rest on the initiative of the
countries of the Group of Five for the Sahel to create
a Joint Force to fight terrorism and organized crime.
It will be crucial to continue to coordinate the efforts
to combat extremism in the Sahel-Saharan region. We
believe that it is essential to work to effectively counter
the spread of extremist ideology, find practical solutions
to the social and economic problems of the countries of
the region and strengthen their State institutions. The
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel has a
key role to play in resolving these issues.

We firmly believe in the positive role of women's
participation in various aspects of the resolution of
armed conflicts and post-conflict restoration. In our
view, women's direct involvement in the prevention of
armed conflict and in post-conflict reconstruction is
an important prerequisite for ending violence against
them. The Security Council's annual debates on women
and peace and security enable us to monitor the overall
progress in improving the protection of women in
situations of armed conflict and ensuring their full
and effective participation in efforts to prevent and
resolve such situations. However, when we are dealing
with concrete situations, it is important to take their
specifics into account.

We believe that it is national Governments that
should play the primary role in protecting women at
every stage of an armed conflict, while the measures
taken by United Nations bodies and civil society should
be aimed at supporting and supplementing the efforts of
States. In particular, the Security Council can make the
most effective use of its toolkit and resources in matters
directly related to the establishment and maintenance
of international peace and security. With regard to
such important topics as ensuring gender equality and
expanding women's rights and potential, the specialized
United Nations entities and mechanisms continue their
successful and systematic work, which Russia is ready
to continue to assist in every way.

