Mr. Cevik (Turkey): I would like to thank Executive
Director Mlambo-Ngucka, Assistant Secretary-
General Mulet and Special Rapporteur Beyani for their
insightful briefings. I also thank Ms. Suaad Allami
from the Sadr City Women's Centre and Legal Clinic
for her remarks.

As the fifteenth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000) draws closer, we welcome the continuing
attention paid to the women and peace and security
agenda in the Security Council and the Council's
spotlight on the issue of displacement and its effects
on vulnerable groups. As the number of people who
have been forcefully displaced now exceeds the number
reached during the Second World War, which led us to
establish this Organization, we are compelled to take
urgent action to address the needs of refugees and
internally displaced persons (IDPs), especially women
and girls.

Women and girls continue to be specifically targeted
in conflicts. They are also vulnerable in post-conflict
situations, mostly during contested political processes,
ceasefires and the early days of the implementation of
peace agreements. Moreover, conflict and displacement
taking place in urban areas often increase the risk of
sexual and gender-based violence. The informal urban
setting has the potential to expose displaced people to
evictions, discrimination in services and lack of access
to housing. Therefore, displaced persons in urban areas
require carefully crafted durable solutions that combine
humanitarian and development approaches. We believe
that there are three ways to tackle these challenges.

First, eliminating the root causes of a conflict is
the best way to prevent sexual violence. Yet that is
not always easy. Therefore, in the short to medium
term, ensuring the protection of IDP women and girls
from sexual and other forms of gender-based violence
is imperative. Prosecution of these acts is another
necessity. During this period, multisectoral responses
and continuing humanitarian assistance for displaced
and stateless women have immediate lifesaving effects.

Secondly, it is necessary to increase women's
meaningful participation and leadership in all aspects
of decision-making and policy processes related to the
displacement and protection of international peace and
security. In this vein, there is a need to ensure women's
effective participation in peace processes, mediation
efforts, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and recovery.

Thirdly, in order to sustain their livelihoods, we
need to empower displaced women and girls through
a comprehensive approach to their education, health,
psychosocial support and human rights. Empowered
women and girls bring together empowered families
and resilient communities that play a fundamental role
in preventing violent extremism.
In response to the forced displacement due to the
tragedies in Syria and Iraq unfolding right across our
border, Turkey has taken important steps to ensure
assistance, protection and durable solutions for
displaced women and girls. Let me take this opportunity
to touch upon some measures and practices that Turkey
has employed in the camps established for the Syrians
fleeing the crisis, as they are, in our view, relevant to
the women and peace and security agenda.

Ensuring the gender balance in education is
paramount. Therefore, the enrolment of girls in school
and the continuation of their education are priority
policies for Turkey. We also offer extensive vocational
training for women and continue to provide additional
subsistence assistance for women with no families for
their empowerment in households and camps.

Syrian families and women in the camps have
an opportunity to attend lectures on issues such as
maternal health, child mortality, psychosocial support,
the human rights of women and girls and domestic
violence. Measures to discourage early and family-
forced marriages are also undertaken.

Turkish personnel employed at the camps
are regularly trained on the legal framework of
international protection and gender-related issues, in
cooperation with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees.

Within camps, public areas are constantly lit and
put under closed circuit television surveillance in order
to maintain public order. Outside the camps, Turkey has
established violence monitoring and prevention centres
in 14 provinces where significant Syrian populations
live. We have more than 90 shelter houses at the disposal
of Syrian women fleeing domestic or sexual violence.

In order to complement primary health care
services, we have given priority to reproductive health
and psychosocial support services for victims who were
targeted before and during their escape from violence.
We continue to give priority to women's participation
in camps, with their inclusion in decision-making and
camp administration, and we enable them to improve
their awareness and skills through the support of
various non-governmental organizations.

In conclusion, I congratulate the Argentine
presidency for today's timely debate on the women and
peace and security agenda. We thank the Member States
and all the relevant United Nations bodies, in addition
to all stakeholders at the local, national, regional and
global levels, that are giving priority to the issue of the
effects of displacement on women and girls.
