Mr. Jdnasson (Iceland): Let me at the outset
thank you, Sir, for convening this open debate on
women and peace and security to discuss the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). The focus
you have chosen for our discussion, "Responding to
the needs of women and girls in post-conflict situations
for sustainable peace and security", is highly relevant
and provides ample scope for reflecting on what the
focus of our work should be in light of the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of the resolution next year.

Iceland maintains a strong commitment to
resolution 1325 (2000), being one of the few countries
that have adopted a national action plan pursuant to the
resolution. The Icelandic Government has decided to
focus its work related to resolution 1325 (2000) on
post-conflict reconstruction and women's access to
peace negotiations, being convinced that the inclusion
of women in peace processes is a security issue
essential to sustainable peace.

In particular, Iceland has supported the
extraordinary work of the International Women's
Commission for a Just and Sustainable Palestinian-
Israeli Peace. This is an organization where women
from opposite sides of the conflict, together with a
group of women from the international community,
have managed to find viable ways to promote peace
and peaceful alternatives to conflict.

Last summer, Iceland organized an international
conference on resolution 1325 (2000), entitled
"Women Negotiating Peace", which highlighted how
best to ensure that women are included in formal and
informal peace processes. Allow me to contribute to
this discussion by recapitulating some of the main
issues addressed at the Reykjavik conference. Four
themes were predominant.

First, the conference emphasized the importance
of raising awareness of resolution 1325 (2000) and
recognized the importance of using the forthcoming
tenth anniversary of the adoption of the resolution for
that purpose. Awareness should be promoted in the
international community, within the United Nations
system, as well as within Member States and societies
in or emerging from conflicts.

Secondly, there is need for increased high-level
commitment to the resolution, both within the United
Nations system and by the Member States. Here, the
maw concern was the issue of gender architecture
within the United Nations system, which now has been
alleviated in part through the unanimous adoption of
General Assembly resolution 63/311, calling among
other things for a new and consolidated United Nations
gender entity to be headed by an under-secretary-
general. The Security Council could establish a
working group on resolution 1325 (2000) and set an
example by incorporating the gender perspective when
discussing conflict.

Thirdly, there was a strong call to the United
Nations system and Member States to use the tenth
anniversary as an impetus to get serious about
implementation. The Secretary-General should insist
on accountability for the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) by the United Nations system. To increase
the focus on results, the High-level Steering Group
chaired by the Deputy Secretary-General, should focus
on the implementation of 1325 (2000). More women
should be appointed as special representatives and
envoys of the Secretary-General, and gender advisers
should be accorded a higher status to ensure that
gender mainstreaming does not become sidetracked.
On the membership's side, the lead must be taken in
implementing the resolution, prioritizing the adoption
and implementation of national action plans.

Finally, but perhaps most importantly, the
conference identified a clear need for accountability
and reporting mechanisms to ensure successful
implementation. Therefore, the Security Council is
urged to consider the setting up of a mechanism for
holding Member States accountable for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). The
mechanism should be based on clear performance
targets and timelines and have the necessary political
backup to report on achievements and failures of
implementation by Member States. Resolution 1612
(2005) regarding the use of child soldiers might
provide a convenient model for how reporting and
accountability can be ensured.

One of the workshops at the conference in
Reykjavik approved recommendations on how to mark
the tenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) next
year. Time does not allow me to mention them here.
The nine recommendations will be circulated with the
printed version of my text. The anniversary provides us
with an opportunity to draw attention to the resolution,
promote greater commitment and improved
implementation and work towards the strengthening of
the resolution. Let us seize that opportunity.

