Mr. Khalek (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to first congratulate Chile on its assumption of the
Council presidency and for organizing this important
debate.

The Security Council has succeeded, over the past

15 years, in anchoring the legal basis of the women
and peace and security agenda by adopting resolution
1325 (2000), followed by six other resolutions. The
most recent was resolution 2122 (2013), which linked
human rights and violations of women's rights during
and after a conflict. In spite of this legal framework
of protection and by adding the protection of women
and girls in conflict and post-conflict situations to the
mandates of peacekeeping operations, this focus did
not deal with violence against women and girls in these
regions that is committed by terrorist groups, thus the
measures taken by United Nations have a limited effect
in alleviating their suffering.

I should like to draw the attention of the Council
to the following points. First, we firmly condemn
all forms of violence targeting women and girls in
conflicts because of terrorist groups in the Central
African Republic, Somalia, Syria and other countries.
We must ensure follow-up to the implementation of
Security Council resolutions and take a more organized
and better harmonized approach to collecting data and
following up on resolutions. We must also redouble
our efforts to ensure that transitional justice measures
contain procedures to punish those who perpetrate
crimes against women and girls in armed conflicts and
their aftermath.

The empowerment of women in economic,
social, political and cultural terms is crucial, as it is
to ensure their participation in the prevention and
settlement of conflicts and in peacebuilding. This is
an essential element for dealing with the root causes
of conflicts. Financial guarantees are also needed for
the implementation of woman and peace and security
programmes, especially in regions where women
and girls are raped by terrorist groups or where State
authority is practically non-existent or extremely
limited in terms of human resources and financing.
We must also continue to seek the best ways to respond
to the challenges facing peacekeeping operations in
the international context by implementing effective
strategies on the ground.

The principal responsibility for protecting civilians
lies with States themselves under international law
and relevant resolutions of the Security Council.
Egypt firmly believes that it is extremely important
to address the root causes of these conflicts. In other
words, eliminating poverty and social marginalization
is essential to stabilizing any country, regardless of
culture or location. This should be one of the priorities
of every States during and after conflicts. States must
take ownership of these strategies to achieve sustainable
peace.

Egypt also believes that armed terrorism poses a
serious threat to the safety of women and girls. The
international community must spare no effort in this
regard, and the United Nations and non-governmental
organizations must focus on bringing to an end the
violations of the rights of women in areas where such
heinous form of terrorism exists. Programmes must
seek to eradicate terrorism, not just deal with it in a
superficial passing fashion. International financial
organizations and donors must respond to this form
of terrorism, which destabilizes the entire world and
jeopardizes development as we embark formulating the
post-2015 development agenda in September.

