Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. Minister, for convening and presiding over this
important open debate. Let me begin by welcoming
both Mina Jaf and Adama Dieng back to the Council
and to thank them for their very important briefings
this morning. I would like to pay particular tribute to
Ms. Jaf for sharing her powerful testimony with us
and for bringing the unique and valuable perspective
of civil society into the Security Council Chamber. It
is a perspective that we need to hear more often. The
Council works best when its members are informed by
the women and men most affected by the issues that we
discuss in the Chamber. And sexual violence in conflict
is no exception to that.

As we heard today, ending sexual violence is
central to peacebuilding, conflict prevention and
reconciliation. That is a message that should not need
repeating in the Council. We have heard it many times
before on our visits to South Sudan, the Lake Chad basi
and, most recently, Colombia.

We can also not forget the stories that we heard
in that dusty camp of internally displaced persons in
northern Nigeria: stories of women whose daughters
had been abducted by Boko Haram, most likely forced
into marriage and sexual slavery. And yet, as the
Secretary-General's report (S/2016/361) clearly shows,
those messages are not getting through. Not enough is
being done. Women and girls, men and boys, are still
being subjected to sexual violence every day: in Mali,
where survivors are forced to withdraw complaints so
that the perpetrators can escape justice; in Syria, where
not a single person has been prosecuted for Da'esh's
vile acts; and in South Sudan, where we see the
continuing abhorrent use of rape as a sickening means
of punishing communities.

We know what needs to happen. We need to make
ending sexual violence a key part of ceasefire deals. We
need fewer women at kitchen tables and more women
at negotiating tables. And we need even more women
serving in uniform, because for too many survivors
a man in uniform is someone to fear, not someone
to trust. That is a lesson that needs to be heeded by
Governments, by armed forces and, yes, by the United
Nations and its peacekeepers too.

We cannot, however, be deterred. We must all
play our part and do everything within our power to
ensure that those crimes are reported, that survivors
are cared for and that perpetrators, whether terrorists
or State actors, are held to account. That is why the
United Kingdom, in partnership with the United
Nations Team of Experts and Justice Rapid Response,
is carrying out a campaign to tackle the stigma that so
often surrounds the survivors of sexual violence. It is
why we worked with over 200 civil society experts to
produce the international protocol that helps document
those crimes. And it is why we are now developing the
principles for global action to be launched at the General
Assembly later this year. This is a new tool, developed,
again, with civil society, but also with United Nations
agencies and Member States, to help policymakers and
international organizations tackle stigma through their
own work.

Ultimately, ifwe want to address the appalling use of
sexual violence by and, indeed, by State actors - we
need to look "bigger"; we need to look broader. We need
to recognize that terrorists and State actors are enabled
to carry out those sick acts when peace and security
have broken down and when the Council has failed to
uphold its duties enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations. What happens in the Council, whether votes in
favour or vetoes against, has a very real bearing on that
insecurity. Let us then make sure that tackling sexual

 
violence is not something that we talk about only once a
year at this debate, but in every single Security Council
item where it is relevant, starting with the upcoming
AI-Qaida sanctions regime review.

Nor can we shy away from the fact that such appalling
acts are the direct results of gender discrimination
and inequality. Until women are treated equally, paid
equally and respected equally, we will have failed, not
just to address this issue but also to deliver the global
goals that we all agreed less then two years ago.

I would like to conclude by paying tribute to
former Special Representative Zainab Bangura for all
her tireless efforts and exemplary leadership on this
important issue. I wish her the best for the future,
and I look forward to working with her successor,
Pramila Patten.

