Mr. Anshor (Indonesia): I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for organizing today's open debate,
which highlights the challenges we face in addressing
sexual violence in conflict. We also appreciate this
morning's briefings by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
and the representative of the NGO Working Group
on Women, Peace and Security, in which they raised
important points.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the representative of Viet Nam on
behalf of the members of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations.

While we commend the efforts the Security
Council has made so far to address sexual violence in
armed conflict, there is a long and hard battle ahead
if we are to put an end to such acts. The important
work done on the ground to deter them must continue
both during and in the aftermath of armed conflict.
The voices of the survivors and those at risk matter.
The populations at risk for sexual violence, as well as
survivors of it, should have a channel for assistance
in which national authorities and other national
actors can play a role. We should focus on how to
empower both sectors - the at-risk population and
survivors - through collective community support and
other means that develop resilience. They can take part
in formulating preventive mechanisms, improving legal
mechanisms aimed at dealing with such horrific crimes
and devising protection, rehabilitation, repatriation and
reintegration frameworks as well as legal mechanisms
for survivors. Survivors themselves should be supported
with multisectoral assistance, including in the areas
of health care, psychological counselling, the law and
livelihood support, while differentiated and appropriate
responses should be made available for children and
male survivors.

We need to constantly ask ourselves what can
be done to promote a culture of peace, respect for
the relevant international laws and zero tolerance for
sexual violence in armed conflict. In his latest report
(S/2015/203), the Secretary-General makes some good
recommendations that we fully endorse and that merit
the Council's consideration.

First, we should make use of the Council's
monitoring of the security situation in conflict-affected
countries to home in on the risk factors and warning
signs for sexual violence. We should promote periodic
field visits on conflict-related sexual Violence and
listen to the views of survivors, their families, affected
communities and all relevant actors, including those
from civil society and religious organizations.

Secondly, we should accelerate the deployment of
both women protection advisers and gender advisers in
priority settings and increase the deployment of women
in peacekeeping operations. However, there must be
an equal emphasis on quality. We need to ensure that
advisers and peacekeepers are well equipped with the
necessary resources and understanding, especially in
relation to sexual violence in armed conflict.

Thirdly, we must create a safe and supportive
environment so that survivors and their families,
witnesses and community members are able to come
forward without fear or stigma. All the parties involved
should have a solid understanding of the cultural
and local context. And adequate, timely funding is
vital to ensuring that ceasefire and peace agreements
comprehensively address and effectively implement
conflict-related sexual violence, and that perpetrators
do not get away with impunity.

Fourthly, since no cause or grievance can justify
any act of terror, including conflict-related sexual
violence, we must promote concerted efforts and a
multi-pronged approach to countering narratives of
violent extremism. In addition, we share the View that
the Security Council should develop innovative and
more aggressive approaches to dealing effectively with
sexual violence perpetrated by non-State armed groups.

Indonesia has played an active role in United
Nations peacebuilding efforts and has strengthened
its contributions to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. We have female personnel in the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur,
and we are committed to increasing the number of
Indonesian female peacekeepers. Mandatory training
for all peacekeeping personnel on addressing sexual
Violence should be continued and supported. Indonesia's
peacekeeping centre has included training on that
particular issue and will ensure that it continues.

But I would like to conclude by stressing that we
should not overlook civilian expertise. The pool of
civilian capacities can be broadened and deepened for
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict.
It should include countries with relevant experience in
post-conflict peacebuilding or democratic transitions,
and particular attention should also be given to
mobilizing capacities from developing countries and
among women.

