Ms. Baumann (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I thank you, Sir, for convening today's debate, which
allows us to reflect on the best strategies to prevent
sexual violence in conflict. Switzerland has always
advocated a preventive approach with regard to conflict
and violence. By preventing sexual violence, we not
only protect individuals from one of the most brutal
forms of violence; we also protect entire societies.
The good news is that the tools needed to implement a
preventive approach, such as access to justice, gender
equality and empowerment are all well-known and at
our disposal.

First, allow me to address access to justice, which
remains a major challenge for all survivors of sexual
violence, especially in places affected by conflict,
where judicial systems are weak or non-existent. The
widespread fear of reprisals and stigma discourages
victims from coming forward. Law enforcement
agencies are therefore important partners in the fight
against violence. That is why Switzerland supports
police and armed forces by training them in compliance
with legislation and taking victim-centred approaches
in the handling cases of sexual violence.

The first step is often to increase public trust in the
police. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we
have been lending our support to the police in holding
open-door days for the local people. In Tajikistan,
Afghanistan and Nepal, Switzerland has worked with
local police forces to set up special police units to deal
with cases of family sexual and gender-based violence.
Switzerland has also prioritized efforts to support the
review of national laws, promote legal aid and provide
survivors with psychosocial counselling throughout
the judicial process. We also encourage and support
efforts to improve the documentation of rape and
other forms of sexual violence against men and boys
in situations of armed conflict to more effectively deal
with such crimes.

Secondly, I would like to turn to gender equality
as the principle means of prevention. There is a strong
empirical connection between the lack of gender
equality in a society and the readiness to take up arms.
A thorough analysis of the dynamics of gender equality
can therefore help to design tailor-made programmes
to prevent conflicts from breaking out. For that reason,
Switzerland's fourth national action plan on women,
peace and security will also focus on promoting gender-
responsive security sector reform and the deployment of
mixed teams in military and police units. The national
action plan further recognizes the need for women's
economic empowerment as a precondition for equal
participation in peacebuilding. However, it is not enough
to simply focus on empowering women; initiatives need
to gain the support of all family members to advocate
women's financial independence.

Thirdly, Iwould now like to speak on empowerment.
We are not talking only about women's empowerment.
Men also need empowerment and education in order to
transform traditional gender-relations and put an end
to harmful behavioural patterns. It is crucial to include
men and boys, whether as allies, potential victims,
perpetrators and champions for gender-equality, in any
conflict and violence prevention strategy.

