Mr. Lucas (Angola): I should like to thank and
congratulate the Chilean presidency on convening this
open debate on the important issue of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, with particular emphasis on
protection challenges and needs faced by women and
girls in armed conflict and post-conflict settings.

I thank Assistant Secretary-General Kang and
Ms. Helen Durham, Director for International Law
and Policy of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, for their briefings. I extend special greetings to
Ms. Ilwad Elman, representing the non-governmental
organization community, whose important advocacy
role we acknowledge. We were particularly touched by
Ms. Elman's eloquent plea.

On this occasion, I would like to express our
recognition to the Secretary-General for his long-
standing commitment to the defence and protection of
victims of armed conflict, particularly women, girls
and children.

As a matter of principle, and based on our own
experience, Angola supports the peaceful resolution
of conflicts through dialogue and negotiations, in the
conviction that addressing the root causes of conflicts
contributes to sustainable solutions. We strongly
believe that prevention is still the best way to address
potential conflicts situations; that States bear the
primary responsibility for the protection of their civilian
population, in situations both of peace and conflict;
and that the international community has a subsidiary
responsibility in addressing that very serious problem.

The latest report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2013/689)
underlines the fact that women are the main victims
of all kinds of violence, including murder, mutilation,
rape, sexual abuse, arbitrary arrest, abduction and
forced marriage. Women and girls are the main
victims of attacks on hospitals and schools, thereby
exacerbating their vulnerability in conflict and post-
conflicts situations.
We welcome the latest report of the Secretary-
General on women and peace and security of
23 September 2014 (S/20l4/693), as well as the
adoption on 28 October 2014 of presidential statement
S/PRST/20l4/2l, on the special needs of internally
displaced and refugee girls and women. We share the
recognition that significant progress has been made
at the normative level with the adoption of resolutions
2106 (2013) and 2122 (2013), establishing the greater
involvement of the Security Council in issues relating
to women and peace and security.

In addition, the two high-level commitments
related to combating sexual violence - namely, the
declaration on the economic empowerment of women
for peacebuilding and the inclusion of criteria based
on gender in the Arms Trade Treaty - supplement the
framework I outlined earlier. However, great challenges
lie in the implementation and maintenance of the
progress achieved so far.

The year 2015 marks the fifteenth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), which, inter alia,
recognizes the importance of strengthening women's
leadership in conflict prevention, conflict resolution
and peacebuilding. We are confident that the high-
level review of this seminal resolution will provide an
important boost for the achievements of the objectives
it outlines. In a crucial year for strengthening the status
of women and the national and international levels,
strong political will and commitment to resolution
1325 (2000) will leverage women's role in national,
regional and international institutions, thus promoting
their participation in conflict prevention and conflict
resolution. In that connection, we are convinced that the
expanded involvement of women in conflict prevention
and peacebuilding can make a crucial difference in the
maintenance of international peace and security.

Angola attaches great importance to the protection
of civilians in armed conflict, with particular emphasis
on the protection of women and children in accordance
with international law, international humanitarian law
and standards set out in international legal instruments
on human rights and the rights of refugees. The
empowerment of women contributes to the stability
of societies emerging from armed conflict, while the
promotion of their rights reduces their vulnerability and
strengthens their ability for self-advocacy, especially
by satisfying their basic needs to education, training,
employment, legal and psychological assistance and
access to health services, including reproductive
control in cases of pregnancy resulting from rape and
sexual abuse.
Angola's experience has been quite positive,
with gender promotion at the forefront of the
Government's programmes, as well as recognition of
women's importance in political, economic and social
development, including their vital contribution to the
consolidation of peace and the reconstruction of the
country. We have adopted a strong legal and operational
position on the prevention of sexual violence. We
consider attacks against the rights of women to be
totally unacceptable and condemnable, and we deplore
the fact that sexual violence continues to be used as a
weapon and as a tactic of war.

The Secretary-General's zero-tolerance policy in
relation to sexual abuse and exploitation by members of
peacekeeping missions and by humanitarian personnel,
including their strict adherence to the code of conduct,
is a welcome development in the fight against such
detrimental conduct. It is our understanding that greater
coordination and interaction between the Security
Council and regional and subregional organizations can
result in the development of more effective strategies
for the protection of women in conflict and post-
conflict situations and ensure greater opportunities for
the exercise of their rights, as well as the satisfaction of
their needs.

Moreover, we support the inclusion of additional
women military and police personnel in peacekeeping
operations. We are also of the view that special
attention should be given to the issue of sexual violence
in the formulation of United Nations mission mandates
and to mission engagement with communities as
a fundamental element for the establishment of
confidence with communities where missions are
mandated to protect. However, engagement with local
communities, including with women, should be carried
out in a safe and respectful manner, so that it does not
put women at further risk when they share information,
which is always very precious given the essential role
played by women in their communities.

Finally, Angola looks forward to the forthcoming
high-level review ofthe progress made and the obstacles
encountered in the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) at the global, regional and national levels. We will
continue to support the efforts of the United Nations to
ensure the protection of civilians in conflict and post-
conflict areas, while paying particular attention to the
protection needs of women and girls, thereby renewing
our commitment to respect international humanitarian
law.

