Ms. Bahous (Jordan): Allow me, at the outset, to
congratulate South Africa on its successful presidency
of the Security Council for this month and to welcome,
with appreciation, this morning's unanimous adoption
of resolution 2493 (2019) on women and peace and
security, of which my country is a proud sponsor. I
would also like to extend my thanks to the briefers. Their
insights inspire us all and their views are invaluable.

My country, Jordan, would like to align itself with
the statement to be delivered later this afternoon by the
representative of Canada on behalf of the 56 Member
States representing all five regional groups of the
United Nations.

Jordan has always been committed to maintaining
peace and security, not only in the Middle East but
also in areas of conflict worldwide, where it provides
peacekeeping troops and expertise. Jordan's adoption
in 2017 of an ambitious national action plan on the
implementation ofresolution 1325 (2000), with a budget
allocation from the Jordanian Government and generous
pool-funding from our donor partners, is an example
of our commitment to enabling women's participation
in conflict prevention, peacekeeping, the prevention of
violent extremism and gender-based violence.

We are at a pivotal moment in history. Xenophobes
and racists have emerged from the shadows, women's
rights are suffering pushback, the space of civil activism
is shrinking and the legitimacy of the principles of
human rights is being attacked.

We all know that men and women are impacted
differently by conflict. A more inclusive approach to
the way peacemaking is carried out is need. While men
have long been considered the only relevant actors in
armed conflict and its resolution, women have been
gravely affected and involved in conflict as relatives,
caretakers, politicians, human rights defenders and
combatants. Efforts should be directed at increasing the
engagement of women, not only in soft and preventive
diplomacy, but also at the core of peace processes, as
we all know that women's participation adds a broader
range of perspectives at multiple levels, enabling
inclusivity and diversity, which have proven to lead to
more sustainable peace.

In that regard, Jordan welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General on women and peace and security
(S/2019/800), particularly its recommendation on
adopting the necessary measures to address the
social, cultural and political barriers to women's full
participation in the security and law enforcement
sectors, such as increasing the number of female
uniformed personnel in peace operations.

My country has made big strides towards integrating
gender perspectives across all peacekeeping functions
and is committed to further developing best practices
on gender mainstreaming in military and police
operations, including in predeployment training, as
well as supporting the roles and tasks ofgender advisers
deployed in peacekeeping missions. Jordan believes that
increasing women's participation in peacekeeping is a
critical factor for the overall success of peace missions.
We are therefore intensifying efforts in order to reach
15 per cent female participation by 2020 in order to
meet Jordan's commitment to the Secretary-General's
Action for Peacekeeping initiative.

Allow me to commend the United Nations
peacekeeping missions on the impressive evolution
of their human-resources capacities and priorities
related to prevention and response to Victims of war
and violence, including sexual violence in conflict and
post-conflict situations, and to making the safety of all,
particularly that of women and girls, a priority of their
active involvement in peace processes.

United Nations reports indicate that, unfortunately,
only 13 per cent ofcountries allocate funding to statistics
and data, and almost 80 per cent of the gender-equality
indicators across the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) are lacking data. Disaggregated data sheds light
on areas where progress is made, reveals gaps where
further efforts are needed and identifies the resources
necessary to shape national policies and plans.

To fulfil our commitments to the SDGs, particularly
Goal 5, and to realize better implementation and
localization of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, the Jordanian Department of Statistics,
relevant governmental bodies and civil society
organizations, in collaboration with UN-Women, are
relentlessly working through a three-pillar programme
in order to reach a supportive policy and institutional
environment to improve the monitoring of national
and international commitments to the SDGs, while
regularly generating quality and comparable gender
statistics and ensuring that gender statistics are widely
accessible and used to inform policymakers.

Finally, as we approach 2020, the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption ofresolution 1325 (2000), it
is imperative that we advance the women and peace and
security agenda by including and empowering women
politically, socially and economically and ensuring safe
universal education for all women and girls. We need
to break the mould, we need to change perceptions now
and for the next generations, and we need to fight the
pushback and the current that are setting us back.

