Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): I thank you,
Madam, and Ambassador Susan Rice personally, as
well as the United States delegation for your efforts to
strengthen the Council's commitment to combating
sexual violence in armed conflict. The implementation
of resolution 1820 (2008) since its adoption last year
has achieved meaningful progress, most visibly in the
markedly improved awareness of sexual violence across
the United Nations system and the international
community and in many conflict areas. The
international community is increasingly recognizing the
need to work together to effectively put an end to one
of the most vicious and inhumane types of violence.

However, my delegation believes that formidable
challenges remain, especially in implementing the
resolution on the ground. This requires concerted
efforts by United Nations bodies, Member States and
other stakeholders to ensure a comprehensive approach
to the issue of sexual violence, including, inter alia, its
incorporation into the earliest stages of the peace
process. In this connection, the strengthening of the
United Nations coordination role is essential. We look
forward to working with United Nations bodies, other
stakeholders and other Member States towards this
objective.

Having voted in favour of the resolution, my
delegation confirms once again Viet Nam's strong
commitment to ending sexual violence wherever it
occurs. At the same time, we believe that resolution
1820 (2008) and resolution 1888 (2009), just adopted
by the Council, should be implemented in close
coordination with the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000).

Since women's empowerment is among the most
effective tools for their protection, women's
participation in peace, conflict resolution and post-
conflict processes should be promoted to ensure that
their weak voice is heard, their rights are respected and
their urgent needs met. Measures to protect women and
girls from sexual violence in conflict situations should
also be designed as part of a broader comprehensive
and strategic framework which covers social, economic
and development issues. United Nations bodies and
donors should be encouraged and helped to assist
national Governments in building gender-related
capacity and developing gender-sensitive programmes
to help survivors of sexual violence with services
ranging from access to justice and relief from stigma
and ostracism, to provision of mental and
psychological health care.

It is equally important that women's physical
security be supported by economic and social security
through income-generation activities, education and
involvement in decision-making. Toward this objective
and in furtherance of the efforts the Council is taking
today under the guidance of the President, Viet Nam,
as the upcoming President of the Council, will convene
an open debate on Monday, 5 October, on the theme
"Responding to the needs of women and girls in post-
conflict situations for sustainable peace and security".
We look forward to active participation, meaningful
discussions and a substantive outcome that will make
the international community's efforts to protect the
better half of humankind more complete.

