Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset to thank the Secretary-General and
the Prime Minister of Spain, Mr. Mariano Rajoy Brey,
for their outstanding efforts to promote the women and
peace and security agenda of the Security Council.
This has allowed us to celebrate today the fifteenth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), which is at the
heart of so many of the other resolutions adopted by the
Council and also at the heart of France's priorities.

I also wish to acknowledge the outstanding work
of the Executive Director of UN-Women, Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka, whose coordination role to promote
this agenda and gender equality within the United
Nations is absolutely essential.

Finally, Iwish to thankMs. Lusenge, Ms. Mohammed
and Ms. Murabit for their poignant testimonies and
their relentless commitment to giving Congolese, Iraqi
and Libyan women a voice, a place and a chance in their
respective societies. Their commitment is a source of
admiration and inspiration for us all.

This high-level meeting on the issue of women and
peace and security does not only mark the anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) 15 years ago,
nor is it a simple review of the progress made since
2000. It represents a new start for the women and peace
and security agenda - a new start for more equality.
In that regard, I welcome the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2242 (2015), which will allow us to pave the
way for a revival of the women and peace and security
agenda in the years to come. I wish to emphasize two
aspects of that relaunch.

First, it is a political revival, in the best sense of
the term. Indeed, the women and peace and security
agenda is a political agenda and should be treated as
such by States and the United Nations. States have the
responsibility to ensure the more active participation of
women in political processes, peace negotiations and
conflict resolution and prevention mechanisms. States
have the responsibility to involve women's organizations
in policy discussions, not only to hear their voices but
above all to enable them to contribute to decisions. It is
also the responsibility of States to appoint more women
to key positions, including with respect to the prevention
and resolution of conflicts. The United Nations also
bears this political responsibility. The appointment of
more women to the positions of special envoy or high-
level expert alongside the Special Representatives of
the Secretary-General is a step in the right direction.
Such policy decisions must multiply. It a question not of
symbols but of added value critical to the Organization.

The review of the women and peace and security
agenda also represents a new operational framework. In
particular, the maintenance and consolidation of peace
require more women, not only in peace operations, but
also through all the issues related to peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. The planning and mandates ofoperations
should take these issues into account at all stages of
a crisis: upstream, to prevent risks; during, to protect
women from violence; and afterwards, to help victims
to rebuild. Good cooperation between the Departments
of Peacekeeping Operations and Field Support with
UN-Women is indispensable to that end. I commend the
efforts of those Departments to take better into account
the situation of women in peacekeeping operations.

1 have stressed the responsibility of Member
States and the United Nations for the implementation
of measures related to the women and peace and
security agenda. I wish to conclude my remarks by
citing France's actions in that regard. Since 2010, the
French Government has adopted two national action
plans for the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda. These national action plans are
subject to an evaluation of the National Consultative
Commission on Human Rights and our Parliament. To
that end, France has mobilized several million euros to
support some 50 projects dedicated to strengthening the
capacities of women in countries in conflict, such as
Mali and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and to
Syrian refugee women living in camps in neighbouring
countries, with the support of UN-Women and several
non-governmental organizations.

You have asked, Sir, that this high-level review
serve as an opportunity for States to announce specific
commitments. I wish to share three instances of
France's commitments.

At the political level, France is committed
to strengthening its mobilization to promote the
women and peace and security agenda nationally,
internationally and regionally. At the national level,
we will increase the visibility of our plan of action.
France, more than 20 per cent of whose ambassadors
are women, is committed to achieving the target of
40 per cent women appointed to high-level diplomatic
positions by 2018. That process is well under way.
At the international level, we will pursue our efforts
in the Security Council to ensure that the provisions of
resolutions on women and peace and security are well
represented in the mandates ofpeacekeeping operations,
as they are in the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic. In the European Union,
we continue to advocate for the inclusion of women
in the Common Security and Defence Policy and to
support the protection of women in conflict situations
and in crisis resolution.

At the operational level, France - which,
through the deployment of over 900 military and
police personnel, is contributing to six peacekeeping
operations - is committed to the utmost vigilance and
resolve to ensure compliance with the rules laid down
by the United Nations in the fight against sexual abuse
and respect for human rights. The recruitment, training
and deployment of our personnel to operations will
continue according to a national process that ensures
compliance with these rules. In the case of recent
allegations of sexual abuse, our political leaders are
deeply committed to the adoption of the most stringent
sanctions, in addition to the judicial response, where
such cases prove legitimate.

Finally, at the financial level, I am pleased to
announce that France will contribute €50,000 to the
United Nations Trust Fund in Support of Actions to
Eliminate Violence against Women. The most recent
biennial General Assembly resolution on the fight
against violence against women (resolution 69/147),
which France and the Netherlands have led since 2006,
calls on States to contribute to the Fund. We hope that
other States will follow. This contribution complements
the financial support to the tune of€100,000 that France
will offer UN-Women to strengthen women's access to
justice.

This high-level meeting marks not the end but the
beginning of an ambitious reform of the women and
peace and security. France is determined to accompany
this reform for more equality so as to promote change in
the perception and treatment of issues related to women
in the United Nations. As the French poet Louis Aragon
once said, "Woman is the future of man". Woman is
also the future of peace.

