Mr. Lovald (Norway): Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) has led to progress. However,
much more can and should be done at all levels.

In order to gain a clearer understanding of how
resolution 1325 (2000) translates into change on the
ground, a review team made up of representatives from
the Netherlands, the United Kingdom and Norway, in
close cooperation with the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO), visited four major
United Nations peacekeeping operations - in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Liberia, Sierra
Leone and Kosovo. The review team was impressed by
the dedication of the gender advisers in the missions
visited. They and their staffs have clearly raised
awareness of gender issues within United Nations
missions. They have also made significant progress in
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in the
field, particularly in the areas of the rule of law and
political participation.

A number of challenges were common to all four
missions. The gender focus was missing from the
earliest stages of mission development; resources were
inadequate; accountability was still limited; and the
sustainability of gender efforts was still in doubt. Some
gender advisers in the missions enjoyed excellent
access to the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and were well supported. Others had more
difficult working conditions. The review team found a
strong correlation between the inclusion of gender
perspectives in the missions' activities and the level of
cooperation between the individual mission and the
United Nations country team.

Although there are examples of best practices,
there is a clear need for a more systematic approach to
gender issues, starting with the mandates. There is a
need for better indicators of successful gender
mainstreaming in integrated planning processes. A
clear and visible implementation plan is necessary.
Adequate financial resources must also be allocated.

It is also important to plan for the longer term. It
is critical to keep the long-term objectives in mind in
order to ensure a smooth transition from peacekeeping
to peacebuilding, in which the United Nations country
team should play a key role. Strategic partnerships
should be developed with the country team at an early
stage, and the missions should draw on the
comparative advantages of agencies such as the United
Nations Development Fund for Women and the United
Nations Development Programme.

The United Nations country team should strive
for a fully integrated gender plan that reflects the
objectives of resolution 1325 (2000), including clear
accountability, division of labour and specific actions
to be taken. The strategic plan should include an
outline for how to cooperate and coordinate activities
with the national Government. This is essential for the
sustainability of gender efforts.

We are encouraged by the growing number of
highly qualified women in DPKO, but the relatively
low number of women in senior management positions
should be remedied. We know that wars and conflicts
affect women, men, girls and boys in different ways.
We also know that women's full participation in peace
processes and peacebuilding is necessary for lasting
peace. These facts must guide the planning and
implementation of both United Nations and our own
efforts for peace and development.

