Mr. Maquieira (Chile)(spoke in Spanish): Mr.
President, I thank you for convening this public debate
on an important topic that cuts across all aspects of
human well-being - namely, the maintenance of
peace.

I would also like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Guehenno, Assistant Secretary-General Angela
King, and Ms. Noeleen Heyzer, the Executive Director
of the United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM), for their statements.

Women and children represent more than three-
quarters of the 40 million people throughout the world
who have been displaced by armed conflict or by
human rights violations. My country, whose armed
forces are brilliantly led by a woman minister,
therefore welcomed with enthusiasm and renewed
optimism the adoption by this body of resolution 1325
(2000), which attaches great importance to the role of
women in conflict prevention, the promotion of peace
and assistance in post-conflict reconstruction.

This has given even greater resonance to the
words of the United Nations Charter relating to "saving
future generations from the scourge of war" and
proclaiming "the equal rights of men and women", thus
giving renewed impetus to the urgent task of achieving
concrete results in this area.

The time has come to remove the barriers that
prevent women from effectively participating in
decision-making processes and foreclose opportunities
for them to accede to the spheres of power.
Mainstreaming the gender perspective into
peacekeeping operations should become a priority item
on Government agendas.

Since the call contained in the Beijing Platform of
Action for all necessary steps to be taken to establish a
culture of peace, the international community has
witnessed a rapid increase in the number of multilateral
initiatives aimed at giving women the opportunity to
play an important role in decision-making processes
related to conflicts. While these are certainly valuable
initiatives, they are still insufficient to achieve a just
balance of opportunities for those who in fact
constitute the main targets in armed conflicts.

It is common knowledge that peace processes are
weakened when women are not included, and a
consensus exists that, when a society collapses on
account of conflict, women play a critical role in the
maintenance of daily life. The words of the Secretary-
General in this connection are unambiguous when he
says that women are the ones "who build bridges and
walls".

Chile looks forward to the appointment of a
woman as Special Representative or Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for peace missions. We also
advocate greater participation by women as military
observers, civilian police and human rights and
humanitarian affairs personnel.

In assuming our responsibility as active members
of the Group of Friends of resolution 1325 (2000), and
with a view to contributing to the implementation of
that resolution, Chile has accepted the challenge of
organizing, together with the presidency of the
European Union, an international conference next
November on "The role of women in peacekeeping
operations", which will open new avenues for the
practical implementation of the item under discussion.
The conference would include the participation of the
United Nations, civil society, experts and Governments
and would seek to discuss all of the most important
aspects of women's roles, not only as victims of armed
conflict but also as part of the solution to such conflicts
and post-conflict reconstruction. As a result, the
conference must adopt a series of recommendations
that could be useful to the Security Council, the
Economic and Social Council and the rest of the United
Nations system in the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). Likewise, Chile is extremely interested in
the report being prepared by the Secretary-General that
was requested by that resolution. In our opinion, it
should be the cornerstone for follow-up on this issue
here in the United Nations.

