Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I associate myself with my colleagues in
expressing pleasure that today you, Sir, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Namibia, are presiding over this
meeting of the Security Council. I would also like to
thank the entire delegation of Namibia for their work in
the presidency during October.

We very much appreciate the contribution made
by your country, Mr. President, in promoting the noble
aims of advancing the status of women. We are also
grateful to Ms. Angela King and Ms. Heyzer for their
statements, and particularly for the specific ideas that I
am sure will be very useful in the practical work of the
appropriate United Nations bodies and the Secretariat.

The words "Women", "peace" and "security"
combine harmoniously, because this harmony is
predetermined by nature. However, while we have
selected these three words for our agenda, we are today
compelled to talk about other concepts, too, the
combination of which is unnatural and yet occurs all
too often in today's world: women and war, women and
armed conflict.

The Security Council's mandate includes its
central role in the maintenance of international peace
and security. A resolve to strengthen this central role
was forcefully proclaimed recently by our heads of
State in the Declaration unanimously adopted at the
summit meeting of the Security Council. The Council's
involvement in resolving a multitude of armed conflicts
in various parts of the world gives us the difficult task
of giving due attention to all aspects of crisis situations
which pose a threat to international peace and security.
In the context of discharging its primary Charter
obligation, in recent years the Council has held a
number of open debates and adopted some important
resolutions on the protection of children, civilians and
humanitarian personnel in armed conflict, and on the
problems of post-conflict peace-building.

We must say that armed conflicts, wars of
aggression and terrorist acts cause enormous suffering
to women. They die because they find themselves in a
zone of hostilities; they lose husbands, brothers, fathers
and sons in war, and, lacking breadwinners, bear the
full brunt of economic problems; and they fall victim
to violence and wander around from one refugee camp
to another. They need a sensitive approach and reliable
protection.

But women, as has already been said today, are
not merely helpless victims. They are an enormous
strength and can provide invaluable assistance in
reconciling belligerents and tending the wounds of war.

Women's peace-making potential is just starting
to become a reality, and we hope that its further
development will be promoted by today's discussion in
the Security Council. We cannot say that so far the
international community has turned a deaf ear to these
problems. Recommendations and gender
mainstreaming initiatives in the context of the
application of international norms in the area of human
rights and humanitarian law, initiatives to involve
women in peace-making and peace-building, have been
broadly reflected in the Beijing Platform for Action, in
the Windhoek Declaration and the Namibia Plan of
Action and in the agreed recommendations on women
and armed conflict of the Commission on the Status of
Women at its forty-fourth session.

Inescapable punishment for sexual violence
against women in armed conflicts, whoever might be
the perpetrator, must be meted out by the International
Criminal Court. We are convinced that this body will
dovetail harmoniously with the existing system for the
maintenance of international peace and security -
with a key role being played by the Security Council -
by supplementing national judicial systems in cases
when they turn out to be ineffectual. When Russia
signed the Statute of the International Criminal Court
on 13 September, we demonstrated our resolve,
together with other countries, to try to end impunity
for, inter alia, crimes against women.

The problem of women in armed conflict was
also highlighted in the special session of the General
Assembly held in June entitled "Women 2000: gender
equality, development and peace for the twenty-first
century". The comprehensive nature of the outcome
document of the special session convincingly shows
that resolving humanity's challenges in all areas
without the full participation of women is impossible.
This applies to the important role that could, and
should be played by women in eliminating and
preventing crisis situations, in the proper rearing of the
younger generation, in developing a culture of peace
and in the dialogue among civilizations.

There is no more reliable way to protect women
from the horrors of war than eliminating conflicts from
people's lives. This was the thrust of Russia's proposal
to strengthen strategic stability, which calls for unity of
action by the international community in the military,
political, socio-economic, human rights and
environmental-protection areas. As Russian President
Putin stressed in his statement at the Security Council
Summit on 7 September, in order to improve the crisis-
prevention capability of the United Nations it is
particularly important to uncover the underlying causes
of conflicts, including economic and social causes, to
develop a culture of crisis prevention and to focus
more on anticipating events. This is the direct
responsibility of the Security Council.

In trying to find answers to the severe challenges
of our times, the Council should heed more closely
women's voices and in its decisions pay closer
attention to the gender perspective. We hope that such
an approach will promote more effective protection of
the rights of women and help in the attainment of the
main goal: the creation of lasting peace on our Earth,
so that nevermore the words "women" and "war", and
"women" and "suffering" go together.

