Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): Let mejoin my colleagues
in expressing our appreciation to the Bolivian
presidency for convening today's meeting. I also want
to acknowledge all of the briefers.

Georgia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union. In my national
capacity, I would like to add the following comments.

Women are indeed at the centre of the conflict-
prevention platform of the United Nations. While gender
parity in the Organization's peace and security sector
has yet to be achieved, we welcome the significant and
continuous efforts by the Secretary-General and the
Security Council to increase women's participation in
areas pertaining to international peace and security.

Based on key findings, recommendations and
consultations with civil society, the Government of
Georgia has already adopted its third national action
plan for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
covering the period of 2018-2020. Its first plan was
adopted in 2011. Apart from delivering on the global
women and peace and security agenda, the plan is
also aimed at protecting the rights of conflict-affected
women by ensuring their physical, social, economic
and political security, as well as eliminating all forms
of discrimination against women and supporting their
participation in decision-making.

Particular emphasis is given to ensuring a gender
perspective in peace negotiations and to the promotion
of the meaningful participation of women and girls in
conflict prevention. The 2018-2020 national action plan
has been harmonized with the Government's action
plan on the protection of human rights and aligned with
the relevant objectives, targets and indicators set for
the attainment of the Sustainable Development Goals at
the national level. The plan has also been incorporated
into the agency-specific internal action plans of lead
Government agencies and local municipalities, with
civil society and development partners playing an
important support role.

Within the framework of our commitments under
resolution 1325 (2000), we continue to promote
conflict-affected women in Georgia as a driving force
ofpublic diplomacy. As a result, today more than 65 per
cent of those involved in peace processes in Georgia
are women. Furthermore, the Government of Georgia
facilitates an increased role for women in reconciliation
and confidence-building projects, carried out with the
support of local and international organizations.

Yet despite those efforts to empower conflict-
affected women, the Russian Federation's ongoing
occupation of Georgia's regions of Abkhazia and
Tskhinvali hinders the peace process and imposes severe
conditions on one of the most vulnerable parts of our
society. Women living in Georgia's occupied regions,
as well as in areas adjacent to the occupation line, are
systematically subjected to human rights violations,
including the denial of the right to the freedom of
movement, illegal detentions by the occupying forces
and threats to physical security for so-called illegal
border crossings.

In the light of that, let me brief the Council about
a Georgian woman, Maia Otinashvili, who is the most
recent victim of the occupation. While harvesting a
plot of agricultural land in her own orchard, Maia
Otinashvili was seized and kidnapped from the village
of Khurvaleti by the occupation forces. Ms. Otinashvili,
who is a mother to three minors, was physically abused,
blindfolded and rushed to Russia's illegal military base,
where she was accused of the so-caIled facilitation of
illegal border crossing. It took 10 days of persistent
efforts by the Georgian Government and international
organizations to have Maia Otinashvili released and
returned to her family, who is suffering from severe
emotional and psychological trauma.

Sadly, Ms. Otinashvili's story is not an unusual
case, but an everyday part of life for those living in
the vicinity of the occupation line. Overall, from 2015
to 2018, 160 women have been illegally detained by
Russian occupation forces and the authorities in control.
Despite numerous Security Council resolutions,
including resolutions 876 (1993), 993 (1995) and
1187 (1998), as well as numerous General Assembly
resolutions stressing the necessity to address the need
for the dignified return of all internally displaced
persons (IDPs) and refugees, hundreds of thousands of
IDPs and refugees - including women, children and
other vulnerable strata of society - remain prevented
from the right to return to their places of origin in
safety and with dignity.

Against that background, my country's commitment
to the peaceful resolution of the conflict remains
unwavering. We will continue to spare no effort to
facilitate the reconciliation process among the war-
torn population by integrating gender perspectives in
decision-making, protecting the rights of women and
promoting their meaningful participation in conflict
prevention and peacebuilding.

In conclusion, while we reaffirm Georgia's
commitment to advancing the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda, both nationally
and globally, we call for increased attention from the
members of the Security Council to the protection of
women's rights in the occupied regions of Georgia and
other conflict-affected areas around the world.

