Mr. Skau (Sweden): Let me begin by thanking the
Deputy Secretary-General Ms. Amina Mohammed,
and the Permanent Observer of the African Union,
Ambassador Tete Antonio, for their valuable briefings
this morning and for the leadership that they have shown
in women, peace and security. They illustrate how the
African Union (AU)-United Nations partnership is
growing even stronger, which we very much welcome.

Sweden applauds the initiative for the joint
visit. Today we put the women, peace and security
agenda front and centre, thus enabling us to properly
understand and respond to contemporary security
challenges in Nigeria and in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. With resolution 2242 (2015), the Council
should be shifting women and gender equality from a
peripheral to a core issue in the Security Council. It is
also at the heart of Sweden's feminist foreign policy.
Combatting root causes is only possible with truly
inclusive solutions. It is also why we remain a steadast
supporter of UN-Women here today - to ensure that
women will be a part of the solution in humanitarian
assisstance, development and in peace and security.

Going forward, we would also highlight three
priorities. First of all, no sustainable peace can be
achieved without effectively linking humanitarian,
security, human rights and development efforts.
The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and
the Sustaining Peace Agenda provides an integrated
approach and the master plan for the United Nations in
that regard. There can be no humanitarian solution for a
political crisis or for long-term development challenges,
which was quite evident during our visit to Lake Chad
in March where we witnessed first hand how the roots
of the conflict run much deeper than the Boko Haram
insurgency and how humanitarian assistance and
military efforts must be supplemented by development
assistance and investments.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Sweden supports the Humanitarian Fund from both
its humanitarian programme and its development
programme to enable humanitarian actors to commit to
longer-term engagement and planning. In all that we
do, SDG 5 should guide our efforts to make sure that
the needs of women and girls are heard and addressed.

Secondly, nothing should be discussed about
women without women. Exclusion will always result in
inequality and the risk of continued conflict. Women's
effective participation and full enjoyment of their
human rights is crucial to achieving effective and
sustainable peace.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
democratic and peaceful development requires the full
implementation of the 31 December 2016 agreement,
including women's full participation in the upcoming
elections. We are encouraged by local efforts to increase
the registration of female voters by, for example,
keeping voter registration facilities open on Sundays.
It is clear that there is no shortage of women wanting
to get involved in Congolese politics, as the umbrella
network Rien sans les femmes and other Congolese
organizations have vividly demonstrated.

In Nigeria, encouraging local efforts to bring more
women into decision-making positions are also under
way, which is most welcome since women currently
hold less than 6 per cent of the seats in the Parliament
and in the courts. Efforts in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and in Nigeria to enhance women's
participation must be strongly supported by the
international community.

Thirdly, we need to strengthen our efforts to
combat sexual and gender-based crimes. Violence
against women and girls violates their human rights
and hinders development. In Nigeria and the Lake Chad
region, survivors of sexual and gender-based violence
risk stigma of association with insurgents, creating
further alienation and isolation which, in turn, risks
leading to further socioeconomic frustration and the
continuation of the conflict.

It is, of course, the primary responsibility of States
to ensure their citizen's safety and dignity and, when
violated, accountability, but if States are unwilling
or unable to do so, the the international tribunals
have an important complementary role to play. The
Security Council should also increase its attention to
sexual and gender-based violence transgressions in the
implementation of its mandates. We would also like
to see enhanced attention to sexual and gender-based
violence in both thematic and country-specific action
when it comes to sanctions. We note that sexual and
gender-based violence rarely receives the appropriate
attention in United Nations reports.

In conclusion, today's briefing has shown that
the women, peace and security agenda needs to be
properly addressed when the Security Council debates
geographic security challenges. It is now important
to ensure the effective follow-up of that important
initiative. We look forward to continued discussions
in the Council and in the Informal Expert Group on
Women, Peace and Security. We need the whole United
Nations system to more coherently report and act in line
with resolution 2242 (2015) as a part of the follow-up.

That initiative should serve as an inspiration for
continued efforts in the field and we encourage similar
trips to more countries and regions by United Nations
senior leadership, United Nations Women and other
relevant actors. Intensified cooperation between the
AU and the United Nations related to women, peace and
security benefits both organizations because it benefits
the strive for peace and prosperity for all, including in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Nigeria. In
such efforts, Deputy Secretary-General Mohammed,
Ambassador Te'te Antonio and all colleagues of the
Council can count on the full support of Sweden.

