Mr. Tangara (Gambia): I will read out this
statement on behalf of the President of the Republic of
the Gambia.

"Allow me first of all to seize this opportunity
to commend and congratulate the Prime Minister
of Spain for having convened such an important
debate on women and peace and security. It is
with great please that Ijoin other participants here
in this very important forum at this high-level
debate on women, peace and security, which also
seeks to review the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), following the Security Council's
due recognition of not only the particular effects
of conflict on women but the need to also include
them as active stakeholders in conflict prevention
and resolution.

"Fifteen years ago, the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), the legal and political framework
within which national Governments, regional
organizations, the United Nations system and
non-State actors are obliged to address the situation
of women in crisis and war. It is worth noting that
the resolution was adopted on 31 October 2000
following decades of lobbying by women's rights
activists, and that it was the first resolution that
specifically addressed the impact of war on women
and girls, thus underscoring the premise that
women's inclusion, their presence and participation
in the process, their perspectives and their
contribution to substantive talks will certainly
improve their chances of achieving a viable and
sustainable peace.

"Bearing in mind the fact that resolution 1325
(2000) emerged a decade after the end of the Cold
War, when new kinds of violence and warfare
were already evident, in particular it was also a
recognition of the complexity of post-conflict
peacebuilding in countries such as Bosnia, Rwanda
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, when
social fabric and trust within communities had
been destroyed. However, although resolution
1325 (2000) and the six subsequent resolutions that
followed have given much-needed international
attention to the impact of conflict on women and
girls, women still face a fight for recognition in
both war and peace. A study conducted to mark
the tenth anniversary of the resolution found that
United Missions had achieved little success in
improving the participation of women in peace
negotiations and agreements. Women in rural areas
still felt excluded. The report went on to state that
while some progress had been made in passing
laws against sexual and gender-based violence
and improving women's security, conflict-related
sexual violence as a deliberate strategy in areas
of conflict still occurred with impunity and had
proved a formidable challenge for peacekeeping
missions.

"Fortunately, more and more women are taking
an appropriate stance, and more men are supporting
them in this venture. Resolution 1325 (2000)
provides a vehicle for bringing together economic,
political and security interests to address the link
between gender and conflict, and I am proud that
we in the Gambia have not abandoned, and will
strive to ensure, our constant presence in the global
arena.

"The Gambia promotes the participation of
women in peace processes by means of its policy
with regard to recruitment and secondment as
well as in its support for qualified candidates.
This is to ensure that experts seconded to civilian
peacebuilding operations as well as participants in
military peacekeeping operations receive a high
level of training in the specific area of gender in
preparation for their deployment on mission.

"The protection of women is a priority of the
Gambia's peacebuilding efforts, since it is women
who tend to suffer the most from violence during
and after armed conflicts. Protection of the rights
of women and the girl child is also one of the main
aspects of the Gambia's human rights policy. In the
international context, the Gambia makes women's
rights and the violation thereof the subject of
discussions. The Gambia also points to violations
of women's rights in the context of armed conflict
and multilateral negotiations as well as in bilateral
demarches and interventions.

"The Gambia is also committed, at the
international level, to combating trafficking in
women and girls and to protecting the victims
of trafficking. Other priorities include efforts to
improve the protection of internally displaced
persons, many of whom are women, and to oppose
immunity for those who perpetrate crimes against
women in the context of armed conflict.

"Furthermore, the Gambia supports projects
and actors that address the specific problem of
violence against women, rape, trafficking and the
exploitation of women in the context of armed
conflicts, either through prevention and protection
of the victim or by efforts to end impunity. We have
a policy of zero tolerance with regard to the sexual
exploitation of women in all cases involving civilian
and military personnel seconded to peacebuilding
operations. Training modules specifically address
the problems of trafficking in human beings and
women's vulnerability to sexual abuse in conflicts,
including by those involved in peace missions.

"Resolution 1325 (2000) specifically calls for
gender perspectives to be taken into consideration
in the negotiation and implementation of peace
agreements, as well as for the participation of
women in all mechanisms for the implementation
of such agreements.

"Particular attention is paid to the gender aspect
of transitional justice, which is one of the priorities
of the Gambia's policy in the area of human rights
and humanitarian activities. Central to these
efforts are the women's amendment of 2012, the
national agenda on women's empowerment policy
2010-2020, the children's act, the trafficking act,
the refugee act and, most recently, the domestic
violence and sexual offence acts of 2013. All

these procedures are indeed very innovative in
that they consistently take women's rights into
consideration. This can be seen, for example, in the
definition of so-called gender crimes, the rights of
women in court procedures, in the representation
of the two sexes in the court's various bodies and
in the organization of the court with regard to the
protection of victims and witnesses. Additional
forms are to be provided for projects that support
the inclusion of women in political and legal
transitional processes, with a view to ending
impunity in cases involving crimes against women.
This is intended to facilitate implementation of the
corresponding procedures and evidentiary rules
contained in the statutes.

"The Gambia has demonstrated effective
involvement in the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), especially through the development
of its national action plan, the sine qua non for
the effective implementation of the resolution by
all Member States. However, to date, the record
shows that only 21 out of 192 States Members
of the United Nations have done so. We all have
our individual roles in ensuring the resolution's
implementation so that women's contribution to
peacebuilding and decision-making are recognized
and women's rights are ably protected. I am
happy to report that these measures have led to a
considerable number of reported cases of sexual
and gender-based violence at the Edward Francis
Small teaching hospital thanks to a complaints
unit at the Women's Bureau, a unit jointly set up
by the Ministry of Justice, the Ministry of Health,
the Child Protection Authority, the Ministry of
Interior, inter alia, strengthened by a multisectoral
national steering committee under the auspices of
the office of the Vice-President and the Ministry of
Women's Affairs, with a mandate of coordinating,
monitoring and evaluating implementation.

"Indeed we cannot but agree with Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon when he said that
participation alone is not sufficient. Women must
not just sit at the peace table. They must be heard.
Not only should women serve in police forces
and peacekeeping missions, but they should also
influence decision-making.

"At this fifteenth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), I wish to emphasize
the importance of reflecting on what has been
achieved, the lessons learned and how to become
more effective in securing concrete changes not
only for the prevention of violence but also the
protection of human rights and for making progress
on all issues related to gender equality.

"In conclusion, I wish to put on record my
fervent hope that this meeting will inspire better
and more innovative initiatives on resolution 1325
(2000), gender-conscious responses to peace and
security and effective contributions to conflict
prevention and the protection and effective
participation of women."

