Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we would
like to welcome Mr. Jose Luis Cancela, Vice-Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Uruguay. We are delighted to
have you, Sir, presiding over today's important debate.
We therefore thank Uruguay, a sister country, for
convening today's debate, and congratulate the entire
delegation, in particular Ambassador Rosselli, on
assuming the presidency ofthe Security Council during
the month of May. We believe that it will be successful
month for the country and for the Council.

At the same time, we would like to thank the
Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Amina Mohammed,
for being here today and for her briefing on the report
of the Secretary-General on Conflict-related Sexual
Violence (S/2017/249). We are also grateful for the
briefings by the Special Adviser on the Prevention
of Genocide, Mr. Adama Dieng, and the Executive
Director of Women's Refuge Route, Ms. Jaf.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela would like
to reiterate its most categorical condemnation of sexual
violence in armed conflicts as a crime that violates
human dignity and is a violation of international
humanitarian law and international human rights
law. The report being discussed today highlights the
ongoing rise in the number of atrocities and crimes
of sexual violence, which are committed in times of
armed conflict and are part and parcel of systematic
action taken by extremist and terrorist groups.

Venezuela has repeatedly stated in all forums of
the Organization that one of the causes of this situation
has been that non- State armed groups are being trained,
supplied and supported in an effort to destabilize and
break up States, forcing the collapse of their institutions
and providing a breeding ground for impunity and the
commission of such atrocities. Worsening extremism
and religious and ethnic intolerance as a strategy
to destabilize countries causes women and children
to become victims of sexual violence, which is
employed as a form of punishment or punitive action
against minorities.

If the ban on providing arms and financial support
to extremist and terrorist groups were fully respected
under international law, there would be a decrease in
both the operational capacity of non-State actors and
terrorists and in the incidences of sexual violence in
situations of armed conflict. We firmly believe that
accountability is also key to preventing such crimes.
We cannot give way to impunity in crimes of this
kind. Venezuela advocates effective accountability for
all forms of sexual violence and the use of exemplary
sanctions on all instigators and perpetrators of
such crimes.

Venezuela also reiterates its support for the
Organization's zero-tolerance policy and demands
accountability for all crimes of violence and sexual
abuse committed by any foreign force and by military,
police or civilian personnel deployed in peacekeeping
operations and special political missions, as well
as by staff of the Organization not deployed in such
operations. In that regard, the United Nations is still
expected to respond to the victims of such crimes.

On another note, we believe that building capacity
in national institutions related to justice, health and
social welfare systems in countries in situations of
armed conflict and post-conflict plays a fundamental
role. It is therefore necessary to pool our efforts so
that, while fully respecting the sovereignty of the
States concerned, such capacity can be developed
and strengthened to allow for adequate and timely
treatement and accountability, as well as the
rehabilitation of victims and children who are products
of that violence. We call for guarantees and respect for
the right to an identity, which includes, among others,
the right to a nationality, which is a fundamental right
of every human being and is also key to being able to
enjoy other fundamental rights.

We would therefore like to acknowledge the
important work being done by the Expert Team on the
Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict in support
of the national authorities of countries aimed at building
institutional and technical capacity to address this
issue. We hope that such an important group will not
be subject to budget cuts. The theme of sexual violence
must be addressed within the context ofpeace processes
and ceasefires, as well as in all demobilization and
reintegration processes in which the United Nations
participates. Mediators and special envoys involved
in such processes must have the requisite training in
order to respond appropriately to the issue as it emerges
in various specific contexts. In addition, efforts must
be pursued to improve the preparedness of all field
staff and to increase the number of gender experts and
women's protection advisers in the various missions.

In conclusion, Venezuela reaffirms its commitment
to helping to strengthen the institutional administrative
and legal mechanisms tasked with combating this type
of crime, which violates the dignity of human beings.

