Mr. Thoms (Germany): I would like to thank Jordan
for organizing today's open debate. I would also like
to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for her insightful briefing on the Secretary-
General's comprehensive report (S/2015/203), and to
express my appreciation to Ms. Hamsatu Allamin, who
spoke so knowledgeably about the situation in Nigeria.
It is important to hear the voice of civil society in the
Council.

Germany aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier on behalf of the European Union.

In recent months, we have heard about women
and girls being abducted, sold as slaves, forced into
marriage and sexually abused. What is frequently
ignored, however, is that sexual violence is committed
against men and boys as well as women and girls. I
would like make three points of particular concern to
Germany.

First, we welcome the report's detailed analysis
of the emerging phenomenon of violent extremism. It
reveals that sexual violence is not only a widespread
crime committed by individuals but that it functions
as an inherent strategic component of extremist
groups' ideology. Sexual violence and abuse are
used to terrorize local populations into submission,
forcibly displace unwanted populations and, even more
shockingly, to recruit new fighters, who are promised
the sexual availability of women and girls. With that
analysis before us, it is high time to tackle the issue.
Robust military and police responses and sanctions
can be a part of the solution, but such measures should
go hand in hand with work at the grass-roots level,
where we must strengthen tolerance, the rule of law,
the protection of human rights and compliance with
international humanitarian law.

Secondly, we welcome the fact that seven of the State
parties listed in the annex to the Secretary-General's
report have committed to taking joint action with the
United Nations to tackle the issue of sexual violence
committed by their troops. However, this year's report
also shows that more and more non-State armed groups
are responsible for systematic and widespread sexual
crimes in conflict. The international community must
find new and innovative ways to interact with those
actors in order to stop them committing such horrific
crimes. The International Criminal Court in particular
has a leading role to play in that regard, and we welcome
its June 2014 policy paper on sexual and gender-based
crimes.

We need to focus on the women and girls who fall
Victim to such violence. Survivors have to be able to
access counselling and medical assistance, including a
full range of sexual and reproductive health services.
They must be encouraged to report such crimes to the
responsible authorities, and any re-victimization and
stigmatization must be prevented. Finally, they have to
be accepted and reintegrated into their communities.
Traditional and religious leaders can play a key role in
creating a welcoming environment and countering any
kind of stigmatization of survivors. We have always
emphasized the crucial role of women as active agents
in the prevention, management and settlement of
conflicts, as well as in reconciliation. Experience has
shown that when women have a seat at the table and
their voices are heard, the prospects for a lasting peace
are better.

Only when we know what is happening on the
ground - and this is my third point - can we effectively
respond to and help those affected by violence. Women
protection advisers have proved to be an essential
asset, a fact that is clear from this year's report. Such
advisers should be included in the mandates of all the
relevant peacekeeping and special political missions,
and their funding and deployment should be a priority.
Moreover, the situation and role of women in armed
conflict should be included in all briefings and reports
on country situations.

In October we will celebrate the fifteenth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000). Together we
will utilize the opportunity to take stock of what has
been achieved over the past 15 years. We look forward
to the results of the global study commissioned by
the Council, which will undoubtedly give us concrete
guidance on further implementation of the resolution
and its follow-up resolutions.

