Mr. Jonasson (Iceland): Allow me at the outset
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this open
debate and to thank the Secretary-General for his
thorough report (S/2009/362). Iceland subscribes to the
recommendations put forward by the Secretary-General
in his report as to how to better implement resolution
1820 (2008).

The international community has a responsibility
to protect civilians from the widespread and systematic
use of sexual violence as a tactic of war. While States
bear the primary responsibility, the international
community also has an obligation to assist those States
that are not able to fulfil that responsibility.

To tackle the deliberate use of sexual violence, it
is essential to understand the nature and scope of the
problem. An effective monitoring and reporting
mechanism is pivotal to ensuring the successful
implementation of resolution 1820 (2008). Useful
synergies could be established between the monitoring
and accountability mechanisms established under
resolutions 1612 (2005) and 1820 (2008).

Furthermore, efforts to address sexual violence,
as set out in resolution 1820 (2008), would benefit
from increased cooperation among the United Nations
actors involved in peacekeeping, development and
human rights, including gender equality and the status
of women. By promoting gender equality and women's
empowerment in national and international
development policies, as well as in peace processes as
set out in resolution 1325 (2000), the international
community can effectively reduce the use of sexual
violence as a tactic of war.

The United Nations must lead by example.
United Nations peacekeepers must receive proper
training. They must not betray the trust we have placed
in them by perpetrating acts of wanton violence.
Troop-contributing countries must adopt appropriate
measures.

Finally, as long as impunity for sexual violence
continues, these crimes will be difficult to suppress. To
effectively end impunity, a broad range of actions is

needed. At the national level, urgent legal and judicial
system reforms are required to punish perpetrators.
This will require active cooperation and assistance
from the international community. Moreover, the
Security Council should use all the measures at its
disposal, especially when it comes to persistent
violators. We encourage the Council to ensure that
sexual violence offences are addressed in the work of
its sanctions committees and to use its most effective
tools, including targeted sanctions, as appropriate, for
such crimes.

In conclusion, my delegation would welcome
annual reports by the Secretary-General on the
progress and implementation of resolution 1820
(2008).

