Mr. Tin (Myanmar): At the outset, my delegation
thanks the Spanish presidency for organizing this
important open debate. I also thank the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2015/716) and the Executive
Director of UN-Women and others for their insightful
briefings.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
made earlier by the Permanent Representative of Viet
Nam who spoke on behalf of the member States of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).

The fifteenth anniversary of the Council's landmark
resolution 1325 (2000) presents us with the opportunity
to review the progress made and strengthen our resolve
to address the remaining challenges in alleviating the
impact of conflicts on women and girls. As the global
study has indicated, the nature of warfare today is
changing. Today, conflicts are becoming more complex,
and the number of major conflicts has risen drastically.
Brutal extremist terrorism has raised its ugly head and
become a major threat to global peace and security.
Due to their vulnerability, women and children are the
first group to bear the brunt of Violent conflict. It has
therefore become all the more urgent to revitalize our
collective efforts to better protect women in conflict.

My delegation commends the United Nations for
keeping the issue of protecting women and girls high
on its agenda. Much has been done to implement key
aspects of the Council's landmark resolution 1325
(2000). The creation of such institutions as UN-Women
should be counted as examples ofvery positive progress.

As the debate focuses on translating rhetoric to
effective results, my delegation wishes to share some
of the steps taken in Myanmar to address the issue at
hand. Sexual Violence is a crime strongly abhorred by
our traditional values and strictly forbidden by law and
the culture of Myanmar. As such, severe legal action
is taken against perpetrators of all reported cases,
be they civilians or members of security forces. The
penal code strongly prescribes severe penalties for
committing sexual violence. We have put in place a
strong legal foundation for punishing Violent sexual
crimes. Military personnel are given in-house training
to ensure compliance with the Military Act, codes of
conduct and relevant civil laws. Violent sexual crimes
are condemned - and not condoned - by law and
practice in Myanmar.

As a State party to the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women, Myanmar has taken a series of steps to
eliminate discrimination and violence against women
in accordance with the Convention. Institutions set up
to oversee the issue of women have been established.
A 10-year national strategic plan for the advancement
of women (2013-2023), which includes measures to
address violence against women, is being implemented.
Another significant step taken was the 5 June 2014
adoption by the Government of Myanmar of the
Declaration of Commitment to End Sexual Violence in
Conflict, initiated by the United Kingdom. It reflects
our renewed commitment to joining the international
community in advocating on this issue.

Over the past four and a half years, the reforms
in Myanmar have promoted democratic values and
opened up society, creating greater political and media
freedom. They have given civil society and international
organizations greater opportunities to work more
actively and closely with Government institutions and
local communities in protecting women. Our newfound
media freedom has also had an impact on the people as
a whole, through its creation of a better environment
in which anyone can file a report without fear about
any wrongful act in which rights are abused. With the
cooperation of the United Nations, the Government
has taken steps to raise public awareness about the
importance of gender equality and the protection
of women. In October 2013, Myanmar organized
an open day on women and peace and security to
mark the anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000). The
event promoted greater awareness of this landmark
resolution among the people, Government officials and
parliamentarians.

In Myanmar, civil society and non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) are now able to actively
participate in activities aimed at preventing violence
against women, including conducting surveys and
research in order to obtain reliable data that can
facilitate measures against sexual violence. We have
organized seminars on violence against women across
the country. We are also working with UN-Women,
the United Nations Population Fund and NGOs to
implement projects that include improving female
victims' access to justice and developing mechanisms
within communities to respond to acts of sexual
violence. In another bold step, the Government, in
cooperation with the United Nations, has been working
hard to enact a law combating violence against women
that is now in its final drafting stage. We hope that once
it is enacted, this important legislation will contribute
significantly to enhancing the protection of women and
girls against violence.

At the regional level, Myanmar is also working with
ASEAN member States to protect the rights of women
within the framework of ASEAN's Commission on
the Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Women
and Children and the ASEAN Institute for Peace and
Reconciliation.

As my delegation has frequently said, the best
way to end violence against women in situations of
armed conflict is to end those conflicts. Myanmar
firmly believes that without peace and reconciliation
we cannot build a developed and democratic society.
We are therefore making sincere and serious efforts to
end the conflict that has plagued our country for more
than six decades, and we are making unprecedented
progress, since almost all our armed ethnic groups
have been agreed on the draft text of our nationwide
ceasefire agreement since 31 March 2014. Tomorrow the
agreement will be signed by the Government and those
armed ethnic groups that are ready to do so. It will mark
not only a milestone in our history but also a watershed
in our peacebuilding process and in our efforts to create
an environment conducive to eliminating the violent
impact of conflict on our people. We hope that the
ensuing political dialogue will encourage more women
to participate in the process. The needs of vulnerable
groups, including women and children, must also be
given special consideration.

In our universal condemnation of acts of violence
against women, we must be sure not to encourage
exploitation of this emotive issue as a tool for one's
own political agenda. Myanmar welcomes the efforts
of the United Nations to advance the agenda on women
and peace and security. In doing so, we believe that
the United Nations must work with Member States
by taking a cooperative approach in assisting them
with national capacity-building and helping them to
effectively address the gaps and challenges remaining
in their policies.

