The President: At the outset of this meeting, I
should like, on behalf of the members of the Security
Council, to express profound grief and sorrow at the
passing of Baroness Thatcher, former Prime Minister
of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland. The members of the Council convey their
deepest sympathy to the family of Baroness Thatcher
and to the Government and people of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.

I now invite the members of the Council to rise and
observe a minute of silence in tribute to the memory of
Baroness Thatcher.

The members of the Security Council observed a
minute ofsilence.

Expression of sympathy for the victims of the
Boston Marathon bombing

The President: Let me also take this moment to
express our deepest sympathy for the victims of the
senseless killing that took place in Boston two days
ago. To the families, the people and the Government
of the United States of America, the Security Council
expresses deep sympathy.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Women and peace and security

Report of the Secretary-General on sexual
violence in conflict (S/2013/149)


The President: I wish to warmly welcome
the Secretary-General, the Ministers and other
representatives present in the Security Council Chamber
this morning. Their participation is an affirmation of
the importance of the subject matter under discussion
today.

In accordance with rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representatives
ofBelgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia,

Ethiopia, Fiji, Germany, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Malaysia, Myanmar, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines,
Portugal, Qatar, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South
Africa, Spain, the Sudan, Switzerland, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Tanzania and Viet Nam to participate in this
meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Zainab
Hawa Bangura, Special Representative ofthe Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, to participate
in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Saran Kei'ta
Diakite of the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace
and Security to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.

I propose that the Security Council invite
Archbishop Francis Assisi Chullikatt, Apostolic
Nuncio, Permanent Observer of the Observer State of
the Holy See to the United Nations, to participate in
this meeting, in accordance with the provisional rules
of procedure and previous practice in that regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document 8/2013/ 149, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on sexual violence in conflict.

I now have the pleasure to give the floor to His
Excellency Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon.


