Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I would
first of all like to welcome the holding of this debate
and to thank the Secretary-General, Ms. Michelle
Bachelet, Ambassador Lazarus Kapambwe and
Ms. Orzala Ashraf Nemat for their briefings and their
participation in this meeting. I should also like to
associate myself with the statement to be delivered on
behalf of the European Union.

It seems to us more important than ever that the
Security Council address the issue of women's role and
participation in conflict prevention and mediation. The
Arab Spring has served to forcefully remind us of that.
Women have been significant actors in the transitions
that have occurred in Tunisia, Egypt and Libya. In
Syria and Yemen women are today continuing to fight
with exceptional courage to defend their freedom, to
ensure that the most fundamental human rights are
respected and to make their calls for democracy heard.
In this connection, I wish to welcome this year's
awarding of the Noble Peace Prize to three exceptional
women who are doing outstanding work in the service
of peace and human rights.

Women must continue to be represented and
actively consulted in the ongoing reform processes.
They must have a place at the side of their male
counterparts in order to successfully carry out the
transition to democracy and establish regimes that are
fairer and more respectful of the freedoms of their
peoples. This is about the success of the ongoing
political transitions and, consequently, about the
stability of the countries themselves and, in turn, about
the security of the region.

The effective implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), on women and peace and security, is a priority
for France, which actively worked for its adoption, just
as we have worked to strengthen awareness of this
issue at the European Union, especially during our
2008 presidency of the Union. Last year, France
adopted a national plan of action on the
implementation of the resolution. In particular, it aims
at prioritizing, at the international level, the protection
of women against all forms of violence and promoting
respect for their basic rights, as well as their equal
participation in decision-making processes in the
context of peacebuilding, reconstruction and
development.

France has undertaken commitments in the
context of its plan of action to strengthen women's
direct participation in reconstruction efforts and the
decision making process, namely, by focusing priority
on access to leadership positions. In particular, France
is implementing several cooperation programmes, in
partnership with UN-Women, aimed at strengthening
women's participation in the decision-making process,
improving their access to, and participation in, the
justice sector. We are doing that by relying on civil
society organizations and, in particular, women's
groups, which I would like here to commend. Those
programmes are being carried out in Africa and the
Arab world, as well as in Afghanistan. Moreover,
France is developing programmes intended to bolster
the participation of women in peacekeeping operations.
Our plan of action also includes initiatives to improve
awareness of the need for respect for the rights of
women in the context of training programmes, which is
another important element in the implementation of the
resolution on women, peace and security.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his recent report (S/2011/598*). We agree with the bulk
of its analyses. We would also like to commend the
work done by UN-Women under the leadership of
Ms. Bachelet. The strategic framework and follow-up
indicators referred to in the report are useful tools, both
for Member States and for the United Nations, in
following up the implementation of the resolution on
women and peace and security. Not only do they make
it possible to assess results, but also to identify
shortcomings in women's participation in conflict
prevention and resolution. They also make it possible
to refocus the efforts of the international community to
ensure better protection for women in armed conflict.

We have seen progress in this regard in the past
10 years. To complement the resolution, the Council
has put in place a framework that makes possible a
more comprehensive approach to the protection of
women and their participation in the resolution of
conflicts. At the same time, the United Nations
Secretariat and its agencies, funds and programmes, as
well as other bodies of the Organization, now
undertake more coordinated efforts. Ms. Bachelet's
role has undoubtedly made a contribution in that
regard. I also wish to commend the work and
coordinating efforts of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
as well as his Special Representative on Children and
Armed conflict for her respective contributions.

Allow me to conclude by referring to the matter
of justice, which is a major issue in the implementation
of the resolution on women and peace and security.
How can women express themselves and participate in
public life if they must live alongside their former
tortures, or live in fear and under oppression? How can
they have access to justice if the road to justice entails
humiliation, threats and reprisals? Access to justice and
combating impunity are essential elements in ensuring
women's full participation. In particular, there is a duty
on the part of the international community to make use
of all the instruments available to it - establishing
commissions of inquiry, making referrals to the
International Criminal Court and putting in place
targeted sanctions, in the case of serious violations and
systematic assaults on the rights of women. Only then
will the efforts of the international community take on
genuine credibility when it comes to protecting women
and promoting their participation in conflict resolution.

