Mrs. Shahar (Israel): Mr. President, at the

outset, I would like to thank you for having convened

this open debate on women, peace and security as we

mark the sixth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000).

This year also deserves special recognition as the
thirtieth anniversary of the United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM). Since 1976,
UNIFEM. has provided financial and technical
assistance to thousands of innovative initiatives around
the world aimed at fostering women's empowerment
and gender equality. UNIFEM. has undoubtedly
touched the lives of women and young girls in more
than 100 countries. Here at the United Nations
especially, UNIFEM. has helped to make the voices of
women heard on critical issues and advocated for the
implementation of commitments made to women
around the globe by the nations of the world.

Israel believes that women must play an equal
role in all aspects of State affairs and in civil society.
We have no doubt that the advancement and progress
of women will translate into nothing less than
advancement and progress for all. As such, Israel
remains committed to the principles and goals of the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, as well as
to the principles outlined in the Outcome Document
adopted by our leaders a year ago.

We welcome the Secretary-General's United
Nations System-wide Action Plan, which will help
ensure that closer attention is paid to gender
perspectives in conflict-prevention and peacekeeping
activities. Similarly, we encourage the Secretary-
General to continue to identify women candidates for
senior-level positions within the United Nations
system, with particular attention to special
representatives. We trust that this will remain a priority
for the incoming Secretary-General as well.

The mainstreaming of gender into all policies and
programmes at the international and national level is a
crucial factor in the prevention of sex discrimination,
exploitation and abuse. If women are ever truly to see
their needs recognized and interests represented in
peace accords, they must have access to peace
negotiations from the earliest possible stages. To that
extent, Israel has been working, through Government
and non-governmental channels, to increase awareness
and amplify the voice of women in peace negotiations
and conflict resolution processes.
In Israel, programmes such as Isha l'Isha -
meaning "woman to woman" - continue to implement

resolution 1325 (2000) through a variety of means,
including, but not limited to, distributing Hebrew
translations of the resolution; distributing and
disseminating information on the resolution to national,
regional and non-governmental bodies; campaigning to
raise awareness through public relations work and
media coverage; and monitoring and documenting the
impact of conflict on women and girls. Isha l'Isha has
also contributed documents and information to the
Israeli parliament's research centre, which is working
to create legal recommendations for the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in Israel.

Similarly, the Israeli Women's Equal Rights law
was amended a year and a half ago, in the spirit of
resolution 1325 (2000), mandating the Israeli
Government to include women in any group appointed
to participate in peacebuilding negotiations and
conflict resolution.

It may be worthwhile to note that some of the key
mediators currently involved in promoting the
resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict are
women, among them our very own Foreign Minister,
Tzipi Livni; United States Secretary of State
Condoleezza Rice; Greek Foreign Minister Theodora
Bakoyannis, who chaired a special meeting of the
Security Council just last month; German Chancellor
Angela Merkel; the British Foreign Secretary and many
other prominent women - women who are today the
effective stewards of a political peace initiative in our
region. These extraordinarily competent women,
drawing on their own skills and, hopefully, on the work
of the resilient and vigorous Israeli-Palestinian
women's peace movement, bring a renewed energy and
dynamism to the negotiations.

However, the election of Hamas, a terrorist
organization, to the leadership of the Palestinian
Authority has stalled the negotiation process.
Additionally, it has made the identification of women
leaders and representatives to peace negotiations from
the Palestinian side all the more difficult.

On the other hand, there is a visible movement of
Israeli women, from across civil society and the
political spectrum, advocating for peace. The
recognition and effectiveness of such advocacy
organizations and non-governmental organizations is a
testament to the vibrancy of Israeli democracy and
pluralism. Israel takes great pride in their leadership.

More specifically, in the spirit of resolution 1325
(2000), Israeli and Palestinian women, under the
auspices of the International Women's Commission for
a Just and Sustainable Israeli-Palestinian Peace, met
again this year here in New York. Their recent visit,
which took place last month during the opening of the
session, at the time of the general debate, facilitated
meetings with key players in regional and peace
negotiations, in an effort to restart dialogue and open
more channels.

Israel is determined that women should play an
increasingly active role in peace negotiations, and we
are committed to advancing the role of women in all
aspects of society. We are hopeful that an enhanced
role for women in peace negotiations will build lasting
bridges of understanding with our neighbours and
allow for the reopening of a dialogue to rejuvenate the
prospects for peace.

As Golda Meir, Israel's only woman Prime
Minister to date, once said: "The only alternative to
war is peace. The only road to peace is negotiation."

