Mr. Niyonzima (Burundi) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like thank you, Madam President,
for convening this interesting open debate of Security
Council on the theme "Displaced women and girls:
leaders and survivors", under the agenda item entitled
"Women and peace and security". I would also like to
thank the four speakers who took the floor this morning
for their informative statements, which taught us a
great deal about the theme that brings us together today.

Since decolonization, it is estimated that Africa has
experienced approximately 80 coups d'e'tat, about as
many armed conflicts and around 40 civil wars. Of the
19 countries around the world where armies intervened
in the 1990s, 15 are located in sub-Saharan Africa, and
my country, Burundi, is one ofthem. It is estimated that
the number of civilian losses in the current conflicts
is around 90 per cent of all casualties, mostly women
and children. A century ago, 90 per cent of those who
died in war were soldiers or were part of the military
personnel.

That dark portrait raises a very important question:
why Africa? Answering that question requires points of
reference. As serious and recurrent as they are, violent
conflicts should not give rise to an analysis that locks
Africa in a hawkish caricature or in a passive position.
The Africa ofpeoples - the Africa ofmen and ofwomen,
the Africa of girls - does not only suffer conflicts; it
also tries to prevent and resolve them, and in all that the
role of women and girls is to be promoted.

After having heard the speeches that preceded mine,
I would say that the overall picture that emerges is that,
14 years after the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), no
conflict can be resolved, no transition can be envisaged
without taking into account the participation of women,
who constitute half of humankind. The consequences
of conflict are devastating, including for the equality
between men and women. Women often have fewer
resources than men with which to protect themselves.
With children, they generally constitute the majority of
refugee and internally displaced populations. They are
the recurrent targets oftactics of warfare such as sexual
violence. They are often kept out of peace talks, even
though they lead peace movements and are the source
of community recovery after conflict.

Women and girls are also particularly affected by
the destruction of the socioeconomic infrastructure,
such as hospitals, health centres, schools, water
systems, roads and transportation routes. That situation
radicalizes their inability to gain access to basic social
services and aggravates problems related to primary
and reproductive health. It also paves the way for an
increase in the maternal and infant mortality rate,
growth in and lack of protection from violence and
sexual exploitation, and the spread of and lack of
protection from risks related to HIV/AIDS.

The abuses suffered by women and girls in
situations of armed conflict are variable and take the
form of rape, sexual slavery and forced prostitution.
Women and girl refugees are very vulnerable to the
violence and exploitation at the heart of conflicts, and
rather than return home they prefer to seek asylum in
other lands.

We welcome the fact that the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has issued
guidelines for the protection of women refugees,
including the prevention of sexual violence against
them and measures to be taken if such acts have been
committed, and that it seeks to ensure that international
law provides adequate protection to women and girl
refugees.

Responding to challenges specific to men and
and to women in conflict and post-conflict requires
sensitivity and focused awareness ofthe human realities
experienced specifically and differently by each sex.
That in turn requires the appropriate training needed
to make informed decisions. That ultimately requires
appropriate tools, firm commitments, measures for
action and evaluation, and accountability mechanisms.

With regard to the maintenance of peace, Burundi,
which is the leading French-speaking troop-contributing
country, supports the deployment of women in United
Nations peacekeeping operations. Deployment of female
troops and police and the appointment of advisors on
the protection of women have demonstrated that one
could promote the empowerment of women and address
sexual violence in armed conflict and thus play a major
role in post-conflict reconstruction.
With regard to women's involvement in the peace
negotiation and reconciliation processes, in Burundi
women played a very important role in the various
negotiations that led to a comprehensive peace
agreement. At the signing ofthe Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement for Burundi in Arusha, Tanzania, in
2000 - an agreement that enshrines political,
ethnic, regional and gender inclusiveness - women
participated actively, and their recommendations were
taken into account. For example, in the context of the
integration ofwomen in the process of social, economic
and political development, the Burundian Constitution
grants a minimum quota of 30 per cent for women in
the highest levels of decision-making. Thus, since 2005,
women have been at the forefront of reforms in the
country. Some 44 per cent of the members of Burundi's
Parliament are women, and 43 per cent of Government
ministers are women occupying significant posts.

Burundi's good experience in that respect shows
today that the contributions of women in reconstruction
and peacebuilding processes are crucial in the
prevention and resolution of conflicts and in post-
conflict reconstruction. We must therefore consider
them as full partners in the formal and informal
processes of conflict resolution and peace negotiations.
We can refer to an example of mobilization very close
to us, namely, the meeting of women's organizations in
the Great Lakes region, which was held in Bujumbura
in July 2013, within the framework of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, whose
headquarters are located in my country, Burundi.

Finally, my country would once again emphasize
the great importance it attaches to the role of women
in prevention and resolution of conflicts and in
peacebuilding and reiterates at the same time its strong
commitment to the full and effective implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security. It will continue to attach particular importance
to the situation of girls and women who are refugees and
displaced. Of course, we eagerly await the results of the
independent review commissioned by the Secretary-
General on the state of implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), which was adopted almost 15 years ago.

