Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): As this is my first
statement before the Council this month, allow me to
begin by congratulating you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of this month's presidency of the Council.
I would also like to welcome your focus in this debate
on the specific role played by women's civil society
organizations in conflict prevention, resolution and
recovery. Thanks must also be extended to Ms. Bachelet
and Mr. Ladsous for the expertise they provided through
their briefings earlier today. I also thank the Secretary-
General for his report on women and peace and security
(S/2012/732).

In the 12 years since its adoption, resolution 1325
(2000) and subsequent related resolutions have been
helpful tools, not only to bring to the attention of the
international community the importance of the women
and peace and security agenda, but ALSO to strengthen
women's participation rather than simply branding
them as victims. The Afghan Government remains
committed to the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) in Afghanistan and its promotion worldwide.

Afghanistan is designing a comprehensive plan
for implementing resolution 1325 (2000) through its
National Action Plan for Women. The Government of
Afghanistan is fully committed to implementing the
Plan, which will be a four-year plan focused on women
and peace and security. We appreciate the generous
support of the Government of Finland for help in the
drafting process.

We have established a steering committee comprised
of seven line ministries, the Commissioner for Human
Rights and members of civil society, which meets under
the chairmanship of the Minister of Foreign Affairs
to effectively coordinate the implementation of the
National Action Plan. In addition, we have established
a technical working group at the Director General level
from those line ministries and an advisory committee,
which includes the United Nations offices in Kabul and
international staff. The inclusion of United Nations
partners has been invaluable in bringing together
knowledge and expertise from post-conflict countries
in order to enable Afghanistan to move towards a
fuller implementation of the National Action Plan. We
are looking forward to the support of UN-Women in
assisting the Afghan Government in the implementation
of the National Action Plan for Women.

Cooperation on the bilateral level has also played
a significant role in ensuring that our architecture to
implement resolution 1325 (2000) is firmly in place
through the provision of technical and financial
support, and we look forward to engaging with our
bilateral partners through the transition and beyond.

The Secretary-General expresses concern in his
report in regard to the slow global progress in women's
participation and representation in peace talks. The
Afghan Government recognizes the vital role that women
have to play in the peaceful resolution of conflicts,
and remains committed to focusing on women's rights
throughout the peace process. Women are playing an
important role in Afghan-led reconciliation, including
through participation in the High Peace Council.

We see a marked improvement in the position of
women through a pronounced presence of women in
political and social life. Currently, there are 69 female
members of Parliament, making up more than a quarter
of the total number of parliamentarians. There are also
encouraging signs for the future of women's social
participation. In 2001, 5,000 girls were enrolled in
school in Afghanistan; now, according to figures from
2011, there are 2.7 million girls enrolled in schools
across the country. The continued participation of
young women in education will ensure a brighter
future not only for them but also for Afghanistan as
they become the police officers, Government officials
and leaders of the next generation.

Additionally, we have ensured that there are strong
links between women in Government and civil society
groups to coordinate activities to encourage more
involvement of women at all levels. Our civil society
has been vital in helping Afghanistan to rebuild itself
from decades of conflict.

Women's civil society groups have been particularly
crucial in acting as a united voice for Afghan women.
An informal advisory group comprised of Afghan
Government representatives, women Parliamentarians
and civil society members meet directly with President
Karzai on a regular basis to discuss issues of women's
security, women in leadership, women's rights and cases
of violence against women. Civil society organizations
played a defining role in the drafting of the Elimination
of Violence Against Women Law enacted in 2009, and
offer continuing support for the National Action Plan.
Currently, a strong coalition of civil society groups has
focused on providing training on the legal and civil
rights of women and the relevance of implementing
resolution 1325 (2000) to men and women alike in
provincial districts.

Violent attacks against innocent Afghan women,
men, girls and boys in some parts of the country remain
a threat to the overall peace and security ofAfghanistan.
Violence against women and girls in the country is
unacceptable. The Government of Afghanistan and
the international community must continue to address
ongoing violence with a View to bringing much-needed
lasting peace to Afghanistan and promoting a stable
situation in which the human rights of all Afghans can
be fully respected.

To that end, by focusing on training and equipping
the army, we have seen an encouraging growth in the
number and capacities of our security forces. Those
efforts have included women's participation in the
Afghan National Army, in which they serve in a variety
of capacities, including highly technical roles, such as
pilots. Women also continue to join the Afghan National
Police, despite receiving threats against their lives and
discouragement, at times even from their own families.
Women's participation in those capacities ensures that
women in the community have trusted mentors within
the Afghan National Army and the Afghan National
Police.

The Government of Afghanistan looks forward
to continued cooperation with the international
community in its efforts to honour and implement
resolution 1325 (2000) in Afghanistan and worldwide.
Through resolution 1325 (2000), the international
community made a commitment to the women and
peace and security agenda that still requires our full
attention and dedication.

