Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): I wish to thank Spain and
commend your vision and leadership, Mr. President, in
organizing today's high-level debate on the review of
resolution 1325 (2000).

Hungary strongly supported the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, and the subsequent resolutions on that
topic. We know that numerous initiatives and actions
have been launched during the past 15 years aimed
at enhancing the effective participation of women
in peace processes, as well as their empowerment in
peacemaking and post-conflict situations.

Hungary fully allies itself with the common
pledges on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) on women and peace and security delivered by
the observer of the European Union.

In addition, at the national level, Hungary pledges
to identify and deploy female military experts, officers
and police officers to United Nations peacekeeping and
European Union Common Security and Defence Policy
missions.

We also commit ourselves to stepping up all efforts
aimed at strengthening justice and accountability. In
that context, we support the inclusion of the perpetrators
of gross violations of women's human rights and other
forms of gender-based crimes in United Nations and
bilateral sanctions.

We are ready to contribute to international
initiatives aimed at combating sexual violence in
conflicts, particularly against women and girls.

Hungary financed, on a bilateral basis, a gender-
based training workshop in Kenya aimed at developing
the security sector within the framework of our
international development cooperation strategy. We
have also supported UN-Women programmes, one in
the Western Balkans on advancing the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, and one in Kenya for improving security and
enhancing leadership for crisis-affected women and
girls. Hungary also contributed to the construction of a
secondary school for girls in Afghanistan.

However, despite the remarkable progress we have
made in the past 15 years, there still remain significant
challenges hindering our efforts to achieve peace and
security for all. Hungary is greatly looking forward
to working with UN-Women and Member States on
the various United Nations programmes, because we
believe that responsibility for dealing with those issues
lies with all of us, without exception.

Hungary declared its commitment to the cause
of preventing sexual violence at the Global Summit
to End Sexual Violence in Conflict held in London
last year, where Hungary joined others in endorsing
the communique on the Call to Action to End
Violence against Women and Girls in Emergencies.
Finally, I would like to add that, in cooperation with
Hungarian Baptist Aid, a renowned organization
that has accumulated vast experience in cooperating
with military peacekeeping forces in fighting sexual
violence and dealing with the consequences of such
vicious acts, Hungary also continues to contribute to a
project aimed at educating women and girls in Baghlan
province in Afghanistan.
