Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): Belgium fully aligns itself with the statements
delivered by the observer of the European Union and
by the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group
of Friends of Women, Peace and Security. I make the
following comments in my national capacity.

As well all know, the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000) was an important step towards recognizing
women's role in conflict prevention, conflict
management and peacebuilding. When, building on
that initiative, the Security Council adopted resolution
1820 (2008) - almost 10 years ago to the day - it
also took a long-awaited step forward in the struggle
against sexual violence in conflict. Belgium, which
was a non-permanent member of the Security Council
at that time, has always attached great importance to
the implementation of that historic resolution and its
follow-up resolutions.

In July 2017, my country adopted its third national
plan of action on women and peace and security. The
plan sets forth six major goals intended to improve
women' situation in conflict zones before and following
conflicts. One of the six major objectives is explicitly
intended to combat all forms of violence directed
against women and girls, and, more specifically, sexual
violence. Exactly as was the case with its precursors,
the plan is to be implemented at the national level
and within the framework of Belgium's foreign policy
involving partner countries of the Belgian Development
Cooperation, international organizations of which
Belgium is a member and countries in which the
Belgian armed forces are active, as well as countries
with which we enjoy bilateral relations. Our policy is
not solely limited to the area of Government. A report
resuming the progress made in every goal set out in the
plan of action is submitted annually to Parliament.

Beyond the national level, it is essential that
we continue to work so that the women and peace
and security agenda inform any new initiative
involving conflict prevention, conflict management or
peacekeeping. In that regard, Belgium welcomes the
fact that the topic of women and peace and security is
an integral part of the new joint proposals made by the
European Union and NATO, announced in December
2017, and we encourage other regional initiatives to
explicitly include that theme in their mandates, as well
as in their efforts on the ground.
Despite the significant work that has been done, the
struggle against sexual violence is far from over. As
we speak, sexual violence against women and girls and
men and boys continues in conflict zones throughout
the world, and those responsible for such acts often
go unpunished. Belgium is deeply concerned about
the instances of sexual violence met with impunity
mentioned in the report (S/2018/250) of the Secretary-
General, and urges all parties concerned to follow his
recommendations so as to bring justice the perpetrators,
rehabilitate the victims of sexual violence and ensure
that such violence is not repeated.

In conclusion, I underscore that Belgium will
remain committed to this issue both at the national
level and vis-a-vis the international community,
thereby giving political and operational priority to
the implementation of resolution 1820 (2008) and its
follow-up resolutions. My country will also continue to
support the work of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the Team of Experts on the Rule
of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict. Lastly, in the
event that we are elected as a non-permanent member
of the Security Council for the period from 2019 to
2020, we pledge to continue to support and actively
promote the women and peace and security agenda
and its mandate, including the struggle against sexual
violence in conflict situations within the framework of
the decision-making process of the Council.

