Mr. Giraldo (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like at the outset to thank you, Sir, for having
taken the initiative of convening this open debate of the
Security Council on women, peace and security
so that we may assess progress made in implementing
resolution 1325 (2000), in which member States
expressed their concern over the situation of civil
populations, particularly women and children, in armed
conflict.

My country is a member of an informal group of
delegations working to formulate initiatives allowing
the United Nations and its membership effectively to
formulate and implement gender equality policies;
focus on women and child victims of armed conflict
throughout the world; take into account the specific
needs of women; and help in reconciliation and the
restoration of the social fabric. Colombia is committed
to the ideals expressed in resolution 1325 (2000). As a
member of the group of friends, we have supported the
resolution's implementation and follow-up.

In Colombia, violence perpetrated against
civilians by illegal armed actors has led to the forced
internal displacement of thousands of people, mostly
women and children, with grave social and economic
consequences for the entire nation. We also have the
tragedy of women combatants in these illegal armed
bands, where, in addition to becoming machines of
death, they are also the subjects of sexual and
psychological discrimination and abuse. In such bands,
women lose their very natures and vocation as the
bedrock of family, community and social stability. The
existence of women combatants makes it impossible to
build the peaceful and sustainable society that every
country requires.

Given the particular vulnerability of women and
children in armed conflict, the Government of
Colombia has focused special attention on the
participation of women in issues related to peace and
security. We have devised a national policy of women
as builders of peace and development, a policy geared
towards peace, equity and equal opportunity. Building
equity starts with identifying populations in which
there are clear differences in opportunity and needs.
All those issues have been included in our national
development plan, "Towards a Communal State", a
document reflecting the current Administration's
priorities.

Resolution 1325 (2000) has particular meaning in
Colombia, being closely linked to our harsh reality.
Just like men, and even children, women are both
participants in and victims of armed conflict. Our
efforts are aimed towards ensuring that all members of
illegal armed bands disarm, demobilize and reintegrate
themselves into civil society. Our commitment is to the
thousands of internally displaced persons, to whom we
want to give the necessary assistance so that they can
soon return to their homes. In both tasks we attach
particular importance to women and children, who
make up at least half of the membership of illegal
armed bands and of internally displaced persons in our
country.

The repatriation, reintegration and rehabilitation
of combatant and non-combatant populations are basic
priorities during the post-conflict stage in order to
build foundations for reconciliation and structures for
peace. In those circumstances, the achievements in
programmes for women and children have a direct and
immediate impact on communities and entire countries.

On 14 October, while subscribing to the national
agreement on equality between men and women - an
event in which Government officials, members of the
executive and legislative branches and representatives
of civil society participated - President Alvaro Uribe
made a special appeal to women in the ranks of illegal
armed bands to lay down their weapons. He also gave a
firm commitment by the State to support them in that
process.

Colombia, like the United Nations and Member
States, has the goal of taking all children out of armed
conflict. We must also aim to take every woman out of
the ranks of illegal armed bands. Colombia appeals to
the United Nations and Member States to give
particular attention to the reality of women soldiers in
illegal armed bands. Programmes and campaigns must
be implemented to encourage those women to abandon
the path of violence and become true builders of peace
and development.

Women's organizations in Colombia make a
considerable contribution to the restoration of peace
and to reconciliation. There is therefore an urgent need
for women combatants in illegal armed bands to end
their involvement and join all those who are daily
working to extricate the country from decades of
violence and armed conflict. A woman without a rifle
is an active member of society whose example
influences families and communities. A woman
without a rifle has a direct impact in the task of taking
children out of conflict. A woman without a rifle is a
guarantee that society is ready to become more deeply
involved in building peace.

I conclude by reiterating the commitment of the
Government of Colombia to respect for international
humanitarian law and the human rights of all
Colombia's citizens, both women and men. It is high
time for the illegal armed bands themselves to decide
to respect the lives, integrity, property, freedom and
other rights of the civilian population. We must
urgently begin to strengthen peace and security while
taking women and children out of armed conflict. By
doing so, we will be making a considerable
contribution to peace.

