Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank you, Madam President, for convening this
open debate on women and peace and security. I also
thank the Secretary-General, his Special Representative
on Sexual Violence in Conflict and the representative
of the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and
Security for their statements and presentations. We
take note of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/149) on sexual violence in conflict and of the
recommendations contained therein.

Azerbaijan welcomes the increasing attention being
paid by the Security Council and the wider international
community to this topic, which has contributed to
developing a solid normative framework and to raising
awareness on the impact that sexual violence has on
victims, families and societies. The appointment of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict and the establishment
of a system-wide entity on women's equality and
empowerment - UN-Women - has added a new
dimension to the global efforts.

It is imperative that all parties to armed conflict
strictly abide by their obligations under international
humanitarian and human rights law. Azerbaijan
reiterates its strong condemnation of all acts of sexual
violence in conflict. There can be no tolerance for such
acts, and all the necessary measures must be taken to
bring perpetrators to justice and put an end to impunity.

As the Secretary-General noted in his report,
national courts remain the principal venue for holding
individuals accountable for crimes of sexual violence.
At the same time, the lack of adequate national capacity
and expertise to investigate and prosecute acts of
sexual violence remains one of the main impediments
to ensuring accountability.

We note, in that regard, the efforts of the Team of
Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict, which was established pursuant to resolution
1888 (2009), aimed at strengthening the capacity of
national rule-of-law and justice actors.

The Secretary-General also noted in his report that

"The focus of international criminal justice and
mixed tribunals on combating acts of sexual
violence, including rape, in the context of crimes
against humanity, war crimes and genocide,
represents an important complement to national
efforts." (S/2013/149, para. 112)

Indeed, where national authorities fail to take action, the
international community should play a more proactive
role in ensuring an appropriate response.

Unfortunately, not all grave violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law,
including acts of sexual violence, have received due
attention and response at the international and regional
levels. Measures that are more resolute and targeted
are required to end impunity in such situations.
Commitments to protection efforts must be free of
selectivity and politically motivated approaches and
preferences. In that regard, Azerbaijan notes the role
played by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict pursuant to her
mandate.

The establishment of truth with respect to gross
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law, including sexual violence in conflict, and
the provision of adequate and effective reparations
are measures that aim, inter alia, to repair or redress
the immediate and long-term harm experienced by
victims of such violations. It is therefore important to
ensure that reparations are established through judicial
or administrative mechanisms and made available to
victims.

Furthermore, past wrongs left unpunished or
unrecognized often impede progress in achieving
long-awaited peace and reconciliation and can even
play a key role in the eruption of new conflicts and the
commission of new crimes.

It is therefore important that the Security Council,
Member States and regional organizations ensure
that mediators and envoys in mediation, peace and
preventive diplomacy processes can contribute to
ensuring accountability, including by encouraging the
parties concerned to envisage transitional justice and
reparation clauses in peace agreements.

We also support the call of the Secretary-General
for the use of the United Nations Guidance for Mediators
on Addressing Conflict-Related Sexual Violence in
Ceasefire and Peace Agreements.

It is also essential to employ all other available
means to address sexual violence in conflict,
including mandating international commissions of
inquiry and fact-finding missions and supporting the
implementation of their recommendations. We concur
with the Secretary-General that those responsible for
sexual violence and other human rights violations must
be excluded from all branches of Government and that
the principle of no amnesty for perpetrators of such
offenses must be applied and implemented.

It is important that the Security Council consistently
maintain its focus on protection efforts, including
sexual violence in conflict. Azerbaijan will support
more systematic and frequent discussion on the topic.

In conclusion I would like once again to commend
Rwanda for convening this open debate.

