Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I thank the
Deputy Secretary-General for her briefing. I extend
my congratulations to South Africa for a successful
presidency of the Security Council and welcome
the United Kingdom's presidency for the month
of November.

The success of the Council's work in the Horn
of Africa hinges on a clear understanding of the key
issues. Therefore, the United States is grateful for the
close attention to detail, especially to the role played
by women and youth in peace processes. I thank
Ms. Fatima Mohammed for her briefing. Yes, it is time
to break the cycle. I would like to highlight that we have
an opportunity to do so with the current peace process
in South Sudan.

In remarks last week (see S/PV.8649), I noted that
the United States has released a strategy on women,
peace and security. Central to that landmark document
is a commitment to the full, effective and meaningful
participation of women in United Nations peacekeeping
operations. While greater female participation is
welcome in its own right, our commitment to that
principle is born of our understanding that women
improve the effectiveness of missions in specific ways
that men cannot. As just one example, given that local
communities and conflict areas are largely comprised
of women and children, female peacekeepers have
a unique ability to conduct outreach and build trust
among hurting and traumatized populations. We must
strive to increase the number of women in military
contingents, police units and civilian support forces.
The United States will continue to work with troop-
and police-contributing countries to strengthen the
capabilities of all peacekeepers, as we have over 11,000
women in our Global Peace Operations Initiative. We
continue to urge all troop- and police-contributing
countries to promote policies that increase
women's participation.

The United States also remains dedicated to
advancing security more broadly in the Horn of Africa.
We support efforts to stabilize Somalia through the
advancement of the federalism process, including
peaceful, inclusive and democratic elections next
year. We commend Eritrea's efforts to develop and
implement a peace agreement with Ethiopia and hope
the momentum of peacebuilding in the region leads
to greater harmony between Djibouti and Eritrea. We
congratulate Prime Minister Ahmed on winning the
Nobel Peace Prize for his efforts to promote regional
peace and stability. Improving inter-State relations in
the Horn of Africa is an important step on the road to
greater trade and development. We therefore encourage
the United Nations Special Envoy to the region to
facilitate more dialogue on improved cooperation and
integration. We also look to countries in the Horn of
Africa to improve cooperation for the sake of regional
peace and stability.

In particular, we urge the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and its member States
to engage with South Sudan's leaders and encourage
them to reaffirm their commitment to the cessation of
hostilities and to implementing their peace agreement.
In our recent Visit, the Council was united in its message
that South Sudan's leaders must embrace compromise
to form an inclusive transitional Government. We
know the urgency of that task because we saw for
ourselves that political failure in this moment will spell
catastrophe for the people of South Sudan, especially
women and children. The eyes of the international
community remain firmly fixed on 12 November,
when we expect the parties to form a Government of
national unity. That is just one example of why the full
participation of women in our institutions of power
must be a priority for each of us.

The Council has an incredible opportunity to
help secure the meaningful inclusion of women in
preventing, resolving and recovering from conflict in
Africa. But, frankly, this is notjust an opportunity. It is
an obligation. When women are involved, the result is
more durable peace and greater security. Accordingly, if
the Council is serious about fulfilling its core mandate,
let us make use of the solution that has been ignored for
so long despite standing in plain sight. Let us give more
women a seat at the table and let us listen to what they
have to say.

