Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) member States Angola, Botswana,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Lesotho,
Malawi, Mauritius, Madagascar, Mozambique, South
Africa, Swaziland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Zambia, Zimbabwe and my own country, Namibia.

Let me thank the panellists for their informative
and illuminating introductory presentations this
morning. We welcome the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2005/636) on women and peace and
security.

I am delighted that it was during Namibia's
presidency of the Security Council in October 2000
that an open debate and discussions were initiated
which culminated in the adoption of this landmark
resolution - resolution 1325 (2000) - which we have
the honour of reviewing today. This five-year review
presents us with an opportunity to pause and evaluate
the progress we have made thus far in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). It is our
fervent belief that this event will add the desired
impetus to our commitment to fully realize all the goals
and objectives of resolution 1325 (2000). We are thus
gratified by the efforts undertaken within the United
Nations to develop a system-wide action plan to
implement this resolution.

The action plan has provided us with a
framework within which progress on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) can be
coordinated, monitored and evaluated. It is important
that the action plan not reinvent the wheel but rather
build on the achievements already made. In that regard,
we welcome the recommendation to review the
adequacy of existing operational tools, guidelines and
manuals for gender mainstreaming.

We further note with appreciation the fact that the
action plan has taken into account the capacity of
women in the areas of peacemaking and peacebuilding.
Women's groups, especially those in the vicinity of
conflict areas, have an important role to play,
especially during the reconciliation, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes. Local
expertise needs to be fully utilized in all phases of
conflict resolution and peacebuilding.

However, we note with concern that, although
there has been some progress in the reporting of gender
issues in the Secretary-General's reports as well as in
the work of the Security Council, gaps in reporting on
gender and women's issues continues to exist. Thus,
there is a need to critically examine the reasons behind
the underreporting of gender and women's issues and
to take the necessary steps to remedy the situation. We
know that in many cases the non-inclusion of gender
aspects is a result of inadequate capacity rather than
reluctance. We would therefore like to stress that
continuous capacity-building on gender analysis skills
both for staff and for stakeholders is crucial for
successful implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

We call for closer collaboration between the
United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations such as the African Union, the Southern
African Development Community and the Economic
Community of West African States, to mention but a
few. However, that will require capacity-building in
terms of technical, human and financial resources. We
therefore call upon the United Nations system to assist
in building the capacities of those organizations.

The Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action
and the outcome document of the twenty-third special
session of the General Assembly called for women's
participation to be equal to that of men and for their
full involvement in all efforts for the maintenance and
promotion of peace and security.

An area of concern to us is the continued low
representation of women in all phases of the
peacebuilding process. Despite the disproportionate
impact of conflict on women, they continue to hold
their families and communities together and often
undertake initiatives across warring factions under
extremely difficult conditions. When involved, they
bring their experiences into formal peace processes.
Thus, it is imperative that they be included in
peacebuilding processes at all levels. It is unfortunate
that, more often than not, the efforts of women are
insufficiently recognized and supported, both
politically and financially. As a result, women's rights
are rarely integrated into peace agreements or in the
structures supporting post-conflict reconstruction.

We therefore urge that the role of women in those
processes be built into the peace agreements from the
very beginning. The challenge before us is how to
increase the number of women in all phases and at all
levels of peace processes. Men need to be sensitized on
the positive contributions that women can bring to the
negotiating table. Both the United Nations system and
Member States must make deliberate efforts to identify
and support women's participation in peace processes.
The inadequate representation of women in decision-
making is not a phenomenon unique to peacebuilding
processes. Rather, it extends to all other areas. In that
regard, we urge Member States and the organizations
of the United Nations system, within their respective
mandates, to address the barriers women face in
moving into decision-making positions.

The establishment of the Peacebuilding
Commission has presented us with an opportunity to
ensure that gender is integrated into the design and
work of the Commission. We must formulate concrete
strategies, actions and programmes in a consistent and
effective manner to advance the role of women in the
area of peace and security. We should ensure the
effective participation of women in the Commission.

SADC condemns the use of sexual and gender-
based violence against women and children as a
weapon of war and also condemns widespread
violations of their human rights. We call upon all
parties involved in conflicts to respect international
humanitarian law and to ensure the protection of
women and children.

Furthermore, the continuing sexual exploitation
and abuse perpetrated against women and girls by
some United Nations peacekeepers and other
personnel is of great concern to us. We urge the
accelerated implementation of the Secretary-General's
recommendations on sexual exploitation and abuse.
Further, we urge troop- and police-contributing
countries to take punitive actions against those
involved in acts of sexual exploitation and abuse.

Finally, let me reaffirm SADC's commitment to
the full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

