Mr. Takasu (Japan): I wish to express our
gratitude to you, Sir, for organizing and presiding over
this open debate. I would also like to thank the guest
speakers of this morning for their very insightful
presentations.

If we are to move closer towards realizing the
principles that Security Council resolution 1325 (2000)
set out, concrete actions have to be taken by all players,
beginning with the Member States, the United Nations
system, regional organizations and non-governmental
organizations, especially those women's organizations
that are working on the ground.

Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) needs to
be implemented in a coherent and effective manner.
Japan welcomes the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2007/567). The report provides an overview of what
the System-wide Action Plan has achieved so far, what
gaps exist in its implementation and what challenges
must be surmounted if the Plan is to be completely
successful. We are also pleased with the development
of a policy framework, implementation strategies and a
2

results-based management framework, as they will
assist in improving accountability, monitoring and
reporting for the Action Plan for 2008-2009.

The initiative by the Inter-Agency Task Force on
Women, Peace and Security to build a database on
good practices and lessons learned in implementing
resolution 1325 (2000) is welcome. We hope it will be
used primarily to indicate how the activities of the
United Nations system are contributing to actual
positive changes in women's lives on the ground. We
are also pleased with the appointment of Ambassador
Ellen Margrethe Loj as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Liberia, and we congratulate her.
She is the first woman Special Representative of the
Secretary-General among those currently serving.

The principles of Security Council resolution
1325 (2000) have been increasingly shared and applied
in many post-conflict situations. However, we have
witnessed so many countries emerging from conflict
sliding back into violence. In that context, the
establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission was a
milestone in achieving the purposes of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000).

A gender perspective must be integrated into
peacebuilding activities. The consolidation of peace
requires the full participation of women in all related
processes, starting with peace negotiations, securing
domestic stability, arranging for humanitarian and
reconstruction assistance and national reconciliation.
Japan is pleased to note that gender equality issues
have been identified and integrated into the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission in the cases of both
Burundi and Sierra Leone. We have to ensure that the
active participation of women is fully incorporated in
post-conflict strategies. As Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission, Japan will make every effort to ensure
that the Commission takes up a policy and strategic
review of the role of women in peacebuilding
processes as a follow-up to today's open debate in the
Security Council.

There is no use in discussing conflict or peace
without taking into consideration the situation of the
vulnerable people whom conflict impacts most directly,
especially women. In post-conflict situations, women
are also able to play a critical role by bringing their
special needs into every stage and process of peace
consolidation and ensuring that those needs are
reflected. That clearly indicates the importance of a
07-55957
people-centred approach which focuses on the
empowerment of individuals and communities and not
only on protecting them from threats to their safety and
basic well-being. That is the human security approach
that Japan has been promoting globally and locally
with special efforts.

In order to put the concept of human security into
practice and to promote concrete action, Japan has
supported the United Nations Trust Fund for Human
Security since 1999. The Trust Fund has supported
projects to assist women in conflict and post-conflict
situations in many countries, including Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Rwanda, Burundi and Afghanistan.
Those projects have helped in creating conditions for
coexistence and in promoting reconciliation among
people belonging to former parties to a conflict. We
hope that the United Nations Trust Fund for Human
Security, together with the Peacebuilding Fund, will be
utilized to support concrete projects which will
facilitate women's initiatives to restore economic and
social stability in post-conflict situations.

In closing, Japan wishes to pledge its continuing
support for efforts to realize the goals of resolution
1325 (2000) so that women will be ensured security
and safety in their lives and so that their special needs
will be taken care of in times of armed conflict and in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding processes.

