Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would like to thank the Azerbaijani
presidency for organizing this meeting. We are also
grateful to the Secretary-General and others who spoke,
for their assessments and very useful information.

For over a decade now, resolution 1325 (2000)
has clearly confirmed its vital role and importance
in strengthening the role of women in the prevention
and settlement of armed conflicts and during post-
conflict reconstruction, as well as in their protection
during such conflicts. Unfortunately, despite numerous
efforts, women continue to fall Victim to various forms
of violence. That is why we believe that more attention
needs to be given to all categories of such crimes.
Such a balanced approach is enshrined in resolution
1325 (2000). Cases of women and children being killed
and getting injured are a cause for serious concern,
including as a result of the indiscriminate or excessive
use of force. We think it is unacceptable to simply turn
a blind eye to such crimes or to justify them as so-called
inevitable acts of collateral damage, which contradicts
provisions in the Geneva Conventions.

One of the main characteristics of the world today
is the significant number of crises in which women
suffer. At the same time, not all of those situations
pose a threat to international peace and security that
would require intervention by the Security Council.
Let us recall that issues of gender violence fall within
the framework of mandates tackled not only by the
Security Council but also by the General Assembly,
the Peacebuilding Commission, the Human Rights
Council, and the Commission on the Status of Women.
We must abide by the existing principles of the division
of labour within our Organization, without duplicating
the efforts and competencies of the various bodies.

We believe that the Council's effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) requires an
unwavering focus on a decisive mandate that approaches
women's issues in the context of international peace
and security and other such issues within its agenda.

We have carefully familiarized ourselves with the
report of the Secretary-General prepared for today's
meeting (S/2013/525). We should like to point out that
it is factually incomplete. We believe that in the future,
such reports should consider the nature of violence
against women in the context of the maintenance of
international peace and security in a more balanced
way, as stipulated by resolution 1325 (2000).

As far as facts in the report are concerned, they
have been compiled on the basis of the first third of
the assessment indicators on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), and we still have questions
regarding the usefulness and relevance of individual
indicators, as well as the scope for applying them. We
believe that work on indicators, which is still undergoing
approval, must be transparent and open in nature.

After all, issues ofinternational peace and security
are of interest to all States Members of the United
Nations. We do not share the report's concept of
using national plans of action for the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) as an assessment tool for
States' policies to improve the overall status of women.
Relevant national plans ought to be prepared voluntarily
by those States that find themselves in situations of
armed conflict. If other States wish to elaborate similar
national plans, that is clearly their right. However, the
voluntary decision of individual States to do that should
not mean that everyone is obliged to do so.

We are convinced of the significantly positive
potential of women's participation in various aspects
of the settlement of armed conflict and post-conflict
reconstruction. Women must not only be seen as victims
of armed conflicts. That in itself is discriminatory.
The direct involvement of women in preventing and
settling armed conflicts is, in our opinion, an important
prerequisite for overcoming violence against women.
We wish to express our satisfaction that resolution 2122
(2013), adopted today, pays a significant amount of
attention to ways of including women in such processes,
in line with resolution 1325 (2000). Clearly, gender
issues must be taken into account when mobilizing
peacekeeping forces.

It is just as important to include such issues in the
mandates of relevant missions. We urge States to tackle
those issues not in a predetermined way, but by being
mindful of individual situations. Such a differentiated
approach must also be applied when giving the United
Nations system instructions on how to integrate gender
issues into their mandates. They have clear mandates,
and for the majority of them, issues of women, peace
and security are not an absolute priority but merely one
of a number of factors within the framework of action
aimed at preventing and resolving armed conflict and
post-conflict situations. Let us not forget that the leading
role in protecting women at all stages of armed conflict
lies with national Governments, while measures taken
by bodies of the United Nations system and by civil
society must be aimed at backing and complimenting
efforts made by States.

We do not share the point of view that establishing
a specialized Security Council mechanism for gender
issues would be useful. We believe that ensuring
the effectiveness of the existing mechanisms for
implementing resolution 1325 (2000) does not hinge
on creating new bureaucratic procedures but rather
on improving the coordination and accountability
of existing mechanisms under the leadership of UN
Women.

