Ms. Intelmann (Estonia): Allow me to begin by
aligning myself with the statement delivered by the
observer of the European Union and by thanking you,
Sir, for convening this debate. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/20l2/33)
and the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict for her
statement. We strongly support the mandate of the
Special Representative, including the requirement to
provide periodic statements as important updates on
the state of sexual violence in conflicts around the
world. Special Representative Wallstrom has been an
important advocate for the fight against conflict-related
sexual violence, and we especially appreciate her focus
on the accountability dimension.

Sexual violence can be a crime of international
concern, especially if it is part of a widespread or
systematic campaign and can therefore constitute a war
crime, a crime against humanity or even an act of
genocide. The need to ensure accountability for such
crimes is self-evident.

International tribunals have long been at the
forefront of the fight against impunity for such crimes.
The International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, for
example, recognized rape as an act of genocide for the
first time in history in 1998. The Rome Statute,
adopted earlier that very year, represented a
tremendous step forward by incorporating, for the first
time and explicitly in an international legal framework,
sexual violence such as rape, sexual slavery, enforced
prostitution and forced pregnancy. It did so in a way
that makes their prosecution a practical possibility. The
importance of implementing those provisions is further
illustrated by the obligation of the Prosecutor to take
into account the nature of a crime, in particular where
it involves sexual violence, gender violence or violence
against children.

In the brief history of the Court, the Office of the
Prosecutor has brought charges for sexual violence
against 13 of the 27 individuals for whom he has
requested warrants of arrest or summonses to appear,
charging sexual violence as a war crime, a crime
against humanity and an act of genocide. Indeed, as
International Criminal Court (ICC) Prosecutor-Elect
Fatou Bensouda has stated, the most striking quality of
the pursuit of gender crimes by the Court to date has
been their centrality to every prosecution so far. While
the Court cannot deal with all instances of sexual
violence, it has nevertheless proven itself to be a
powerful tool for bringing those responsible for the
gravest such crimes to justice.

The nexus between the United Nations and the
ICC in the fight against sexual violence is very clear.
The Court is active in six of the situations highlighted
in the Secretary-General's report, whether through
preliminary examinations, investigations or
prosecutions. However, the Rome Statute limits the
Court's reach to its States parties, and to crimes
committed after 1 July 2002. Crimes falling outside
those two criteria are the specific responsibility of the
States concerned and, where necessary, of the Security
Council, for, as the preamble to the Rome Statute
reminds us, grave crimes threaten the peace, security
and well-being of the world. The Council has also

recognized conflict-related sexual violence as a threat
to international peace and security, condemning its use
as a tactic of war.

It is incumbent on the Council to react effectively
to acts of sexual violence when it is likely that they
amount to the most serious crimes under international
law. Council action should be based on credible
reports, including those of the Secretary-General. The
use of accountability mechanisms, including referrals
to the International Criminal Court and the use of
targeted sanctions against those responsible for rape
and other forms of sexual violence, in accordance with
resolution 1960 (2010), are but two of the tools
available. It would be remiss of the Council not to
make use of such tools if the circumstances so demand.

When discussing sexual violence, let us not forget
the burden borne by victims. Under the Rome Statue,
victims of crime have the opportunity to participate in
proceedings before the Court. Victims of sexual
violence also require targeted assistance of the sort
rendered by the Trust Fund for Victims established by
the Statute. To name but one example, a project in the
Ituri region of the Democratic Republic of Congo
provides education, day care and basic health-care
services to 67 girls who had been abducted by the
armed forces and had borne children while in captivity.
Whether through multilateral or bilateral development
cooperation, it is important that donors remember the
special needs of the victims of sexual violence.

Women are the largest group of victims of sexual
violence, which is why the fight against impunity must
be complemented by efforts to empower women to
become actors in peace and security. For this reason,
Estonia attaches great importance to implementing and
further developing resolution 1325 (2000) and its
follow-on resolutions in order to strengthen the role of
women in conflict prevention, settlement and
peacebuilding.

