Mr. Bermfidez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank Ms. Amina Mohammed, the Deputy
Secretary-General, for her thorough briefing on the
joint visit of the United Nations and the African Union
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Nigeria a
few weeks ago. I would also like to thank Ambassador
Te'te Antonio, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations. It goes without saying that
the African Union is a fundamental partnership of the
United Nations where peace and security are concerned.

I would like to begin by expressing Uruguay's
full support for the initiative to make the joint visit,
emphasizing the participation of senior United Nations
officials, including the Deputy Secretary-General,
the Executive Director of UN-Women and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict. In our view, this kind of initiative
is extremely useful for giving us a deeper understanding
of the situation of women in armed conflict and helps
to turn a spotlight on this vulnerable group, which
nonetheless has a key role to play in the peaceful
resolution of conflicts.

We also believe that it can be a good complement
to the efforts of the Security Council's Informal
Experts Group on Women, Peace and Security, which
my delegation, jointly with the delegation of Sweden,
has the honour to chair. As members know, the Group
was established in accordance with resolution 2242
(2015), which the Council adopted in October 2015. In
the 18 months of its existence it has held 12 meetings
to discuss the situation of women in Mali, Iraq, the
Central African Republic, Afghanistan, Yemen and the
Lake Chad basin. The information and analysis it has
produced has also been used by various stakeholders
in the effort to advance the agenda on women and
peace and security, from donors and policymakers to
defenders and agents for women's rights on the ground.

I would like to comment briefly on the particular
cases of Nigeria and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the countries that were the object of the visit.
We are very concerned about the systematic use in
Nigeria of sexual violence as a tactic of terrorism, such
as in the terrorist group Boko Haram's abduction and
sexual exploitation of thousands of women and girls
and the increasing use of women as suicide bombers.
However, there is a dearth of information on the impact
of gender on such complex humanitarian crises, as
well as on the role that women's participation and
leadership and gender-equality issues have to play in
peacebuilding efforts, for example in the fight against
violent extremism, the restoration of State authority
and the protection of human rights.

In that regard, my delegation has identified
several key areas requiring special attention, such
as transborder judicial cooperation; assistance in
dealing with the stigmatization of victims and their
children; the provision of basic services in areas such
as education and sexual and reproductive health, as
essential components of the humanitarian response; and
ensuring that national and regional strategies identify
survivors of sexual violence as victims of terrorism so
that they can receive appropriate aid.

During the Security Council's visit in March to the
countries of the Lake Chad basin, we had the opportunity
to hear valuable testimony by Nigerian women, from
members of Parliament to activists and the internally
displaced, in our meetings in Abuja and Maiduguri.
All of them shared their expectations, aspirations and
frustrations, their initiatives and plans. Above all, we
were struck by the clarity of their message, which was
their simple desire to have the opportunity to freely
exercise their rights and make decisive contributions to
their country's social and political development.
With regard to the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Uruguay supports every effort
to guarantee women's participation in supporting the
country's political process and organizing and holding
elections. It should be emphasized that the Security
Council has tasked the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo with supporting the Government and the
United Nations country team in ensuring women's
representation and participation in political processes.
We would also like to acknowledge the efforts of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in this area, particularly by strengthening the Ministry
of Women and appointing a special adviser to the
President on these issues. We urge it to continue its
efforts to ensure women's full and equal participation,
especially in the approaching elections.

