Ms. Patten: I am delighted to join the Council
today for the first open debate on sexual violence in
conflict during my tenure as Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
Allow me to start by expressing my appreciation to Peru
for presiding over this meeting and for its leadership on
the women and peace and security agenda.

The focus of this debate, on preventing sexual
violence in conflict through empowerment, gender
equality and access to justice, could not be more timely
or more in line with my own vision for advancing this
mandate. When I took up office last June, I outlined
a three-pillar priority agenda, namely, converting
cultures of impunity into cultures of deterrence through
consistent and effective prosecution; addressing
structural, gender-based inequality as the root cause
and invisible driver of sexual Violence in times of
war and peace; and fostering national ownership
and leadership for a sustainable, survivor-centered
response that empowers civil society and local women's
rights defenders.

Another important first is the participation in
today's debate of Ms. Razia Sultana, on behalf of the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security.
Ms. Sultana is the first Rohingya woman, born in
northern Rakhine state, Myanmar, to brief the Council
on the plight of her people. Her presence here is a
historic opportunity to give a face and a voice to a
community that has been denied a nationality, denied
an identity, and even denied a name. Her perspective
will be particularly valuable on the eve of the Council's
first visit to Myanmar and Bangladesh. Indeed, voices
from directly affected communities provide the ground
truths that must guide our action, and I trust that her
message will be heard and heeded.

The annual open debate on sexual violence in
conflict provides a critical opportunity for taking
stock of how we are progressing, or regressing, in this
agenda. The data and trend analysis presented in the
annual report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/250)
serves not only to measure progress but also to inspire
and accelerate it. It was exactly one decade ago, in
2008, that the Council adopted the ground-breaking
resolution 1820 (2008), which elevated the issue of
conflict- related sexual violence onto its agenda as a
threat to security and an impediment to peace. It urged
us to debunk the myths that fuel sexual violence, and
indeed the notion of rape as an inevitable by-product of
war or mere collateral damage can never again serve as
an alibi for inaction.

Since then, the issue has been systematically
included in the mandates of peacekeeping missions,
reflected in the designation criteria ofsanctions regimes,
addressed in ceasefire agreements and excluded from
amnesty provisions. Women's protection advisers have
been deployed to field missions to generate actionable
information and pursue a protection dialogue with
parties to conflict. Today, we are supporting thousands
of survivors we were not reaching a decade ago.
Resolution 1820 (2008) demanded nothing less than
the immediate and complete cessation by all parties
to armed conflict of all acts of sexual violence against
civilians. In that respect, while significant normative
and operational progress has been achieved, it is clear
that words on paper are not yet matched by facts on
the ground. We have not yet moved from resolutions to
lasting solutions.

I believe that we are at an inflection point in this
agenda and must urgently consolidate progress by
ensuring accountability or risk a reversal resulting in
wartime rape being once again normalized due to the
frequency and impunity with which it is committed.
The past decade of enhanced political momentum
to combat sexual violence has coincided with a
confluence of global crises, including mass migration
and displacement, rising violent extremism and
terrorism, the resurgence and spread of conflict, and
the proliferation of arms.

These factors have created the conditions for
renewed patterns of violations. Indeed, the report before
us shows that in 2017 sexual violence continued to be
employed as a tactic of war, a tactic of terrorism and a
tool of political repression. Across a range of settings,
it was used by parties to conflict to attack and alter
the ethnic or religious identity of persecuted groups and
to change the very demographics of disputed regions.
The threat of sexual Violence continued to serve as a
driver of forced displacement, and has inhibited the
return of uprooted communities to their areas of origin,
especially in the absence of accountability for past
crimes. In this way, conflict-related sexual violence has
led to the dispossession of land, resources and identity.

The trafficking of women and girls for the purpose
of sexual exploitation continued to be an integral part of
the political economy of war and terrorism, generating
revenue for combatants and armed groups. Women and
girls have also been gifted to combatants as part of a
perverse system of rewarding and socializing recruits.
A rising trend noted in the report is the recourse to
negative and harmful coping mechanisms in response
to the risk of rape in environments of instability and
indigence. Early marriage has spiked in contexts
where families have no other means of providing for or
safeguarding their daughters. This has resulted in more
repression, in the name of protection. Indeed, sexual
violence both arises from and reinforces unequal
gender relations, impeding the realization of women's
rights and freedoms.

In several contexts, victims have been forced
to marry their rapist in the name of restoring social
harmony and family honour. Survivors have endured
multiple, intersecting stigmas in the wake of sexual
violence, including the stigma of association with
an armed or terrorist group and of bearing children
conceived through rape by the enemy. Often, these
women and children are viewed as affiliates rather than
as victims of violent extremist groups, and vilified as
threats to the communities they seek to rejoin. The
divisive force of stigma prevents family reconciliation,
in some cases leading to renewed displacement, with
survivors fleeing to escape reprisals by their own
relatives or communities. Stigma can have lethal
repercussions, including honour killings, suicide,
untreated diseases - such as HIV and traumatic
fistula - unsafe abortion, maternal mortality, extreme
poverty and high-risk survival behaviour. Stigma and
victim-blame give the weapon of rape its uniquely
destructive power, including the power to shred the
social fabric and turn victims into outcasts. It is also
the reason that sexual violence remains one of the least
reported of all crimes.

The plight of children conceived as a result
of wartime rape demands urgent attention. These
children may be left stateless, in a legal limbo, and
susceptible to recruitment, radicalization, trafficking
and exploitation, with wider implications for peace
and security. Colombia is the only country in which
children conceived through rape are legally recognized
as victims, al though the fear of stigma has prevented
many from coming forward to seek redress.

Male survivors of sexual violence have had their
social status, identity and sexual orientation called
into question. In some countries, that can even result
in their arrest. Despite some landmark cases, such as
the International Criminal Court ruling in the trial of
Bosco Ntaganda in 2017, mass rape continues to be met
with mass impunity. That means that the vicious cycle
of violence, impunity and revenge continues unabated
in many nations torn apart by war. For instance, it is
a travesty and an outrage that not a single member of
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) or Boko
Haram has yet been convicted for sexual violence as an
international crime.

Although the report before us paints a bleak, at
times harrowing, picture ofbrutality, it is also important
to highlight the progress achieved at the country level.
For instance, the Forces armees nationales de Cote
d'Ivoire were delisted last year, following the adoption
of concrete action plans and concerted efforts to
prevent and punish sexual violence. No new cases or
allegations concerning members of the Ivorian armed
and security forces were recorded in 2017, which shows
what is possible when political will and risk-mitigation
measures are in place.

Several other States continue to implement joint
communiques and action plans to curb conflict-related
sexual violence, such as the Central African Republic,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Guinea, Iraq,
Somalia and South Sudan. I look forward to other
parties that appear in the list, such as the Myanmar
armed forces and the Sudanese armed forces, adopting
similar communiques or frameworks of cooperation
with my Office. Another instructive example is that of
Colombia, which elevated gender justice to the heart of
its peace process, resulting in thousands of survivors
receiving reparations for sexual violence.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, a former
parliamentarian in Kavumu, South Kivu province, was
convicted in 2017 for the rapes of 39 young children
committed by his militia, as a crime against humanity.
That trial brought an end to the serial rapes in Kavumu,
and helped to disband a militia that was threatening
local security. In addition, hundreds of prosecutions
have been undertaken by the Congolese authorities,
with support from the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law
and Sexual Violence in Conflict, which is part of my
Office. A number of significant law reform initiatives
also took place in 2017 to delink rape from adultery and
morality crimes, as seen in Afghanistan, Somalia and
the Sudan.

The history of wartime rape has been a history
of denial. On my visits to countries of concern, I still
encounter attempts to deny or downplay this issue. Yet
such an approach serves no one - not the Government,
not the credibility and efficacy of national institutions
and not the people trying to come to terms with the
past and build a better future. No problem can be solved
through silence. We will never be able to prevent what
we are unable, or unwilling, to understand.

At this critical juncture, we cannot lose focus. We
must keep the searchlight of international scrutiny on
this historically hidden crime. When I think of what is
at stake, I think of the thousands of women and children
who remain in the captivity of groups like ISIL and
Boko Haram. I think of the women released - pregnant
or with children - from the grip of a terrorist group,
who are forced to choose between their babies and their
communities of origin that refuse to accept them. I
think of the faces of the survivors I have met in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Iraq, Darfur,
Nigeria and Guinea and in the teeming camps in
Bangladesh. I think of the Bosnian man who reduced
the room to tears by describing his struggle for identity
and belonging, having been born of wartime rape and
orphaned by prejudice and stigma. If the Security
Council resolutions on sexual violence tell us one thing
it is that wartime rape is preventable, not inevitable.
Addressing it is our collective responsibility. The
survivors are watching and waiting. We cannot afford
to fail them. Looking forward, I would like to propose
three recommendations.

First, I call on the international community to
give serious consideration to the establishment of
a reparations fund for survivors of conflict-related
sexual violence, to help them rebuild their lives and
livelihoods. Reparative justice is what survivors want
most, yet receive least.

Secondly, we need a more operational response to
stigma alleviation, because stigma kills. Socioeconomic
reintegration support for sexual violence survivors and
their children must infuse peacebuilding, reconstruction

and reconciliation efforts. In cases where survivors face
ongoing risks, I encourage States to adopt special quota
projects to help relocate women and children to third
countries, following the precedent set by Germany to
protect members of the Iraqi Yazidi community. Similar
consideration should be given to the most vulnerable
Rohingya women and children.

Thirdly, we need to marshal sustained political
resolve and resources equal to the scale ofthe challenge.
The gender-based violence response in humanitarian
settings remains chronically underfunded. Time and
time again, we see how a lack of resources translates
into a lack of protection. The report before us should
serve as an alarm and a wake-up call to the onset of any
donor fatigue.

Despite all the challenges, what gives me hope
is the way that women - from Liberia, Colombia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and elsewhere - have used their experience
as survivors of sexual violence to mobilize political
movements for peace. They have become galvanized
and organized in response to that threat, and have
begun to channel that impetus into political aspirations
to ensure that the dark chapters of their nation's history
never repeat. We must support these efforts to enhance
women's participation and influence because, after all,
empowerment is protection.

