Ms. Ferrer (Andorra) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I should like to congratulate Spain on the
excellent work it has done in the Security Council and in
leading the initiative to convene this high-level debate,
which will allow us to make progress in implementing
resolution 1325 (2000). I take this opportunity to wish
you, Sir, every success in presiding over the Security
Council this month.

I also thank the Secretary-General, UN-Women
and the civil society representatives present here for
their contributions and leadership in this area.

This year marks 15 years since the historic,
unanimous adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) by the
Security Council. Since then, we have seen notable
progress in favour of women, such as the establishment
in 2010 of UN-Women and the international recognition
of sexual violence as a threat to international peace
and security. Andorra, as everyone knows, does not
have armed forces but has nonetheless continued to
support United Nations peacekeeping operations and a
various initiatives of the Organization. I cannot fail to
note our co-sponsorship of resolution 2225 (2015) of
18 June 2015, concerning children in armed conflict,
which has some bearing on today's debate and which
reiterates concern over sexual violence against girls
and encourages States to continue to implement the
Secretary-General's zero-tolerance policy concerning
sexual exploitation and abuse.

Resolution 1325 (2000) also urges Member States
to incorporate women in decision-making processes.
In that regard, I should like to highlight Andorra's
experience, which has achieved a gender-balanced
Parliament without adopting legislative measures but
rather as a result of a society that was able to evolve
in terms of equality. Agenda-sensitive legislative power
has made it possible to undertake important activities
with respect to gender equality. For example, Andorra
was the tenth State to ratify the Council of Europe
Convention on preventing and combating violence
against women and domestic violence, thereby allowing
the Convention to enter into force. On 15 January, we
also adopted a law criminalizing gender-based and
domestic violence. The law calls for the establishment
of a national commission for the prevention of gender-
based and domestic violence. Andorra has made a
commitment, as it did during the second cycle of the
universal periodic review, to endowing that body with
the resources necessary to effectively meet its goals.

Also on 15 January, all groups represented in
Parliament adopted an agreement to promote gender
equality in the General Council. The agreement calls
for the development of a white paper on equality and the
implementation of the recommendations contained in
the Plan of Action plan for Gender-sensitive Parliaments
of the Inter-Parliamentary Union.

Our experience of recent years has demonstrated
yet again the effectiveness of including women in
decision-making, and I can confirm that Andorra's
commitment to gender equality remains steadfast. The
Government of Andorra recently set up focal point for
equality policies under the auspices of the Secretary of
State for Social Affairs, which is part of my Ministry
for Health, Social Affairs and Labour, a Government
body that is in charge of coordinating national equality
policies. Andorra is also committed to adopting as
soon as possible an omnibus gender-equality law to
strengthen the existing legislative framework. Also
with respect to this future act, the Government intends
to adopt a national plan for equality that will draw on
the participation of civil society.

Andorra reiterates its commitment to the role of
women in the maintenance of international peace and
security. There is no doubt that the implementation of
and follow-up to resolution 1325 (2000), as well as the
inclusion of women in decision-making, will promote
progress in women's rights and the strengthening of
peace and security in the world. In this conviction, it is
an honour for me to announce to this Chamber Andorra's
decision to co-sponsor resolution 2242 (2015), which
was led by Spain and the United Kingdom and adopted
this morning.

