Mr. Vilovie (Croatia): Croatia welcomes the
report of the Secretary-General on women and peace
and security (S/2008/622) and the recommendations
contained therein. We thank the delegation of China for
organizing what is, for us, a timely debate. I would also
like to thank Ms. Mayanja, Ms. Alberdi, Mr. Le Roy
and Ms. Taylor for their valuable participation in
today's debate.

The focus of today's debate is "Women's equal
participation and full involvement in all efforts for the
maintenance and promotion of peace and security". In
that respect, my delegation would like to emphasize
several points.

To begin with, it should be emphasized that in
many countries suffering from armed conflict, women
peacebuilders are often faced with male-dominated
institutions. Those women work under difficult
conditions and the space given to their issues is often
negligible. Women's issues tend to be organized
separately from other issues of post-conflict civil
society and their associated support groups, which
would explain why the issues of women's
empowerment and gender-based violence are easily
overlooked, making it easier to exclude women from
decision-making structures that could enhance their
security.

There has not been enough research conducted on
the cross-border dimensions of armed conflict that
stem from the uncontrolled movement of armed forces
and groups across poorly patrolled frontiers, especially
in places like the Sudan and the region around the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Since no formal
cross-border networks exist among women's
peacebuilding groups, we believe that women's
participation in regional peacebuilding institutions,
such as the Amani Forum in the Great Lakes region,
could be encouraged through, for example, the
establishment of a task force to examine women-
specific cross-border concerns.

The expansion of women's roles as peacebuilders
is achievable, notwithstanding negative views on social
change that may arise following armed conflict and a
tendency by male-dominated societies in post-conflict
regions to undermine the new roles women can play in
helping to resolve conflicts and associated violence.
Consideration should be given to including
marginalized men, such as former combatants or those
in refugee or internally displaced persons camps, in our
efforts to support women's equal participation in peace
processes, while Governments should ensure that
traditional practices are not misused by men to control
women or to violate their rights.

The United Nations, national Governments and
individual donors should listen closely to the views of
women's civil society organizations. Such
organizations need in turn to receive their fair share of
professional education and support. It is a
Government's obligation to fulfil its responsibilities to
establish and maintain women-friendly security, health
and education services.

Women activists in many parts of the world
suffering from armed conflict are struggling in their
efforts to bring public attention to the fact that women
and children, including infants, face extremely high
levels of violence, including sexual violence and abuse
by men. The ongoing effects of such violence long
after war is over should be a primary concern of those
who advocate the greater inclusion of women in
peacebuilding institutions. Strategies to prevent
violence against women during armed conflict should
also include strategies to protect women's participation
in reconstruction and democracy-building projects in
its aftermath. We believe therefore that the Security
Council should ensure the prompt and effective
implementation of resolution 1820 (2008).

Although many women were victims in the wars
that took place in South-East Europe, they also had an
active role in opposing armed conflict and in building
understanding and peace among the national groups of
our region. For example, during the aggression
committed against Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina
in the early 1990s, when Croatia played host to over
300,000 internally displaced persons and as many
refugees, women's non-governmental organizations
played an important role in providing psychological
help, organizing humanitarian activities and
establishing shelters for refugees and displaced
persons, regardless of their ethnic background.
Similarly, the first attempts to initiate dialogue among
the different sides in the conflict came from women
and their organizations.

Croatia, as a troop- and police-contributing
country, is fully aware of the ongoing efforts aimed at
improving the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and the necessity of increasing the deployment
of more women in peacekeeping missions. Croatia also
uses sex-disaggregated data in order to better monitor
and track progress in its reports on levels of military
deployments to peacekeeping operations. Finally,
Croatia will continue actively contributing to the goals
of resolution 1325 (2000) and beyond.

