Mr. Spinellis (Greece): We would like to express
our appreciation to the presidency of Azerbaijan for
convening this important open debate, as well as to
the Secretary-General, the Executive Director of UN
Women and the Under-Secretary-General for their
important contributions. We align ourselves with the
statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union and we welcome the adoption of resolution 2122
(2013) by the Council earlier today.

In a conflict-affected environment, violence against
women is significantly intensified, indicating that in
many cases, Violence is an extension of existing gender
inequality in society. Despite the continuous efforts
of the international community to eradicate violence
against women, sexual violence in armed conflicts
remains a widespread phenomenon. It exacerbates and
prolongs situations of armed conflict and is therefore
directly linked to the maintenance of peace and security.

Among others, resolution 2106 (2013) underlines
the importance of women's greater participation and
leadership in decision-making processes in areas of
conflict. In many cases, women are excluded from
decision-making. Nevertheless, their full and equal
participation in peacemaking and peacebuilding is
indispensable for the success of those processes, since
it is the only way to ensure that the needs of women
involved in conflict-related situations are effectively
addressed. Women must be seen not solely as victims,
but as active agents of change and of peacekeeping.

Prevention, rather than reaction, must be a
priority. That requires the existence of early warning
mechanisms based on accurate, objective and reliable
information. The collection of data relating to sexual
Violence in areas of conflict is crucial and strongly
encouraged, so that both national and international
actors may be duly informed.

While it is crucial to address sexual violence
in conflict and post-conflict contexts, it is equally
important to combat impunity and strengthen both
international and national justice responses to those
crimes. Consequently, capacity-building related to
the rule of law, that is wide in scope and goes beyond
traditional areas of law reform and strengthening of
justice and law enforcement institutions are necessary.

The rule of law should address justice, equality
and equity with a strong focus on the empowerment
of women and girls, gender equality, and preventing
and combating violence against women as essential
preconditions for equitable and inclusive sustainable
development. In that context, we praise the work of the
United Nations in assisting Member States to address
rule of law issues in conflict contexts and we consider
it vital that the United Nations continues to emphasize
the importance of providing redress and assistance
to Victims in conflict, post-conflict and other crisis
situations.

The prevention of and response to violence against
children, in particular, including sexual violence and
abuse, forced marriage and maltreatment, should
continue to be an important focus area of United
Nations assistance.

To ensure genuine rule of law, beyond the formal
establishment of institutions, judicial systems need
to be fully accessible to all individuals and groups. A
major obstacle to access is the cost involved in legal
advice and legal representation services. We support
the work of the United Nations to implement a wide
variety of projects focused on providing legal aid to
address that obstacle.

In conclusion, Greece is ofthe View that genuine and
inclusive participation in the elaboration of transitional
justice mechanisms ensures that they not only respond
to the needs and expectations of victims, but provide
transformative change for sustainable transition to
peace and reconciliation, which is the ultimate goal of
all of our efforts.

