Mrs. Nguyen (Viet Nam): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the ten member States of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) - namely
Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao
People's Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar, the
Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and my own country,
Viet Nam.

We commend the Jordanian presidency for
convening this open debate on women and peace
and security, with a focus on conflict-related sexual
Violence. We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2015/203) and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict for
her informative briefing.

ASEAN welcomes the progress made in implementing
key aspects ofthe Security Council's landmark resolution
1325 (2000) and subsequent relevant resolutions. We
are pleased to see more women participating as key
actors in conflict resolution and peace processes. The
capacity of national rule of law and justice actors in all
regions has been strengthened. More has been done to
better protect women and girls from sexual violence,
gender-based discrimination and social exclusion.
We look forward to the comprehensive review of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) byMember
States, United Nations entities and other stakeholders.

ASEAN condemns all forms of violence against
women and girls, in particular sexual violence. We
are deeply concerned about the rise in conflict-
related sexual violence, which affects and threatens
the well-being of women and girls in many parts of
the world. It is particularly alarming to witness the
horrendous widespread sexual Violence, including
abductions, sexual slavery, rape and forced marriage,
used by extremist terrorist groups as a tactic of war to
deliberately target civilian populations, as detailed in
the Secretary-General's report. We urge Member States,
United Nations entities, the relevant international
and regional organizations and other stakeholders to
redouble their efforts to address the multidimensional
challenges relating to the prevention of sexual Violence,
victim assistance and the empowerment of women.

Conflict-related sexual violence is best prevented
by addressing its root cause and preventing armed
conflict itself. Conflict-prevention mechanisms,
especially those under United Nations auspices, should
be promoted. Political reconciliation, the rule of law,
socioeconomic development and poverty eradication
are the foundations for sustainable opportunities for
women and girls. Institutions for gender equality and
respect for and promotion of human rights at national
and international levels should be continuously
strengthened.

The perpetrators of sexual Violence must not go
unpunished. But more important, victims of conflict-
related sexual Violence must be provided with assistance
and services tailored to their specific needs. They must
be protected against stigmatization and exclusion, and
given the opportunity and capability to re-engage and
reintegrate with their communities. In a broader sense,
we must promote the full and equal political, social
and economic participation of women. The inclusion of
women and their priorities in all aspects of the peace
process is crucial.

ASEAN is of the view that, while States must bear
the primary responsibility in these efforts, the United
Nations and international community can play their
important roles by, inter alia, providing assistance and
sharing best practices. In that regard, ASEAN wishes
to stress that reports on specific situations should
ensure accuracy, objectivity and impartiality, in full
consultation with the Member States concerned, and
include national efforts to address the situations.

ASEAN is strongly committed to ending sexual
violence wherever it occurs. The ASEAN member
States have been fulfilling their respective obligations
and commitments under the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination of Women
and the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action.
We have established legal and policy frameworks, as
well as mechanisms, both at the national and regional
level, to further enhance the status and welfare of
women and girls and to eliminate all forms of violence
against women, including sexual Violence.

The ASEAN Intergovernmental Commission on
Human Rights and the ASEAN Commission on the
Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Women and
Children are actively implementing their respective work
plans that aim to promote and protect the human rights
and fundamental freedoms of women and children in
the ASEAN region. The recent workshop to strengthen
women's participation in the peace process and conflict
resolution, organized by the ASEAN Institute for Peace
and Reconciliation on 18 and 19 March in Cebu, the
Philippines, highlighted the importance of women's
participation in peace processes and conflict resolution
in the region, and helped raise awareness on, and
promote the implementation of, resolution 1325 (2000)
and existing national action plans on women and peace
and security.

Conflict-related sexual violence can be stopped
if the international community steps up its efforts to
put in place comprehensive strategies that protect the
rights and fundamental freedoms of women and deliver
necessary services for victims and survivors. For its
part, ASEAN reiterates its readiness and commitment
to join efforts to ensure the elimination of sexual
Violence, protect and assist Victims and enhance the
role of women in peace processes.

