Mr. Baublys: (Lithuania): It is no news that
armed conflict, the absence of the rule of law, rampant
corruption, the abuse of ethnic and religious minorities
and systematic gross violations of human rights all
contribute to human displacement. Smuggling and
trafficking networks feed on the human tragedies
in Libya, Iraq, Syria, Afghanistan and elsewhere.
Human trafficking and smuggling is a multi-billion
dollar business, in which the nexus linking criminals,
traffickers and terrorists is well established. Increasing
numbers of women and girls are turned into slaves and
suffer sexual abuse and rape. Some are turned into
suicide bombers - girls as young as eight and ten years
old, as has been the case with some of Boko Haram's
victims.

The Lords' Resistance Army is known to have
abducted some 30,000 children - boys and girls alike.
We cannot forget the thousands of women and children
who remain captive in areas under Daesh control. We
cannot forget the Yazidi women and girls who were
abducted, sold at public auctions into sexual slavery and
forcibly impregnated. Nor can we forget the hundreds
of Yazidi boys who were abducted and marched out to
the front under the Daesh banner wearing suicide belts,
or as human shields. The Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham has targeted migrants and refugees in Libya.

Frankly, it is morally unacceptable for the Council
to stand back and allow that evil alliance of traffickers,
terrorists and armed groups to profit from human
suffering. The least we can do is draw attention to
the plight of the victims by adding our strong voice
of condemnation. We can also rise to the challenge of
solving conflicts that generate internal displacement,
irregular migration and refugee flows, be it in the
Middle East, the Sahel, the Lake Chad basin or the
Horn of Africa. States have legal obligations to prevent
and combat trafficking in persons and to detect and
disrupt trafficking networks. We all need to do more,
work more with Interpol and other agencies, and boost
international law enforcement cooperation.

As the Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) just said,
UNODC can provide technical assistance to Member
States. It can do more to help implement the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and its Protocols. Better coordination within
the United Nations system, as some briefers have
said, would help to proactively identify victims of
trafficking. We need to look into what United Nations
peacekeeping operations can do. The training of front-
line officials - including law enforcement officers,
judicial officials, border officers and social workers at
the local level - needs to be improved. Governments,
community and religious leaders and civil society
should work together to ensure that victims are not
stigmatized. Victims must have access to assistance,
medical assistance, protection and support in order to
prevent their retrafficking.

Accountability for such crimes is the biggest
challenge. We encourage Member States, regional and
subregional organizations and the UnitedNations system
to cooperate with the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court to explore ways to hold accountable
the perpetrators of violent crimes committed by
extremist groups and terrorists. We also need to step up
prevention by improving coordination regarding early
warning and analysis of potential conflicts. We look
forward to the Secretary-General's new comprehensive
strategy on preventing violent extremism.

A month ago, at the European Union-African Union
Summit in Valletta, the leaders of the two continents
pledged to scale up joint efforts in preventing and
fighting migrant smuggling and eradicating human
trafficking. They committed to beating back organized
criminal networks, better managing borders and
better coordinating and implementing agreements.
The European Union and its States members are at
the forefront of that fight in promoting global higher
standards for addressing human trafficking, including
through regional dialogue processes - such as the
Khartoum and Rabat processes 4 with the countries
along the East and West African migratory routes.

The elimination of the trafficking of girls and
women for all forms of exploitation stands as the
priority for all European Union (EU) countries. The
European Union has built a comprehensive legal and
policy framework, guided by an anti-trafficking
directive and an EU strategy. Actions are coordinated
by an EU anti-trafficking coordinator. This is a good
practice that could be shared with all interested regions
and institutions.

In fact, a regional organization can play an
absolutely critical role, as the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) does across Europe.
The OSCE has become a major platform for cooperation
and coordination in combating human trafficking. The
high-level Alliance against Trafficking in Persons
each year brings together top policymakers from
OSCE participating States, the OSCE Mediterranean
Partners for Cooperation, United Nations international
and regional organizations, non-governmental
organizations and trade representatives.

In conclusion, presidential statement
S/PRST/2015/25, adopted today, calls for genuine
action by all Member States, the United Nations system,
regional organizations, civil society, religious leaders.
It is time to make it happen.

