Mr. Doujak (Austria): Austria is grateful to
Azerbaijan for convening today's open debate on
women and peace and security, and would like to thank
all the briefers for their very interesting presentations.
We appreciate the broad range of issues covered in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2013/525), as well as
the continuing use of indicators that allow for a more
accurate and precise assessment of the progress made
in implementing resolution 1325 (2000).

Austria aligns itself with the statement made earlier
on behalf of the European Union.

We agree that the nexus between the rule of law
and women and peace and security needs our further
attention. In the aftermath of conflict, transitional
justice mechanisms must be Victim-centred and
gender-sensitive in order to ensure that the rights of
Victims, in particular women and children, are fully
respected. Legal, institutional and social obstacles to
women's access to formal and informal justice systems
must be more energetically addressed, and in that
context gender-sensitive reforms should receive more
attention. Reparation programmes for gross human
rights Violations contribute to the reconciliation of
divided societies, in which financial reparations
potentially have an important impact on enhancing the
economic security of women, including war widows, in
the aftermath of conflict. Reparations should also be
targeted to victims of sexual and gender-based violence.

The Security Council has clearly recognized its
own role in ending impunity for serious violations
of international humanitarian and human-rights law,
and has acknowledged the full range of justice and
reconciliation mechanisms, including in resolution
1894 (2009). In that context, we would like to stress the
important role of the International Criminal Court and
other international criminal tribunals in the fight against
impunity, and we welcome the first investigations of
cases of sexual violence before those courts.

A central element of our understanding of the
rule of law is that it not only guarantees women's
equal rights but necessarily implies women's equal
participation in political and public life, as well as
their economic empowerment. While the full, equal
and meaningful participation of women in all conflict
prevention, resolution and peacebuilding efforts is at
the heart of resolution 1325 (2000) and should be self-
evident 13 years after its adoption, there is no reason
for complacency.

We call on the Security Council to make the
best use of the time frame leading up to the high-
level review of the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) in 2015 and to mainstream measures to enhance
women's participation in its work, including in the
mandates of peacekeeping and political missions. Our
immediate concern must be to increase the number of
women in police and military contingents in United
Nations peacekeeping operations. In that regard, we
welcome today's adoption of resolution 2122 (2013) and
its references to the deployment of women in United
Nations peacekeeping operations as well as more
regular briefings in the Security Council.

Austria appreciates the Security Council's
increased attention to violence against journalists in
situations of armed conflict. As the Secretary-General's
report rightly points out, female journalists often face
gender-specific risks of violence and intimidation. Our
initiative on the safety of journalists in the Human
Rights Council acknowledges those specific risks and
calls for a gender-sensitive approach when considering
measures to address the safety ofjournalists.

Also, I would like to take this opportunity to give
a short update on our national measures to implement
resolution 1325 (2000). On the basis of our revised
national action plan adopted last year, we have
continued our efforts to enhance the gender-expertise
of civil and military staff in peacekeeping operations.
Together with the Austrian Study Centre for Peace and
Conflict Resolution, Austria has developed a training
curriculum that fully incorporates both resolutions
1325 (2000) and 1894 (2009) on the protection of
civilians. After a pilot course held last year, the first
regular course with the new curriculum will be held in
early December.

Austria has also continued its efforts to support
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in other
forums, including the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). Together with Finland,
Turkey and Kazakhstan, we have proposed a draft text
for an OSCE-wide action plan on women, peace and
security to assist participating States in implementing
resolution 1325 (2000). We hope that those efforts will
soon lead to a positive result.

In concluding, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, all for your efforts in advancing the
women and peace and security agenda and express the
hope that we will see significant progress in that area in
the lead-up to the 2015 review.

