Mr. Vilovic' (Croatia): Let me begin by extending
our congratulations to you, Mr. President, and your
delegation on your presidency of the Security Council
for the month of October, and by assuring you of the
full support of my delegation. I also thank you and
your delegation for initiating this meeting and bringing
the Council together to discuss an issue that is
critically important to the Republic of Croatia and,
surely, to all nations.

Allow me to extend a warm welcome to
Ms. Michelle Bachelet and wish her success in her
future work as the first Executive Director of the newly
established gender entity, UN Women, and Under-
Secretary-General for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women. Given her high political
stature and experience, we deem that Ms. Bachelet will
enhance the gender equality agenda and that
UN Women will grow into the principal voice for
gender mainstreaming and the empowerment of
women.
Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Belgium on behalf of the
European Union. Here, I would like to make additional
remarks in my national capacity.

The adoption by the Security Council of
resolution 1325 (2000) bears testimony to the progress
made during the past decade in the area of women and
peace and security. This historic resolution has focused
much-needed attention on the question of women's
empowerment, which represents a priority for my
country. While all the resolutions on women and peace
and security are equally important, resolution 1325
(2000) serves as an umbrella resolution in addressing
women's empowerment, their task as peacebuilders and
their fragile position as victims of war.

The Republic of Croatia welcomes the report of
the Secretary-General on the implementation of this
landmark resolution (S/2010/498), the recommendations
contained therein, as well as the presidential statement
adopted by the Council today(S/PRST/2010/22). We
call upon the Security Council to endorse the indicators
developed by the Secretary-General as soon as
possible.

The commitments set forth by the resolution are
commendable, but translating words into action is the
only way of resolving the remaining issues - and the
issues are many. As numerous situations on the agenda
of this Council have shown, women still have a long
way to go in order to fulfil their empowerment goals as
well as to fully realize their human rights, both in times
of war and peace. The empowerment of women is
imperative to the full achievement of human rights, as
well as to overall economic and political development
and progress. Although women are widely recognized
as effective agents of peace, they still have little access
to decision-making positions and peace negotiations.
More should be done.

Armed conflicts continue to have a devastating
impact on women and girls and are often accompanied
by gender-based violence, including the increasing
scale and brutality of sexual violence, often used as a
means of war. Impunity for such acts of violence
against women is still prevalent and the prosecution
rate very low.

Even on Croatian territory, in the heart of Europe,
rape was used as a method of intimidation and terror
during the aggression to which Croatia was exposed in
the early 19905. We are fully aware of the role both the
Security Council and the international community can
play in addressing sexual violence against women and
girls, especially when used by political or military
leaders as a means of achieving political or military
objectives. We believe that the Security Council needs
to provide strong and effective leadership on this issue,
including by taking concrete action when necessary,
with the ultimate aim of eradicating this abhorrent
behaviour. Such acts of violence demand further action
by the Security Council to strengthen the rule of law
and to end impunity. They need to be thoroughly
investigated and perpetrators brought to account, and it
is therefore imperative for the International Criminal
Court, as well as national courts, to be the last instance
of justice for the victims and a reminder that there can
be no tolerance for the crime of rape.

We are pleased to see that progress has been
made in several areas and that the United Nations
system continues to engage in a wide range of good
practices. We encourage the strengthening of the
coordination among United Nations agencies both at
Headquarters and in the field, especially in monitoring
and reporting on situations where parties to armed
conflict engage in rape and other sexual violence as a
means of war. Nevertheless, more consistent and
comprehensive reporting on sexual violence would
enable the Council to address the protection of women
and children in a more systematic manner, whereas the
Council should include specific reporting requirements
in resolutions establishing or renewing mandates.

More needs to be done also at the national level.
The integration of the resolution has to be country-
driven, and Member States need to take responsibility
for its success by ensuring that it is integrated into
national policies. We urge countries to apply a broad
gender-mainstreaming approach across Government,
for instance through a system-wide approach that links
development, humanitarian and defence issues. All
plans should include civil society consultations, as well
as monitoring and reporting mechanisms.

I am pleased to say that Croatia has taken steps to
integrate the gender perspective into its national
security policy through its national strategy for the
promotion of gender equality, and is currently
developing its national action plan on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), which is
expected to be adopted in 2011. Under the leadership
of its first female Prime Minister, Croatia will continue
to give its firm support to all areas of the women and
peace and security agenda. We see it as a gender-based
peace agenda that involves addressing the
disproportionate effect of conflict on women and
combating sexual violence. It is also about securing the
full, equal and effective participation of women at all
stages of the peace process, giving them an equal role
in the prevention and resolution of conflicts, as well as
in peacebuilding. The realization of these goals is
essential to safeguarding basic human rights and
achieving human security and lasting peace.

