Mr. Aisi (Papua New Guinea): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the Pacific small island
developing States represented at the United Nations,
namely the Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji,
Kiribati, Palau, the Republic of the Marshall Islands,
Nauru, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu, Tonga,
Vanuatu and my own country, Papua New Guinea.

I would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate the United Kingdom on its assumption of
the presidency and on presiding over this debate on the
subject of women and peace and security. I would also
like acknowledge the Secretary-General's recent report
(S/2009/362) on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1820 (2008).

Resolution 1820 (2008) builds on resolution 1325
(2000). It has compelled the international community
to finally recognize sexual violence committed during
conflict situations as a crime punishable by law. Sexual
and gender-based violence is no longer a by-product of
war and conflict. It can no longer be seen as collateral
damage of war. We, the international community, have
decided that enough is enough, that sexual violence in
war and conflicts is intolerable and that the practice
must be prevented at all costs.

We commend the Security Council and the
Secretary-General for engaging in high-level
diplomacy and advocacy. The recent developments in
integrating the issue of sexual and gender-based
violence into the peace process in countries such as, for
example, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, are a
strong step forward for the Security Council. The
Council has communicated to the leaders of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and to the global
community at large that sexual and gender-based
violence in times of conflict is intolerable. We
commend the Council for providing assistance to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in monitoring
incidents of gender-based violence.

Furthermore, we are also encouraged that the
issue of sexual and gender-based violence has now
become an integral element of the Council's
assessment and evaluation of peacekeeping missions,
increasing the legitimacy and accountability of
peacekeeping troops.

We commend the Secretary-General's concerted
effort to promote a more coordinated and systematic
approach towards gender-based violence. We also
commend the work implemented by the recent United
Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict
initiative. United Nations Action unites the work of
12 United Nations entities with the goal of ending
sexual and gender-based violence in conflicts. It takes
a holistic approach to sexual violence in conflict by
coordinating the efforts and work carried out by
individual United Nations agencies on the matter. Such
systemic coordination and cooperation improve
accountability, amplify programming and advocacy,
and increase support for national efforts in the
prevention of sexual gender-based violence.

United Nations Action takes the following actions
to attain the objectives of resolution 1820 (2008),
which we recommend to the global community. At the
country level, it supports joint strategy development
and programming by United Nations country teams and
peacekeeping operations, including building
operational and technical capacity. In the area of
advocacy among the public at large, it takes action to
raise public awareness and generate the political will to
address sexual violence as part of a broader campaign
to stop rape now. Through learning by doing, which is
important to many of us, it creates a hub of knowledge
on the scale of sexual violence in conflict and on
effective responses by the United Nations and its
partners.

We believe that more can be done to fully attain
the objectives outlined in resolutions 1325 (2000) and
1820 (2008). Currently, there are a few outstanding
issues that should be further addressed. They include
the need to strengthen and coordinate a systematic
approach by international organizations, including the
need to strengthen the coordination of regional
organizations and mechanisms in dealing with sexual-
based violence in conflict situations. We also believe
that there is a need to strengthen national priorities,
legal frameworks, personnel training and public
advocacy to exterminate the practice of sexual-based
violence. Finally, we believe that there is a need to
increase the participation of women in conflict
resolution, peace negotiation, peacekeeping troops and
the rebuilding and reintegration of soldiers and
communities.

Recently, Deputy Secretary-General Asha-Rose
Migiro, in her address to the Security Council in April
this year on United Nations support for advancing the
national implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), put
forth a practical framework involving the "three Ps":
protection, participation and prevention in developing
national action plans. We believe that the three Ps
provide a broad and practical framework that can also
be applied to Security Council resolution 1820 (2008).
Allow me to briefly highlight some of the relevant
aspects of the three Ps.

In the area of protection, we recognize the need
to strengthen our collective determination to treat rape
and sexual assault in conflict situations with the same
determination as that with which we address any other
factors of war. One of the obstacles preventing the full
implementation of resolution 1820 (2008) is the
tendency of Governments and military personnel to
treat gender-based violence as a by-product of war, not
as a crime.

We believe that there is an ad hoc approach to
women's security in times of conflict. Until recently,
gender-based violence was often an afterthought
following the occurrence of conflict. There is a need to
protect women and children by building protection
policies into national security strategies, legislation and
peace negotiations.

Secondly, with regard to protection, we believe
that there is a need to establish a firm and clear
international norm when it comes to the prosecution of
crimes involving gender-based violence in times of
conflict. Perpetrators cannot go unpunished. The
United Nations system and the Security Council must
strengthen their resolve to collect evidence-based data
to support accounts of sexual gender-based violence.
Deployed soldiers and peacekeepers need to be
properly trained and debriefed.

As far as participation is concerned, we believe
that we need to encourage women's engagement in
conflict resolution and prevention and in the
negotiation of peace agreements, as their participation
greatly increases the prospects for sustaining peace
during times of conflict. Engaging women in post-
conflict dialogue and policies will ensure their
participation in creating a system-wide effort that
includes results-based monitoring and social
provisions.

We believe that there is a direct link between
poverty and security. In countries with high rates of
sexual gender-based violence, the economic capacities

of women are often diminished. In many developing
nations, the traditional role of women and their
relationship to land make them important contributors
to food production and economic growth. And it has
been recognized that the economic empowerment of
women is an effective way to combat sexual gender-
based violence. However, we find that the current
United Nations programmes are unsustainable and
often being cut short when funding is depleted. We in
the Pacific in particular would therefore like to
encourage the United Nations to invest more resources
and to strengthen existing agencies in order to promote
the link between women's economic empowerment and
security.

Pacific leaders are committed to the eradication
of sexual gender-based violence. In June this year, the
Pacific Islands Forum Regional Security Committee
discussed the issue of gender-based violence and
reaffirmed that sexual gender-based violence is a
growing and serious concern and requires concerted
national and regional response. Just this week, at the
fortieth Pacific Islands Forum group meeting held in
Australia, our leaders, together with those of Australia
and New Zealand, reaffirmed their commitment to
eliminating sexual gender-based violence. The Forum
communique acknowledged sexual gender-based
violence as a threat to human security in the region.
The leaders welcome collaborative efforts at the local,
national and regional levels to address the issue and
would like to increase their engagement with global
initiatives to address the issue.

Following are some examples of the initiatives
taken in our region. In Vanuatu, a Family protection act
has been enacted; in my own country, there have been
many advances in the legal arena, such as through the
establishment of a family sexual violence unit; and in
Solomon Islands, a sexual assault unit and a family
violence unit have been established.

Finally, Pacific Islands such as Fiji, Vanuatu,
Samoa and Palau have volunteered their soldiers and
police in support of Security Council peacekeeping
missions. We would like to take this opportunity to
reiterate our support for the Council's initiative in
making the elimination of sexual gender-based
violence an integral part of peacekeeping.

