Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Before delivering my statement, I would like to say
that this morning, my delegation had requested the
right to explain its vote. I would like to believe that an
unintentional error caused that opportunity to be lost.
Our motive was not to explain why we voted in favour
of resolution 2122 (2013), but rather to explain why we
did not sponsor it, which would have been our normal
inclination, given our strong commitment to resolution
1325 (2000). The reason was that despite my delegation's
reiterated proposals for a slight nuance in the language
of the eighth preambular paragraph, to accommodate
it in our national legislation, our proposals were not
heeded, and we merely wanted to have that recorded.

I now turn to my statement. I wish to thank you,
Sir, for convening this open debate. Anecdotally, it
brings back memories of my presidency of the Council
exactly one year ago, when a presidential statement
was adopted (S/PRST/2012/23) even before the debate
was held, for it was postponed until November due to
Hurricane Sandy, which caused so much damage to the
city that it prevented the scheduled meeting. That is
why we welcome the convening of the debate and the
adoption of the new resolution, which strengthens the
conceptual framework of the Council's groundbreaking
resolution 1325 (2000) on the issue, as well as several
subsequent resolutions and presidential statements.

We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2013/525) and for presenting it to the Council. We
also thank the new Executive Director of UN Women,
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, for her presentation.
I thank Ms. Navanethem Pillay for her valuable
contributions to the topic in the Council today, and I
especially thank Ms. Brigitte Balipou for providing
so eloquently a collective vision of civil society
organizations, whose participation we have consistently
supported. I also note that we value the concept paper
prepared by the presidency (S/2013/587, annex).

Each year the Council has continued to build upon
the core premise of resolution 1325 (2000), because we
are convinced that without women's security, there can
be no lasting peace. We think that the timely theme of
today's debate, on women, rule of law and transitional
justice in conflict-affected situations, will generate
added value.

Although so far the Council has held seven debates
on the issue of the rule of law, there is still a way to go
to achieve overall accountability for crimes affecting
women and girls. Nor have we made sufficient progress
in achieving women's full participation in the processes
of transitional justice. Similarly, there is room to
improve the analysis of sex-differentiated effects on
women and girls when the rule of law is violated during
and after conflicts.

We have previously said that, based on our own
experience, the boundaries between peacebuilding,
peacekeeping and economic, social and legal
transformations are not clear. Therefore, we think it is
of the utmost importance to advance the fight against
impunity, improve access to justice for women and
strengthen the justice system infrastructure to deal with
such crimes, both nationally and internationally. With
regard to our own country, we have adopted legislation
on femicide and established courts for the prosecution
of that crime, as well as justice centres for onsite legal,
judicial and medical services, including psychosocial
support for women and their children. We agree with
the Secretary-General's recommendation that we must
step up efforts to meet and fund the recovery needs of
women and girls, especially those who have become
heads of households.

Moreover, my country wishes to acknowledge
the work of UN Women, whose establishment was a
singularly important institutional step forward, among
other things to promote the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). We support greater participation by women
in peacebuilding and strengthening civil capacity after
conflicts to be consistent with the issue of women and
peace and security. We believe that it is necessary to
recognize women as builders of peace and stability.

The resolution that we adopted today contributes to
reducing the vulnerability of women and girls in armed
conflict and post-conflict situations. We recognize the
need to receive timely information in order to intervene
early and save lives. In that sense, preventing conflicts
is the best way to protect all civilians from the horrors
that accompany armed conflicts, in particular women
and girls.

Finally, we believe that the fifteenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), in 2015, will
provide not only the Security Council but the entire
United Nations system an opportunity to review the
levels of implementation of that resolution and to renew
commitments to combat violence, including sexual
violence. We urge all Member States and the United
Nations system to facilitate greater participation by
women in that area.

