Mr. Kydyrov (Kyrgyzstan) (spoke in Russian):
At the outset, I wish to thank you and the delegation of
Nigeria, Madam, for having organized this important
debate. Kyrgyzstan welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2011/598*) and his recommendations,
including the strategic framework to clearly guide
actions to implement resolution 1325 (2000) at the
national, regional and global levels in the next
10 years.

Kyrgyzstan has made significant headway over
the past two years in promoting the participation of
women in the country's political life, conducting
democratic reforms and peace-based initiatives. The
2010 national referendum resulted in the election of the
first female president in Central Asia. Today, women
occupy nearly one-third of the parliamentary seats.
They also hold the posts of President of the Supreme
Court, Prosecutor General and President of the
National Bank. Women also hold posts as ministers,
governors and heads of various non-governmental
organizations.

Following the inter-ethnic conflict in southern
Kyrgyzstan in 2010, special importance was given to
supporting female initiatives in the area of conflict
resolution, peacebuilding and post-conflict
reconstruction. In that difficult time, women activists
joined together to form women's peacekeeping
networks in order to put an end to conflict and violence
and to prevent a recurrence of the tragic events.

My country notes the timely and swift reaction of
the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund, which funded
projects to promote national reconciliation and post-
conflict reconstruction. Today, the women's
peacekeeping network includes 20 local women's
peace committees and serves as the link between local
communities and the central Government.

Kyrgyzstan believes that the key role in
coordinating agreed measures on women's
participation in conflict prevention and peacebuilding
efforts should be played by the new entity UN-Women.
Through close partnerships with UN-Women, UNICEF,
the United Nations Development Programme and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, in May the network of Kyrgyzstan women
peacekeepers began to implement 11 projects aimed at
fostering inter-ethnic harmony and ensuring peace in
post-conflict areas of Kyrgyzstan. We also consider it
necessary to more actively promote that component in
the action strategy of the United Nations Regional
Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia.

Kyrgyzstan believes that United Nations
peacekeeping operations serve as the main tool for
maintaining peace in conflict zones. In that respect, my
country supports the efforts to enhance the role of
women in the field missions of peacekeeping
operations. It would be relevant to expand the targeted
training programme for women to relevant positions in
United Nations peacekeeping missions.
In the future, Kyrgyzstan intends to increase the
number of women serving in the military and police
contingents of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. We have developed draft legislation on
principles and procedures for the participation of the
Kyrgyz Republic in the maintenance of international
peace and security, which also incorporates a gender
perspective.

Preventive actions in post-conflict countries,
including comprehensive reform of judicial and law
enforcement systems, are important as the only way to
ensure the rule of law and better protection of the
rights of women, particularly in protecting them from
violence and increasing their participation in the law
enforcement sector. My country believes that positive
experience in that area must be mainstreamed and
disseminated.

In conclusion, I would like to point out that work
has begun on a draft national strategy on achieving
gender equality in the Kyrgyz Republic by 2020, as
well as a draft national plan of action on achieving
gender equality for the period 2012-2014. Those
documents will stipulate further measures for
strengthening the role of women in the area of peace
and security, including in the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).

