Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Guehenno, for his
comprehensive briefing on the mandate and role of the
gender advisers in peacekeeping operations in
implementation of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000) on women and peace and security. I also thank
Ms. Amy Smythe for the information on her
experiences in the field that she conveyed to the
Council.

That we are meeting today on the third
anniversary of the Council's adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) on women and peace and security reflects
clearly the Security Council's ongoing interest in the
role of women in peace and security, in conflict and
post-conflict situations. This sends a clear message
about the need to mobilize efforts and generate the
necessary interest at the international level to deal with
this issue.

The recommendations in the report (S/2002/1154)
of the Secretary-General, issued last year in response to
resolution 1325 (2000), reflect an important
examination of the impact of armed conflict on women
and of the role of women in peace-building. Those
recommendations constitute a step towards
consolidating the achievements made so far and
dealing with current challenges.

In that regard, we recall that resolution 1325
(2000) dealt not only with the question of
peacekeeping operations, but also with many other
issues, such as respect for international law, the rights
of women and girls and their protection during armed
conflict. We reaffirm the importance of the
recommendations adopted at United Nations
conferences concerning women, the last of which was
the twenty-third special session of the General
Assembly in 2000. They all constitute milestones in the
march towards promoting and strengthening the status
and role of women in the economic, social and political
spheres.

Resolution 1325 (2000) underscores the fact that
women and children account for the vast majority of
those adversely affected by armed conflict. This is
attributed to the fact that they are the most vulnerable
groups in societies and make soft targets for attacks.
We also underline that in times of armed conflict and
foreign occupation, women are deprived of their most
basic rights, let alone their right to participate in
political decision-making. The situation of Palestinian
women in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip is a case in
point.

In that regard, we reaffirm the need to respect
international humanitarian law and the 1949 Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, in particular women and
children, referred to in operative paragraph 9 of
resolution 1325 (2000). However, the content of that
paragraph has not been heeded by the occupying Power
in the occupied Syrian Golan and the occupied
Palestinian territories.

My delegation believes that we should stress the
importance of taking specific steps to implement
resolution 1325 (2000), including the need for all peace
agreements to deal with the outcome and impact of
armed conflict on women and girls, their participation
in the peace process and their priority needs once
conflict has ended. It is also necessary to integrate the
gender perspective in the mandates of peacekeeping
operations and deal with this issue in the reports to the
Security Council. In addition, there is a need to make
available the necessary financial and human resources
to integrate women and girls, and not to be content
with paying lip service to that objective. We also
believe that the United Nations agencies must have

unhindered access to all areas and people - in
particular women and girls - in need of their
assistance.

Since education and work are of crucial
importance for the liberation of women and the
necessary advancement of girls, it is acutely necessary
to identify the legal and social barriers that deny
women education and work and prevent them from
contributing to economic construction; then, clear and
necessary strategies and plans in that field must be
prepared.

We would also stress that it is of extreme
importance to pay attention to the needs of women and
girls as ex-combatants in post-conflict situations. There
should be more programmes for women and girl ex-
combatants in order to create a more favourable
environment for them after the conflict and ensure their
safe return to the productive workforce in society and
to a decent life.

Finally, the delegation of Syria hopes that
resolution 1325 (2000), as well as this debate held by
the Security Council, will present a serious opportunity
to consider the major problems that women suffer from
in general and that women and girls in conflict
situations suffer from in particular, in order to put an
end to their suffering and to move towards a society of
equality, progress and peace.

