Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union and its member States.
The candidate countries Turkey, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia;
the countries of the Stabilization and Association
Process and potential candidates Albania and Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, as well as Ms. Rhoda
Misaka, who spoke on behalf of civil society, for their
statements.

Conflict-related violence continues to claim lives
and lead to serious and irreparable consequences for
its survivors, their communities and their families,
including children born ofrape. That is clearly reflected
in the alarming information in the latest report submitted
by the Secretary-General (S/2014/181). We therefore
call on the Security Council and all stakeholders to
continue to focus on measures aimed at preventing
sexual violence, protecting and assisting its survivors,
bringing its perpetrators to justice and ensuring that
women and women's organizations participate in all
our efforts to foster peace and security.

We welcome the steps taken towards a consolidated
approach to conflict-related sexual violence and, more
broadly, to the issue of women and peace and security,
as well as the progress made in moving from the
principles and goals established to creating operational
measures and tools. We must live up to our political
commitment through concrete and measurable action.
In that regard, we strongly agree on the need for all
of us to assume national ownership, leadership and
responsibility.

We commend the work of the Special Representative
and the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict, and welcome the Secretary-
General's report. The European Union agrees that
more work on a comprehensive, multisectoral and
multidimensional approach to preventing conflict-
related sexual violence should be done. In that regard,
we would like to particularly emphasize the following
issues.

Reporting, monitoring and information-sharing
should be based on intensifying the establishment and
use of monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements
in the context of country-specific resolutions and
mandates. It also depends on increasing the deployment
of women protection advisers in the relevant
peacekeeping missions. We also note the importance of
continued and enhanced information-sharing, including
through briefings by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and by the Executive Director of
UN-Women, when the Council is discussing mandate
renewals and country situations.

Concerning access to justice and accountability,
crimes of sexual violence must be prosecuted and
punished under national and international law. In
that regard, we emphasize the significant advances
made in international law by the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court and the non-permanent
international criminal tribunals relating to combating
sexual violence in conflict, as well as national efforts
to implement the Statute. We also support targeted and
graduated measures by the relevant Security Council
Sanctions Committees aimed at perpetrators of sexual
violence in conflict. In that regard, we note the resolution
renewing the mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic
(resolution 2134 (2014)), which includes sexual violence
as part ofthe designation criteria for targeted sanctions.

In South Sudan, we are very concerned about the
recent reports from the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan of targeted killings of civilians based on
their ethnic origins and hate messages calling for sexual
violence against people on the basis of the community
they belong to. We are also concerned about women's
participation in conflict prevention, resolution,
protection and peacebuilding processes. None of our
actions will be effective unless they are backed by
the expertise, support and ownership of women and
women's organizations, as well as that of civil society
and community leaders.

The European Union continues to implement
its dedicated policy on women, peace and security,
including through close cooperation with other
international and regional organizations. In that regard,
we welcome the designation of Ms. Bineta Diop as
the African Union Commission Chairperson's Special
Envoy on Women, Peace and Security. Among the
EU's support for efforts to address sexual violence is
a project in the Democratic Republic of the Congo that
focuses on empowering women, combating impunity
and reforming the security sector. The EU is continuing
its work on specific training modules on human rights
and gender in crisis management, helping to focus on
sexual violence in armed conflicts and on training for
trainers on gender and human-rights issues.

We welcome the provisions related to gender-based
violence and violence against women and children in
the Arms Trade Treaty, which has been signed by all
European Union member States and already ratified by
a majority of them. We also welcome the endorsement
by 144 States of the Declaration of Commitment to End
Sexual Violence in Conflict, proclaimed last September
in New York, to be followed up in June at the Global
Summit to End Sexual Violence in Conflict. We must
stay focused on combating sexual Violence. I can assure
the Council that the European Union will do its part to
contribute to that goal.

