Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): Sexual
violence in conflict is a phenomenon that should
receive more and urgent attention, and Spain welcomes
every effort of the international community to continue
working to combat this scourge more effectively. We
also welcome the Council's adoption this morning of
resolution 2106 (2013), of which Spain was a sponsor. It
is particularly pertinent in that it specifically addresses
the issue of impunity as one of the key components in
the fight against sexual Violence in conflict. Combating
impunity must be addressed with a comprehensive
approach that promotes an education system that
promotes the dignity and equality of men and women, a
social system that condemns sexual violence and a legal
mechanism aimed at ensuring the protection of victims
and the punishment of perpetrators.

There are two key instruments in the fight
against impunity for crimes of sexual violence in
conflict - legal codes and training. An adequate legal
code ensures that the necessary legal tools are in place
in order to bring perpetrators to justice. I reiterate
Spain's support for the conclusions of the fifty-seventh
session of the Commission on the Status of Women,
which highlighted the inclusion of crimes of sexual
Violence in the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court and the fact that the ad hoc international
criminal tribunals recognize rape and other forms of
sexual violence as possible war crimes, crimes against
humanity or acts of genocide or torture.

The most recent reform of Spain's military code
of conduct includes the obligation to provide specific
protection to women and children against rape, enforced
prostitution, humiliating and degrading treatment or
any other form of exploitation or sexual assault within
the context of armed conflict.

Regarding training, we must realize that in a post-
conflict scenario, where legal systems are broken, it is
essential that the reconstruction of national capacities
includes specific training on cultures of impunity. Spain
has therefore given support to specific programmes
in that area through the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP)/Spain Millennium Development
Goals Achievement Fund. To cite but two examples,
in South Sudan efforts have been focused primarily
on educating and raising awareness in indigenous
communities on gender equality, while in Colombia
the programme has involved training women in human
rights and violence prevention so that they can later
replicate such teaching in their communities.

Since combating impunity should be specifically
included in humanitarian and development programmes,
the Spanish Humanitarian Aid Office has drafted a
guide to addressing sexual Violence in humanitarian
interventions. Legal codification and training are
indispensable in the fight against impunity, but beyond
that there is a need for clear political will in order to
see that perpetrators are prosecuted and to guarantee
legal and social protection for victims. Therein lies the
importance of including the subject of responsibility in
peace agreements and supporting the participation and
advancement of women in peacebuilding processes.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, through the
UNDP/Spain Fund I just mentioned, we have promoted
the establishment of a number of assistance centres
aimed at providing psycho-social support and training
for women victims of acts of sexual violence, in order
to facilitate their social and economic reintegration.

The commitment of States and international
organizations to fighting impunity must be further
strengthened through an ongoing debate within the
international community, so as to create mechanisms
that can effectively prosecute any form of sexual violence
in conflict. Spain will do its utmost to participate
actively in the various forums addressing the issue. At
the most recent session of the Human Rights Council
in Geneva, Spain took part in both the interactive
dialogue based on the thematic report of the Special
Rapporteur on violence against women, its causes
and consequences (A/HRC/23/49), and in the panel on
women's rights that took place in the same context.
In both forums Spain emphasized the importance of
criminalization and deplored the deficiencies that
emerge when dealing with violence against women,
due to a lack of specific training and education, and
to the patriarchal and stereotypical patterns that hinder
appropriate approaches to such cases, both in terms of
prosecution and investigation. Such debates must help
raise awareness ofthe importance of firm condemnation
of such crimes and result in the Council's renewed
support for advancing the fight against impunity and
maintaining a proactive stance to help reduce the
incidence of sexual violence in conflict and refer such
cases to the International Criminal Court.

Finally, the observer of the European Union will be
delivering a statement that Spain naturally aligns itself
with and has actively contributed to.

