Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): First of
all, I would like to thank the Security Council, under
the presidency of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan,
for convening this important debate. In particular,
I would like to congratulate you, Madam President,
on being the first Arab woman to preside over the
Council. I also thank Ms. Zainab Bangura, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, and the representative of the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security
for their important statements.

Fifteen years have passed since the Council's
historic adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), which
has led to many achievements in enhancing the role
of women in the field of peace and security. Indeed,
women play a singular role in conflict resolution,
combatting extremism, peacebuilding and providing
options for establishing stability, democracy, prosperity
and peace. Peace cannot be achieved when women are
marginalized and excluded from political life. There is
no doubt that our meeting today will allow us to build
on those efforts. We very much wish to see the adoption
of tangible conclusions during the high-level review of
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). That will
be an important moment to step up States' efforts to
confront the relevant challenges and concerns.

It is with great interest that we take note of the
Secretary-General's report on conflict-related sexual
violence (S/2015/203). It paints a very grim picture of
the situation in 2014 in terms of abuses, rapes, sexual
slavery and forced marriages perpetrated by parties to
conflict, including extremist groups. These are tools
used to sow terror and terrorism. We are very concerned
by the report's description of sexual violence as a
phenomenon that is not isolated, but rather intrinsically
linked to the strategic goals of extremist groups, as well
as to their ideology and funding. It is used as a tactic to
sow terror and draw civilian populations into conflict.

Despite the fact that acts such as sexual slavery
and sexual violence are considered to be international
crimes, women and girls remain the vast majority of
the Victims of armed conflict, especially when they
are displaced or refugees. They are the victims of
aggression, sexual Violence and human trafficking,
which is very troubling. The parties responsible for
such horrific acts, whether Governments or non-State
actors, still go unpunished. This is why we agree with
the recommendations contained in the report regarding
the need for the Council to use all tools at its disposal
to guarantee accountability, bringing the perpetrators
to international justice and preventing impunity.

The conflicts taking place in different parts of
the world - and the instability in the Arab world in
particular - have caused the deaths of hundreds of
thousands of civilians, who were terrorized and the
victims of all kinds of rights violations, including
sexual Violence. We therefore highlight the need
to reiterate Governments' responsibility to protect
civilians by taking measures pursuant to international
law, implementing a zero-tolerance policy for the
perpetrators of these crimes, providing assistance to
survivors and strictly applying laws on the protection
of women from Violence, especially sexual Violence in
situations of conflict.

We reiterate Qatar's commitment to guaranteeing
gender equality and guaranteeing the rights of women
during conflict and in post-conflict situations. To
that end, and insofar as sexual violence in conflict
situations constitutes a humanitarian emergency, we
welcome the joint mechanism between UN-Women
and the joint rapid response unit on sexual and gender-
based violence in situations of conflict.

