Ms. Mejia Velez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank the Secretary-General, the Executive
Director of UN-Wornen and Security Council members
for their statements in support of the participation of
women in my country's peace process. I would also
like to thank Ms. Rita Lopidia and her organization for
having shared her testimony. She can rest assured that
her appeal to the international community on behalf of
women from Colombian civil society who are seeking
to build peace to make sure that the agreement reached
in Havana is safeguarded will not fall on deaf ears.

My delegation thanks the Russian presidency for
convening this open debate, almost 16 years after the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). The President's
concept paper (S/2016/871, annex), which his delegation
disseminated for the debate, states that all of the studies
that the Secretary-General commissioned last year
point to a significant link between the participation
of women in conflict prevention and resolution and
the effectiveness and sustainability of the subsequent
rebuilding. That conclusion was reflected in last year's
resolution 2242 (2015). We must continue to prioritize
the participation of women in conflict prevention
and resolution and peacebuilding, and States must
fully assume the responsibility of safeguarding
and guaranteeing women's rights in a safe and
suitable environment.

In Colombia, as we close a difficult chapter of the
hemisphere's most protracted conflict, we understand
that women and girls play a fundamental and proactive
role in the building ofthe peace we so desire. We can say
that the process has been a new, almost unprecedented
experience. It is the first time that a gender focus is
expressly included, not only through the participation
of women as fully empowered members of both
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia
guerillas and the Government, but also through the
creation and work of a gender subcommission - that the
Secretary-General and many of delegations recognized
this morning - which, through often difficult but
respectful dialogue, bore fruit as all resulting chapters
of the final peace agreement provide concrete gender-
specific provisions.

As the Secretary-General's report (S/2016/822)
on women and peace and security indicates, women
accounted for up to a third of the participants at the
table, approximately half of those participating in the
consultations and over 60 per cent of the victims and
the experts that visited the negotiation table in Havana.
We recognize that civil society, especially women's
organizations, have spurred that rebuilding and the
future adherence to the agenda for women's rights.
That is why they are now strategic State partners in
the search for that shared goal. Although challenges
remain, the Government's resolve to overcoming
them is underpinned by its commitment to offering
women reparations for the injuries they have suffered,
guarantees that the abuses will not recur and preventive
measures. My country will continue to promote a culture
free of all forms of discrimination and violence. To that
end, we have signed on to the recently created Women,
Peace and Security National Focal Points Network, an
initiative led by Spain and other regional countries.

In conclusion, in spite of the difficult results of
the 2 October referendum, the Government has called
for a national dialogue to bring together all parties to
help reach an agreement and its implementation as
soon as possible. The commitment to gender equity and
peace was strengthened on 21 October when President
Santos and 109 women's organizations reaffirmed
their support for the peace agreement and welcomed
the fact that victims' rights were at the heart of the
agreement and that the fundamental role of women and
girls in peacebuilding was recognized. The President
of Colombia will continue to strive for peace until the
very end of his mandate.

