Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank you, Mr. President, for convening today's
meeting. I welcome the statements by Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon and Ambassador Wittig, Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).

Post-conflict peacebuilding is an important
component of the work of the United Nations and is of
great significance in helping countries that have just
emerged from conflict to achieve lasting peace. Over
the past decade or so, the United Nations has taken an
active part in peacebuilding in various post-conflict
countries and regions and has achieved remarkable
results. At the same time, the promotion of post-
conflict peacebuilding is still faced with many
challenges. I would like to make the five points in that
regard.

First, the political will of the international
community is a strong guarantee for helping post-
conflict countries succeed in peacebuilding. The
international community should not only be well aware
of the importance of post-conflict peacebuilding, but
should also display firm resolve and take decisive and
quick action. Peacebuilding efforts should be
undertaken in the immediate aftermath of conflict.
Peacebuilding and peacekeeping complement and
reinforce each other and can function in harmony.
Peacebuilding operations should also have an exit
strategy to facilitate a smooth transition to sustainable
development.

Secondly, ownership by the countries concerned
is a prerequisite for a successful peacebuilding process.
Peacebuilding countries and administrations shoulder
primary responsibility. The international community's
efforts in the area of peacebuilding should fully respect
the will of the countries concerned and give free rein to
country ownership. For countries in the immediate
aftermath of conflict, the international community
should give priority to helping them with capacity-
building and improving governance. Donors should
treat post-conflict countries not as mere recipients but
as equal partners in cooperation.

The United Nations and the relevant national
agencies, while helping post-conflict countries to
prepare their international development strategies for
peacebuilding, should fully respect the priorities
independently identified by the countries concerned, as
well as the diversity of circumstances in individual
countries, and adopt an integrated approach in order to
spare the countries concerned additional and
unnecessary administrative burdens.

Thirdly, identifying priorities is important to
ensuring the successful implementation of post-conflict
peacebuilding. We concur with the view of the
Secretary-General that post-conflict peacebuilding
should focus on the five areas of ensuring basic
security, building the political process, providing basic
services, supporting core Government functions and
revitalizing economic development.

A strong political process and national
reconciliation are prerequisite foundations for
peacebuilding. Only by achieving speedy and early

recovery and promoting socio-economic development
can we win the confidence of the peoples of post-
conflict countries in the peace process. It is critical to
address the issue of youth employment and the
reintegration of ex-combatants in order to eliminate
hidden threats to social stability and to prevent relapse
into conflict, and these matters should receive
heightened attention.

Fourthly, the PBC and regional commissions
must be enabled to play a more important role in post-
conflict peacebuilding. China welcomes the PBC's
five-year review of its work and hopes that Member
States can reach an early consensus on the proposals
for improving the Commission's work. With a View to
complying with the relevant General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions, we should give full play
to the unique strengths of the African Union and other
regional and subregional organizations in the area of
peacebuilding. China supports the efforts of the United
Nations and the PBC to deepen peacebuilding
cooperation with such international organizations as
the World Bank.

Fifthly, China pays close attention to the
financing of the development of pools of experts and
calls on the international community to continue to
provide resources to post-conflict peacebuilding efforts
and to unite in tapping new and additional sources of
financing. The multi-donor trust fund should undertake
appropriate reforms of its operations in order to
enhance its accountability and efficiency.

China has always supported the countries
concerned in their peacebuilding efforts and stands
ready, together with the international community, to
make its own contribution to achieving peace and
stability and promoting sustainable socio-economic
development in the countries concerned.

