Mr. Limeres (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation commends you, Madam, for your initiative
to convene this open debate. We also thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon; Under-Secretary-General
Michelle Bachelet; Ambassador Lazarous Kapambwe,
President of the Economic and Social Council; and Ms.
Orzala Ashraf Nemat of the NGO Working Group on
Women, Peace and Security for their statements.

Our country welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2011/598*), which comprehensively reflects
the important role that women play in preventive
diplomacy, peace negotiation processes, and
post-conflict reconstruction. The merit of resolution
1325 (2000) is specifically that the Security Council
recognizes therein the key role that women can play as
protagonists in peace processes. The international
community must pool its efforts to ensure that this
protagonist role remains possible. We are convinced
that lasting peace can be attained only if women
participate in all phases of peace processes. We
therefore welcome the idea of compiling lists of
women candidates to mediate conflicts.

We also believe that the establishment of
UN-Women was a key step in the consolidation of the
women and peace and security agenda, embodied, inter
alia, in technical assistance that the entity is providing
to countries of all regions in the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions. We
wish in particular to express our appreciation for the
cooperation of UN-Women in the ongoing drafting of
Argentina's national action plan, which has been
created on the basis of a series priority areas of our
domestic and international policy, including the
defence of multilateralism, contributions to peace
processes, the promotion and protection of human
rights, gender equality, and the protection of civilians
in conflict. Another priority is increasing the political
participation of women and including the gender
perspective in all matters related to peace and security
at the national, regional and international levels.

Our plan is the result of a participatory and
comprehensive exercise led by the Ministry for Foreign
Affairs, and involves other State and civil society
agencies. In addition to incorporating the traditional
contributions of the Ministries of Security and
Defence, the plan includes input from stakeholders
with experience in training and assistance to women
victims of gender violence and human trafficking, who
we believe are able to contribute to the reconstruction
of societies affected by armed conflict, thereby
underscoring the gender approach in the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process and
preventing the re-victimization of women. Moreover,
we believe it necessary to include cooperation in the
field of health, in particular sexual and reproductive
health, and in the integration of women into the labour
market and the educational system.

I cannot conclude without expressing my
appreciation for the report's mention of Argentina's
efforts to increase the number of Argentine women
deployed in its armed and security forces, as well as to
peacekeeping missions. The report also notes our
initiatives to develop and improve training in the
specific protection rights and needs of women and
girls. We will pursue such efforts in the conviction that,
11 years after the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
much remains to be done if we are to achieve its full
and effective implementation.

