Mr. Heaton (New Zealand): In view of your
appeal with regard to the length of statements,
Mr. President, I will limit myself to a few brief
comments. Copies of the full text of our statement have
been circulated.

Resolution 1325 (2000) is broad in scope, and we
think it is valuable to take the time this year to deal
with this particular issue in depth: as we have heard
from so many speakers today, violence against women
in conflict situations is reaching epidemic proportions.
We note with particular concern that violence against
women and girls continues to be used as a weapon of
war.

New Zealand has identified several priorities to
address violence against women and girls in armed
conflict. With regard to the United Nations system,
first, we support those calling for a new system-wide
action plan for the coordinated implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). As part of this, we note that the
increasing representation of women at all levels of
United Nations operations and decision-making must
be an important part of United Nations efforts.

Secondly, we continue to urge the Security
Council to include a systematic and express focus on
the gender dimensions of conflict in every case that
comes before it. We note that the idea was floated last
year of naming a Security Council member to be
responsible for tracking implementation of the
resolution, and we hope that that idea will be
considered seriously by the Council.

Thirdly, on the specific question of peacekeeping,
there is an urgent need to inject a clear gender
perspective into all facets of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. We note that ensuring that
will require adequate resourcing by the Security
Council and by us, the Member States. Member States
also have a major responsibility to nominate women at
all levels of United Nations peacekeeping operations.

With regard to the wider United Nations
membership, fourthly, we must ensure that we do not
just focus on women as victims but recognize their
roles as peacemakers and active participants in
resolving conflict and building peace at all levels.

Fifthly, impunity for gender-based violence
cannot be accepted, and the international legal
framework in place to address gender-based Violence in
armed conflict must be respected. The Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court, which specifically
defines rape and other forms of violence against
women as war crimes and crimes against humanity, is
important in that regard.

