Mr. Marzooq (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate the Russian Federation
on assuming the presidency of the Council this month
and for the transparent manner in which it conducts
the work of the Security Council. I would also like to
thank New Zealand for its tremendous efforts during its
presidency of the Council last month.

Iraq is one of the earliest countries to being
implementing resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security. Notwithstanding the challenges
and difficulties that the country faces and the terrorist
attacks of Da'esh, Iraq is developing an effective
national action plan to implement the resolution. A
special operations room has been established in the
Prime Minister's Office to implement resolution-related
plans, as well as the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women.

Iraq is working to ensure women's participation in
public life and raises awareness among the population
about women's social, economic and political rights,
promotes gender equality through an equal opportunities
policy and encourages women to take up posts and
participate in decision-making processes. Women
taking up high-ranking positions has increased since
2003. We now have 83 women parliamentarians, three
women ambassadors and 86 judges and Iraqi women
are now the presidents and deans of 75 universities
and colleges and cabinet ministers in an Iraqi State
inhabited by 7 million people. Sustainable development
can be achieved only when there is an environment of
peace and security.

Iraq is witnessing the most violent terrorist attacks
in the world perpetrated by lethal terrorist groups. The
people in the areas under the control of such gangs have
experienced the most savage and horrendous criminal
practices committed against, in particular, women
and children. Such gangs and groups have kidnapped
a huge number of Yazidi women and people from
other ethnicities of all ages in Iraq, whohave been sold
as chattel in the areas between Iraq and Syria. Their
dignities have been humiliated. They have been raped,
enslaved and tortured psychologically, physically
and sexually. We therefore call on the international
community to make further efforts to support Iraq,
free these women, return them to their families and
reintegrate them into society.

My Government, in coordination with international
organizations, is monitoring and addressing violations
taking place during counterterrorism operations. It is
training women and involving them in all steps of the
war against terrorism. Collective efforts undertaken
by the Government of Iraq and the United Nations led
to the signing of a joint statement by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Iraq, Mr. Ibrahim Al-Jaafari, and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Bangura,
on 23 September, on the sidelines of the high-level
meetings of the General Assembly.

The advancement of women is a huge step towards
achieving peace and security. Iraq is continuously
cooperating with international organizations to
promote women's advancement, to expand women's
role and empowerment, and to enable women to assume
their role in society. The Government is cooperating
with the Gender Unit of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq to enhance the role of women in
national reconciliation and to raise awareness about the
importance of resolution 1325 (2000).

