The President: I have received letters from the
representatives of Albania, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Belgium, Benin, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, the
Czech Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Estonia, Finland, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Kenya, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro,
the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Peru, Portugal, the Republic of
Korea, Romania, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, The former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste and Ukraine, in which they
request to participate in this meeting. I propose to
invite those representatives to participate in this
meeting without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: On behalf of the Security Council,
I extend invitations under rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure to Ms. Margot Wallstrom,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, and
Lieutenant General Babacar Gaye, Military Adviser of
the Office of Military Affairs in the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations.

It is so decided.

I have received a letter from His Excellency
Mr. Pedro Serrano, Acting Head of the Delegation of
2
the European Union to the United Nations, in which he
requests to be invited to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I now give the floor to His Excellency Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon.


