Mr. Tidjani (Cameroon) (spoke in French): At
the outset I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having organized this public meeting today, which
marks the third anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security. This meeting eloquently attests to the Security
Council's continuing interest in advancing the rights of
women and their role for peace.

I would also like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Jean-Marie Guehenno and to pay a tribute to
the Senior Gender Adviser of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Ms. Amy Smythe, for their very rich,
thorough and informative briefings. I would also like to
welcome Ms. Angela King, Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on Gender Issues and Advancement
of Women, and Noeleen Heyzer, Executive Director of
the United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM), who are honouring our debate with their
presence.

Since the Security Council's adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) on 31 October 2000, genuine
progress has been made by United Nations Member
States and the international community at large in
protecting women in conflict situations and advancing
their full and complete participation on an equal basis
in action to maintain and promote peace and security
and to implement the provisions of resolution 1325
(2000).

Moreover, this public meeting provides us with
the opportunity to assess the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and the recommendations
contained in the Security Council's presidential
statement of 31 October 2002, contained in document
S/PRST/2002/32. That statement, like that of 31
October 2001, reaffirms the Council's concern
regarding the relatively low number of women
appointed as special representatives or envoys of the
Secretary-General with peacekeeping missions. It also
reaffirms the commitment of the Security Council to
the full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
recommends a number of measures to the Secretary-
General, United Nations bodies, civil society and
interested players on a gender-specific approach in
missions to countries in conflict, humanitarian
operations and post-conflict and reconstruction
programmes.

My delegation welcomes the fact that the study
requested of the Secretary-General in paragraph 16 of
resolution 1325 (2000) contains contributions from all
the bodies, programmes and funds of the United
Nations system. Such a comprehensive approach will
clearly allow for the drafting or strengthening of
measures to protect the rights of women and the greater
involvement of women in peace and reconstruction
processes. That objective is shared by Cameroon. On
28 October 2002, my delegation endorsed the
recommendations of the Secretary-General in his report
contained in document S/2002/1154, particularly
regarding strategies to advance partnership between
men and women for the strengthening of the
effectiveness of multidimensional peacekeeping
operations.

As regards the progress that has been made, I
note and welcome the establishment by the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations of gender equality groups
and gender advisers within peacekeeping missions, as
well as the appointment within the Department of a
Gender Adviser. We also note the active cooperation,
led by the Senior Gender Adviser of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, with civil society and political parties to
strengthen the capacities of women's organizations and
their leaders and to allow them to play a greater role in
the democratic process under way. In Sierra Leone, we
welcome the efforts made by the human rights sections
of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone, through
the actions of its expert on issues of gender inequality,
to train and raise the awareness of the population on
the special needs of women, their rights and the
elimination of domestic and sexist violence.

With respect to justice, we welcome the measures
undertaken and mechanisms established to ensure that
the perpetrators of all acts of violence in which women
and girls are victimized do not go unpunished. In this
regard, I wish to thank Mr. Guehenno for his
description of the efforts of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations to implement resolution 1325
(2000) and for his emphasis on the pending tasks.
These are challenges we must meet together. I also
thank Ms. Smythe for her information from the field
and for her work therein, the results of which are clear.

Despite the progress, a great deal remains to be
done towards the full implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). That implementation does not fall solely
to the United Nations system. It requires the
cooperation of all Member States, all parties to
conflicts, civil society and the international community
as a whole.

In that vein, a regional meeting was held in
Douala in May last year, led by the United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) and in
cooperation with the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa, on
equality, development and the participation of women
in Central Africa. The outcome of the work at that
meeting, in which there was especially active
participation by women and representatives of civil
society from the subregion, was the adoption of a
regional plan of action. In identifying certain obstacles
to peace in Central Africa, the plan advocated a series
of measures designed to achieve a tangible promotion
of the role of women with respect to peace and
security. Because of a lack of resources, its
implementation was deferred to 2004. In this context, I
appeal to contributors for technical, logistical and
financial support for UNIFEM. and women's
community groups and networks whose initiatives
share common goals with resolution 1325 (2000).

In Africa, women are the axes of family and
social life. Everything revolves around and relies on
women. Nothing solid or lasting can be accomplished
without them. Let us pay due tribute to women and let
them play their proper role in the maintenance and
building of peace. Meeting the challenge of
implementing resolution 1325 (2000) will open new
opportunities for all humankind. With resolve and joint
action, we will succeed.

