Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): My delegation would
like to express its sincere appreciation to the Secretary-
General, Under-Secretary-General Michelle Bachelet,
Ambassador Lazarous Kapambwe in his capacity as
President of the Economic and Social Council, and
Ms. Nemat, speaking on behalf of the NGO Working
Group On Women, Peace and Security, for their
statements. We also appreciate the presence of the
Deputy Secretary-General in this debate.

South Africa welcomes the convening of this
important meeting. The adoption of the historic
resolution 1325 (2000) 11 years ago was a significant
milestone in the recognition of the role that women can
play in the maintenance of international peace and
security, particularly in decision-making processes
relating to conflict prevention and resolution. In light
of that achievement, South Africa is encouraged by the
various frameworks that have been created to ensure
the implementation of that resolution, in particular the
creation of UN-Women under the leadership of
Ms. Michele Bachelet.

Those positive developments are pivotal for
advancing the agenda of women, peace and security. It
will allow for this important issue to be consistently
placed at the top of the agenda of the United Nations
system, and lead to increased coordination in policy
programming for women and girls within the United
Nations system.

Indeed, inroads have been made in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), as
highlighted in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2011/598*). However, let us be clear that gaps
remain in the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), as well as glaring disparities pertaining to the
role of women in preventive diplomacy, formal peace
processes and mediation. We therefore welcome the
institutional and policy frameworks elaborated in the
Secretary-General's report, in particular his seven-
point action plan for gender-responsive peacebuilding,
which seeks to establish standard operating procedures
for gender issues in the United Nations, conflict
resolution and peacebuilding architecture.

ll-56959

We further welcome the practical
recommendations and the strategic results framework
outlined in the Secretary-General's report, which
constitute a concrete proposal to include women in
conflict prevention and mediation. In particular, we
wish to highlight the importance of nominating women
to lead negotiation processes and increasing the
number of women in the foreign services and security
establishments.

Equally, the proposal to increase the number of
women police and troops in United Nations missions is
highly desirable in addressing the specific needs of
women in conflict and post-conflict countries.

In that regard, South Africa is among the States
with the highest representation of women across all
spheres of Government. Women are also at the helm of
ministries in the fields of international relations,
cooperation and defence. In the area of peacekeeping,
we have deployed gender mainstreaming officers in
positions of command in peacekeeping missions to
ensure that issues related to women are addressed. In
addition, we are one of the top three troop-contributing
countries with the largest contingent of women in
peacekeeping missions.

In the recent past, South African women held the
position of Deputy Police Commissioner in the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur. We
believe that the presence of women in peacekeeping
missions positively benefits local women and girls,
including other vulnerable groups in countries in, and
emerging from, conflict.

Based on its past experience, South Africa is
conscious of the centrality of women as peacemakers
and facilitators in political processes and peacebuilding
initiatives, particularly at the grass-roots level. Women
at all levels of society have a role to play in conflict
prevention and peacebuilding as agents of change. In
that regard, South African Women in Dialogue has
been actively engaged with women's organizations in
countries such as Burundi, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Sudan in sharing experiences and
lessons learned with women in States emerging from
conflict.
South Africa continues to contribute to
popularizing the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) through structures such as the Southern African
Development Community, the African Union and the
Pan-African Women's Organization. To that end, South
Africa recently held the Progressive Women's
Movement of South Africa Summit on Women, Peace
and Security in May.

Indeed, in congratulating the three outstanding
women who were jointly awarded the Nobel Peace
Prize this year, President Johnson-Sirleaf of Liberia,
her compatriot Ms. Leymah Gbowee and Ms. Tawakkul
Karman of Yemen, President Jacob Zuma underscored
the important contribution that women continue to play
in their ongoing struggle for women's rights, dignity,
peace and development all over the world. The vast
majority of women are not involved in creating wars,
but they remain the primary victims of war and
conflict. Long after the guns have ceased blazing, their
children and families continue to suffer the devastating
effects of the aftermath of conflict. Women are the
ones left to pick up the pieces and to rebuild families
and their communities.

Women also suffer disproportionately from
poverty. An important dimension in advancing peace
and preventing conflict is to ensure greater and more
equitable economic justice and development. Despite
advances in positioning women to assume leadership
roles in conflict prevention and mediation, those
advances will be meaningless if the root causes of
conflict, which are by and large developmental in
nature, are not sufficiently addressed.

In conclusion, as members of the Security
Council, we should encourage the incorporation of a
gender perspective of preventative diplomacy
initiatives in our mandate renewals. That could be
achieved, first, through the effective utilization of
women as mediators, including through the good
offices of the Secretary-General; secondly, by
increasing the number of women Special
Representatives, thirdly, by making the utmost use of
the gender expertise resident in UN-Women; and
fourthly, by incorporating the gender perspective in the
work of Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention
and Resolution in Africa.

Finally, South Africa welcomes the adoption of
the draft presidential statement before us.

