Archbishop Auza: The Holy See thanks the
Uruguayan presidency for bringing this unsettling
topic to an open debate in this Chamber, and thus to the
entire international community.

My delegation wishes to thank the Secretary-
General for his latest report (S/2017/249) on conflict-
related sexual violence, which describes the horrendous
impact these crimes have on women and girls and on
entire communities.

The term "conflict-related sexual violence" covers
a wide range of sexual violence, including rape, sexual
slavery, forced prostitution, forced pregnancy, forced
abortion, forced sterilization, forced marriage, as
well as trafficking in persons, when perpetrated in
situations of conflict for the purpose of sexual violence
or exploitation. As appalling and criminal as these
forms of sexual violence are, my delegation wishes to
draw specific attention to the use of sexual violence in
conflict as a tactic of terrorism.

The motives behind this particularly heinous
crime, enumerated in the Secretary-General's report,
constitutes a litany of evil that includes incentivizing
the recruitment of terrorists, terrorizing and displacing
populations, forcing religious conversion through
marriage, suppressing women's fundamental rights,
generating revenues through sex trafficking, extorting
ransom from desperate families, giving women and
girls as war spoils to compensate fighters, who are then
entitled to resell or to exploit them as they wish, and
using women and girls as human shields and suicide
bombers. The immeasurable suffering of so many
women, who continue today to be victims of such
cruelty, cannot but put fire under our feet to spur us
all to action. The Holy See therefore appeals to the
international community through the Security Council
to give priority to this particularly horrendous violence
against women and children.

There is no need of further evidence to document
the fact that women and girls are being specifically
targeted as a tactic in order to incite fear, crush their
will and generate revenues for the terror machine.
Pope Francis has reminded the diplomatic community
that we must not overlook the horrendous crime of rape
in conflict, which is a most grave offense against the
dignity of women, who are not only violated in body
but also in spirit, resulting in a trauma hard to erase and
with effects on entire societies as well.

In the face of these heinous crimes, there exists,
first for States and then for the international community,
a grave responsibility to protect those who are exposed
to war crimes, crimes against humanity, genocide or
ethnic cleansing. The international community is
called upon to encourage and help States to exercise
this responsibility. Conflict-related sexual violence,
in particular sexual violence as an instrument of
terrorism, undoubtedly falls within this pressing and
profound responsibility to protect. The prevailing
impunity of those who have committed such crimes
clearly illustrates the urgency of fulfilling this duty.

The urgent need to act in order to spare women and
girls from becoming prey for such atrocious tactics in
conflicts should accompany, and even embolden, States'
common efforts and resolute will to bring conflicts
to an end and to adopt coordinated solutions through
dialogue and mediation efforts and through post-conflict
peacebuilding and reconciliation measures. There is no
need to recall also that the role of women in such an
endeavour is essential. It should not be an afterthought
or considered simply as something politically correct,
but rather as an indispensable contribution to all our
peace and security efforts designed to spare our world
from further scourges of war and violence.

A week ago, Pope Francis once again warned that
the culture of destruction is spreading throughout the
world and that we are experiencing a new massacre of
men and women and children who suffer and die as a
result of war and migration, or who are being exploited
for someone else's personal interests. In response to this
culture of violence, the world, especially the women
and girls whose dignity is being savagely violated,
looks to the Security Council for hope and action. Let
us remember their faces and show them by our action
that they do not hope in vain.

