Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): My Government
welcomes today's debate and the report of the
Secretary-General on women and peace and security
(S/2013/525). We celebrate this year the thirteenth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), and we welcome
today's important resolution 2122 (2013), which we
sponsored. The resolution will advance today's agenda
relating to women and peace and security.
We take this opportunity to make a few remarks
in our national capacity, while we fully endorse the
statement made by the observer of the European Union
earlier.

We attach great importance to today's theme, which
is close to our mission statement - "The Kingdom of
the Netherlands, your partner for peace, justice and
development". Let me highlight five points.

First of all, the Government of the Netherlands sees
women as leaders. In our national action plan based
on guidelines set forth in resolution 1325 (2000), as
well as in our wider human rights and gender equality
policies, we have chosen to focus on the role of women
as political actors in conflict prevention, conflict
resolution and recovery. We believe in the power of
women as agents for peace and as representatives of
communities living in conflict. During the recent
opening week of the sixty-eighth session of the General
Assembly, the Netherlands Minister of Foreign Affairs,
Franciscus Timmermans, hosted an event with a group
of Syrian women. He heard their recommendations and
opened doors for them here in New York. Their stories
inspired many and offered new hope for a solution to
the horrific conflict in Syria. We stand ready to further
support Syrian women's contributions to that end.

We encourage the Security Council to remain
committed to the full agenda of resolution 1325 (2000),
including the meaningful participation of women in
all peace negotiations, security sector reform and
decision-making related to conflict resolution and post-
conflict rebuilding. We call upon the Security Council
to more systematically implement the women and peace
and security agenda.

Secondly, we support the women's agenda in
countries in conflict or transition. In his report,
the Secretary-General finds that deficits remain in
opportunities for women to exercise leadership, with
shortfalls existing in the resources provided to support
women and strengthen their organizational capacities.
Recognizing that fact, the Netherlands has therefore
established a funding mechanism called "Women on
the Frontline" for women's organizations in countries
in transition in the Middle East and North Africa. We
aim to support them with organizational and capacity
development. Our aim is clear f women should be in a
position to make their voices heard, demand their rights
and contribute to the development of their countries.

We also welcome efforts by United Nations
mediators to include women in peace and transition
processes. Yemen is an inspiring example, where,
against all odds, women are participating in the National
Dialogue and are claiming their role in the next phases
of transition. We also pay tribute to Special Envoy for
the Great Lakes Mary Robinson's outreach to women
early on in her mandate, as our Irish colleague briefly
mentioned a moment ago.

Thirdly, we support legal systems based on
equality. We need a gender-sensitive approach to the
rule of law and transitional justice in conflict and
post-conflict situations. Women and girls should have
equal access to fair and transparent justice services
and they should be able to influence justice policies
and institutions in their country. In that respect, we
also acknowledge the important contribution of the
International Criminal Court and other special courts
and tribunals in addressing gender-based and sexual
violence in specific.

As the focus of today's debate is on the importance
of the rule of law and justice, let me highlight an
example. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, my
Government is helping to establish a gender-sensitive
judicial system, including by training women to become
lawyers themselves.

Fourthly, we care about prevention and the
protection of victims of sexual violence in conflict.
The Netherlands welcomes the continued high-level
attention to the role of women in conflict situations.
In June, the Council adopted resolution 2106 (2013);
other international actors, such as the Group of Eight,
have also shown real commitment to the prevention
and prosecution of sexual Violence in conflict. For my
Government, that is a crucial part of the 1325 agenda.

We welcome and support the recommendation
of the Secretary-General to ensure the full range of
services to victims of rape, including access to services
for the safe termination of pregnancies resulting from
rape, without discrimination and in accordance with
international human rights and humanitarian law.

The prevention of, and protection from, sexual
violence is an issue that continues to demand our full
attention. I am proud to announce that the Netherlands
recently increased its contribution to the United Nations
Trust Fund for the Elimination of Violence against
Women by $2 million, bringing it to a total of more
than $8 million.

Fifthly and lastly, we stand ready to share
experiences and improve on our joint implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda. We offer
our full support and cooperation to the global review
on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) that
UN Women is currently undertaking. In that context,
we are pleased to announce that, in late 2014, the
Netherlands will host an international conference on
lessons learned.

As I have said, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
wants to be a partner for peace,justice and development.
The role of women is crucial in all three dimensions.

