Mr. Sana (Rwanda): It is with conviction that I
share with the Security Council Rwanda's stance and
commitment to ending sexual exploitation and abuse in
United Nations peacekeeping operations. I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting. I
also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.
We take note of the recommendations contained in
his report (A/70/729) to the General Assembly on the
sexual exploitation and abuse. We hope that all Member
States, in particular all troop-contributing countries,
will have an opportunity to share their views in that
regard. We also take this opportunity to commend
the Secretary-General for his efforts to combat sexual
exploitation and abuse.

Rwanda is more than committed to ensuring that
as we deliver on our responsibility to protect we protect
with the utmost integrity the lives of those we have
been tasked to safeguard. The Kigali Principles on the
Protection of Civilians, an outcome of the International
Conference on the Protection of Civilians held last
year, has touched on this important issue by advancing
the steps that must be taken to achieve a zero-tolerance
policy, while at the same time underscoring the need
to report on all human rights abuses. We believe that
all sexual violence and abuse is unacceptable. Our
military and judicial policies are a strong testament of
our commitment to ending such abhorrent actions. Let
me be clear: even one case, in our view, is unacceptable,
and should not be tolerated. The protectors should not
be perpetrators. There is no justification whatsoever for
cases of sexual exploitation and abuse. Any allegation
should be reported and investigated, with legal action
taken against the alleged perpetrators.

Combating sexual exploitation and abuse begins
long before peacekeepers arrive in the mission area.
Discipline and a code of conduct anchored in our culture
and within national jurisdictions is paramount in
preventing, fighting and eradicating sexual exploitation
and abuse, which in the end undermines the credibility
of peacekeepers, who are doing a tremendous job in
different missions, including making the ultimate
sacrifice.

My country has an absolute-zero tolerance for
sexual exploitation and abuse. We ensure that our
troops and police receive thorough training, which
covers sexual exploitation and abuse, for which
we also use United Nations manuals as additional
reference. In terms of ourjudiciary, the Rwandan penal
code punishes all those found guilty of the crime,
including peacekeepers operating internationally. My
Government has also committed to combating sexual
exploitation and abuse, including by deploying a legal
adviser and an investigator in each battalion of our
contingents deployed in United Nations peacekeeping
missions since 2011.

In the case of Rwanda, as mentioned in the report
of the Secretary-General, three inquiries have been
undertaken into inappropriate relationships between
adult women and Rwandan police officers formerly
serving in the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti. That allegation represents a serious violation
of our Government policies. Investigations have been
ongoing and strong administrative measures have been
taken as we await their completion.

As Member States, we must continue to report,
prosecute and punish those who have been convicted of
taking advantage of the most vulnerable, the women and
children entangled in today's conflicts. The victims are
our mothers, our sisters and our daughters. This effort
should also apply to those operating as non-United
Nations personnel working under a Security Council
mandate. It should also be expected that national and
regional entities deployed outside the United Nations
mandate are held to the same standard as United Nations
personnel, including independent investigations with
the outcomes brought to the attention of the appropriate
bodies for action. Transparency, objectivity and
accountability should characterize the Secretariat's
work in addressing this issue.

In addition to the obligation incumbent upon the
troop-contributing countries, there is a great need for
regular interaction between the Secretariat and TCCs
when it comes to investigations. Therefore, updates
from both sides are necessary before reports are
released. Most often, the Secretariat does not consult
Member States. Yet there are cases that have been
investigated and legal action taken, but are not included
in the reports. At the same time, non-policy violations
should not divert attention from, or dilute responsibility
for, the numerous unresolved cases of rape and child
abuse by peacekeeping forces. We therefore call upon
the United Nations and troop-contributing countries
to remain focused on accountability for this heinous
crime.

In conclusion, let me say that the time to take
immediate and effective action is now. We must
all, individually and collectively, do what is in our
means to enforce the zero-tolerance policy for sexual
exploitation and abuse, while also working towards
eradicating the existence of sexual exploitation and
abuse in peacekeeping operations. As we continue to
work within our capacities to strengthen all measures
related to sexual exploitation and abuse, we must
also hold other stakeholders accountable. By working
collectively and with transparency we can eliminate
past wrongdoing and refocus our efforts on upholding
the infinite act of great courage undertaken by our
peacekeepers time and time again.

The meeting rose at 12.45 pm.
