Mrs. Hassan (Djibouti) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks the French presidency of the Security
Council for convening this debate on women and peace
and security, as well as for the excellent quality of
the accompanying concept note (S/2017/889, annex),
which highlights the relevance and importance of this
issue on the agenda of the Security Council and the
General Assembly as we implement the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development.

We also welcome the excellent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/861) and thank Ms. Jean,
Secretary-General of the International Organization of
la Francophonie, and Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive
Director ofUN-Women, for the quality oftheir briefings.

Since 2000, some eight Security Council resolutions
have substantively contributed to the progressive
enrichment of the legal and institutional framework
dealing with the issue before us, while also being
translated into closer institutional links among peace
and security, development and human rights bodies.

In times of conflict, the security situation on the
ground deteriorates significantly and takes a heavy toll
in human lives. Civilians are the primary victims of
such wars, and their lives are in jeopardy on a daily
basis. It is obviously no coincidence that women always
pay the highest price. Day after day, if nothing is done,
their lives become a never-ending string of misfortunes,
accompanied by a lack of access to water, health care
and adequate food. Any hope of a quiet and peaceful
life is obliterated, and they face abject poverty, pain and
misfortune as they gradually become deprived of any
means of subsistence. Indeed, the resulting insecurity
takes a high toll on their daily lives, filling them with
despair and making their future increasingly uncertain.
The precarious security environment creates a fertile
breeding ground for terror and terrorism.

Much progress has been made under the women
and peace and security agenda, but much remains to be
done. We note with satisfaction that the framework of
preventative diplomacy and preventive action in various
areas - such as demobilization, disarmament and
reintegration, security-sector reform and human rights
aimed at preventing and resolving conflicts - can
support complex political transitions and maintain
peace among national stakeholders.

In that context, there is a clear trend towards
increasing women's participation. As such, those tools
have the immediate goal of mitigating the triggers
and impacts of violent conflict, while seeking to build
peace and move towards the long-term objectives
of prevention and lasting peace. In that respect, we
believe that women's participation is crucial in order to
increase effectiveness. We also commend the efforts of
the Secretary-General with regard to the zero-tolerance
policy on sexual exploitation and abuse.

We welcomed the launch of the African Women
Leaders Network in May in New York. We also
reiterate that we are pleased to see the high degree of
integration of the issue of women into the peace and
security architecture of the African Union. Indeed,
commendable efforts have been made in the African
Union to integrate objectives relating to women and
peace and security into its mechanisms for security and
human rights protection, as well as its crisis-response
and peacebuilding strategies, including, inter alia, the
promotion of women's access to positions such as peace
mediators, election observers and gender advisers.

Djibouti has long worked to adopt measures relating
to women's economic empowerment, governance and
justice. Many sectoral public policies in that regard
have been implemented and featured in the national
programme on gender. Article 1 of our Constitution
establishes equality between men and women with
respect to civic and political rights. Since 2013, our
Parliament has had a 12 per cent representation of
women. In public administration, thanks to a legal
framework and the political will for equal participation,
women now represent some 25 per cent of the
workforce. Finally, Djiboutian women are participating
in peacekeeping missions, in particular in the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the African
Union Mission in Somalia.

As affirmed by the Beijing Declaration in the
Platform for Action of the Fourth World Conference
on Women,

"Women's equal participation in decision-making
is not only a demand for simple justice or
democracy but can also be seen as a necessary
condition for women's interests to be taken into
account. Without the active participation of women
and the incorporation of women's perspective at all
levels of decision-making, the goals of equality,
development and peace cannot be achieved."

Currently, we in Djibouti are initiating the
preparation of a project aimed at the creation of a
gender observatory. That project consists, on the one
hand, of collecting, analysing and disseminating data
relating to gender equality, and on the other, of making
recommendations that will inform decision-makers
in their decision-making and, consequently, the
development of public policies to promote and improve
the situation of gender equality in our country.

To conclude, the topic debated today - about
which predictions indicate that the road ahead is fraught
with difficulties, but also that the obstacles are by no
means insurmountable - provides us with an excellent
opportunity and means of eradicating the root causes of
conflicts and strengthening conflict prevention. We can
and must collectively work with vigour to implement
the elements and recommendations of the global study
in that regard.

