Mr. Mahiga (Tanzania): Mr. President, we thank
you for organizing this important Security Council
debate on the implementation of resolution 1820
(2008), on sexual violence against women, during the
presidency of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland. We commend the Secretary-
General's report on this matter (S/2009/362), which
advances our understanding of the subject of sexual
violence against women, especially in situations of
armed conflict and post-armed conflict situations, and
the measures which need to be taken to preventing and
address violence against girls and women.

We appreciate and encourage the leadership of
the Secretary-General and the Security Council on this
subject, which needs to be linked normatively and
operationally to resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
armed conflict. Both resolutions are central to
international peace and security. They have generated
significant positive responses from States and regional
and international organizations, which have become
engaged in addressing gender-based violence in
conflict and non-conflict situations alike.

In Tanzania, we are working with the United
Nations system - especially the United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) - on
advocacy initiatives, as well as promoting legislative
and policy measures to address and mainstream
national initiatives against gender-based violence.
Tanzania has agreed with UNIFEM. to lead a regional
initiative related to the campaign against gender-based

violence, including sexual violence against girls and
women.

I also take this opportunity to draw the attention
of the Council and the United Nations system to the
newly launched African Union gender policy, which is
related to, among other issues, the implementation of
Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008). We encourage the Council and the United
Nations system as a whole to cooperate and coordinate
with the African Union on initiatives in these areas, as
appropriate. This could be a subject of future
discussions in the evolving partnership and cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union.

There are many challenges in the implementation
of resolution 1820 (2008) at all levels. Among those
that stand out and require urgent responses at all levels
is the collection of adequate and reliable information
on sexual violence. That can best be done through the
provision of assured access to humanitarian assistance
for survivors of Violence. Information would not only
give us a better understanding of the problem, but also
allow us to devise appropriate strategies to address the
problem and help the victims of sexual violence. In
peacekeeping missions and other humanitarian
operations, access to survivors of sexual violence must
be given due priority.

Coordinated action within the United Nations
through a focal point in the Secretariat needs to be part
of the wider initiative of the gender entity in the United
Nations system-wide coherence exercise. This ought to
go hand in hand with developing expertise on gender-
based violence within United Nations agencies in the
humanitarian sector. We commend the individual
agencies, funds and programmes that already have
dedicated units to deal with gender-based violence, but
their mandates would be greatly enhanced through a
system-wide focal point.

While the Security Council, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs continue to
improve the protection of civilians in peacekeeping
missions, preventing and protecting against sexual
violence remain a relatively new and still evolving
undertaking. We therefore encourage troop-
contributing countries, in partnership with DPKO, to
develop specific training for peacekeepers in the
protection of women and girls against sexual violence
before their deployment to peacekeeping missions.

That would entail increasing the numbers of female
military and police officers, as well as of trained
civilian female staff, to be deployed in the field.

We look forward to participating in a wider
debate in the Council later this year on the protection
of civilians in peacekeeping operations.

