Mr. Rakhmetullin (Kazakhstan): I would like to
join previous speakers in thanking you, Madam
President, for having convened this very important
meeting, as well as all those who contributed to its
preparation.

We are pleased to note that resolution 1325
(2000) has continued to open new perspectives of
awareness about women's role in peace negotiations,
humanitarian planning, peacekeeping operations, post-
conflict peacebuilding and governance. Even so, there
is a wide gap between aspirations and the reality on the
ground. The report of the Secretary-General on women
and peace and security (S/2011/598*) provides a
strategic road map for the United Nations, together
with national, regional and international stakeholders.

We must continue to ensure that women play key
roles in peacekeeping operations and political
missions; we must not only look at gender as a
thematic issue, but ensure that women hold key and
responsible positions at every level. We endorse the
recommendations of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations that a larger proportion of women be
deployed in the military and police contingents of
peacekeeping operations, and recruited into the armed
forces and police services of Member States, with
predeployment training for military and police on
gender issues. It is through these actions that we can
achieve the target of women constituting 20 per cent of
peacekeeping operations by 2014, from the highest
decision-making level to field operations.

In addition, there must be dedicated budgets,
targets, timelines and indicators aligned to national
peacebuilding plans, overall national defence and
security strategies or poverty reduction programmes.
Focus in the post-conflict recovery phase must ensure
that women's needs and rights are consistently
addressed.

My delegation supports the Secretary-General's
recommendation that at least 15 per cent of United
Nations funds for peacebuilding be dedicated to
projects that address the specific needs of women and
girls, advance gender equality and empower women.
Adequate financing is vital to ensuring resources for
gender training and support for non-governmental
organizations and local groups that focus on issues of
food security, nutrition, health and HIV/AIDS,
reproductive health, education, and the rehabilitation
and reintegration of women affected by war.

The prevention of the violation of women and
girls' human rights, including sexual violence, must
enjoy the highest priority. It is high time that we bring
war criminals to justice, end impunity for their
atrocities, and invest in immediate service and
assistance mechanisms for women and girl war crime
victims. Our focus must also be on including women in
peace processes as mediators, members of negotiating
parties, and signatories to peace agreements.

Kazakhstan welcomes the drafting of a
comprehensive set of indicators aimed at tracking
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), which can
serve as benchmarks for standards to design and set in
place a methodical monitoring system allowing
countries to review their own structures and
mechanisms and resource allocations. We must also
condemn rape as a tactic of terror and war.

The flagship agency on gender - UN-Women -
has begun to prove its leadership in the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) through United Nations
system-wide coherence. It has been able to pulled
together a set of key universal and regional human
rights instruments. The focus on women and peace and
security can be further strengthened through
collaboration with humanitarian, human rights and aid-
to-development agencies, and the defence forces of
concerned United Nations Member States, as well as
with all categories of women, including activists, war
victims, refugees, asylum-seekers and migrants.

To conclude, we must go forward to strengthen
resolution 1325 (2000), structured on the three main
pillars of participation, protection and prevention, and
is a most powerful tool for women's organizing,
mobilization and action.
