Mr. Koenders (Netherlands): Approximately one
third of all women in the Congolese province of Kivu
have been raped. In the Sudan, tens of thousands of
women in the last years have been molested, mutilated
and sexually abused, and not a single person has been
held accountable.

Recently, I visited the Democratic Republic of
Congo. Even though I knew all the statistics, I was still
horrified by what I saw in refugee camps and local
hospitals. Unfortunately, this pattern of abuse is found
in nearly all of the world's conflict areas. Wherever
hostilities erupt, women and girls are most vulnerable.
In the former Yugoslavia, women were purposely raped
to bear the enemy's children. In Central America,
violence against women is increasing with dramatic
figures, and we find similar grave situations around the
world. The responsibility to protect is an urgent call
here.

Violence against women is more than a violation
of human rights. It is also a security issue, and that is
why we are here today. Over the last decade, violence
against women has become endemic in conflict zones.
It has become a weapon of modern warfare that
specifically and structurally targets women. That is
why it is so important that it be discussed here. Doctors
two weeks ago spoke to me about a horrible epidemic.
The United Nations Security Council took a big step
forward when it unanimously adopted resolution 1325
(2000) on women and peace and security.

Violence against women is only one aspect of
resolution 1325 (2000) - although a very important
one - but it deserves the immediate and urgent
attention of everyone in this room, for it is the most
prominent aspect underlining the little progress we
have made since the adoption of the resolution in the
year 2000. We have been telling ourselves for seven
years now that it is more than words on paper. It is a
clarion call to arms, a catalyst.

In the Netherlands, we are developing a national
action plan for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), in consultation with all relevant ministries and
civil society. I assure this Council that it will not
remain merely another piece of paper.

More than anything else, we need leadership. Let
us set an agenda for action here today - an agenda
that I believe should focus on four issues.

First, we need to include women in our security
strategies. This means investing more strongly in
security sector reform and in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programmes
in post-conflict countries to ensure that violence
against women does not continue after a conflict has
ended. I have seen the urgency of the need for this in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

If there is not more security sector reform, the
army indeed preys more on the population than it
protects the women. We need to train armies and
soldiers, making them aware that violence against
women is unacceptable and will not be tolerated. The
Netherlands will allocate extra funding for security
sector reform, DDR and training programmes in fragile

States. We have already provided the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations with funds for gender
expertise in order to integrate a gender perspective into
peacekeeping operations.

Second is the matter of empowerment. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, women risk their
own lives to encourage others to report sexual abuse to
the proper authorities. We need to create safe havens
for women who have suffered from violence and help
them reintegrate into their societies. As Council
members know, they are often isolated. We have to
support women who set up their own networks for
conflict prevention and for dealing with trauma. And,
even more, we need to ensure that women get the place
they deserve at the table in formal peace processes. In
Liberia, women played an essential role in the peace
process, bringing people together across factional lines.
I recently created a fund for women's rights and
empowerment, and I hope other donors will follow this
example, so that we can really pool our efforts.

Thirdly, I would like to call for the speedy
conclusion of ongoing consultations on the new gender
entity of the United Nations - it is taking a long
time - and to stress that this entity will have to make
violence against women an urgent issue. We should
also support United Nations agency programmes
directed at violence against women, especially the
United Nations Trust Fund to End Violence against
Women, administered by the United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM).

Finally, we have to stop impunity. The grave
violation of women's human rights, through massive
rape and other sexual violence, requires the immediate
attention of organizations such as the International
Criminal Court (ICC) and other relevant tribunals. The
Security Council can play a role in this area by
referring such cases to the ICC. We have to give a clear
signal to the perpetrators that the international
community is no longer tolerating impunity for these
heinous crimes.

In conclusion, I would like to underline the
crucial role of the Security Council in addressing
violence against women in conflict situations. In this
respect, I would like to express my strong support for
the Secretary-General's recommendation to establish a
dedicated monitoring mechanism to increase the
effectiveness of the Council's contribution to
preventing and redressing violence against women in
armed conflict.

Last but not least, uncomfortable issues like rape
and other forms of sexual violence against women
should be openly discussed with and by Governments,
members of parliament, militia leaders and opinion
makers - by us. The Security Council has to raise its
voice on this issue. The "big silence" has to stop. I
hope that this debate in the Security Council will give a
clear message to the international community.

Let us join forces and implement resolution 1325
(2000). Let us end the abuse of women everywhere by
stopping this "big silence" today.

