Mr. Hossain (Bangladesh): Let me begin by
complementing you, Mr. President, for the leadership
of Ghana in its stewardship of the Council's
deliberations during the current month. I would also
like to thank the presidency for its initiative in
organizing this open debate on women and peace and
security pursuant to the landmark resolution 1325
(2000). It is with a modicum of pride that I recall that
Bangladesh, a member of the Council at that time, was
closely associated with the resolution's adoption.

Women suffer most as victims of conflict, and in
peace processes they are those most deprived of the
dividends. Their voices are not fully listened to, or
even heard. Today, seven years after the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), we need to reflect further on
how best to advance its goal. We need to analyse what
constitutes the challenges, and how these challenges
can be overcome. We need to ensure adequate
representation of women at all levels of decision-
making in conflict prevention, during hostilities and
through post-conflict reconstruction and rehabilitation.
The true measure of women's participation in peace
negotiations is not through numbers, but through power
in decision-making. It is undeniable that in the
consolidation of peace the role of women remains vital.

The Secretary General's report on women and
peace and security (S/2007/567) notes some progress
in the implementation of the System-wide Action Plan
2005-2007. It is our hope that the remaining
shortcomings will be addressed in the updated 2008-
2009 Action Plan in order to meet the desired goals.
The overall experience so far in implementing 1325
(2000) at all levels of decision-making has been mixed.

A number of persistent constraints remain to be
addressed. The challenges, particularly at the
institutional and organizational levels, have not been
dealt with adequately. There is seemingly an
inadequate understanding of the gender dimensions in
conflict situations. This leads to gaps in the capacity to
address various provisions of resolution 1325 (2000).
In our view, this largely impedes the implementation of
the resolution.

The availability of gender-disaggregated data is
particularly important in understanding the situation of
women and girls who are victims of war and conflict. A
focused examination of issues particularly related to
violence against women is also important in
formulating policy guidelines. This is an exercise that
would assist in undertaking preventive measures. The
sharing of experience and good practices and lessons
learned on a regular basis are useful not only in
sustaining peace but also in guiding policy measures.

Peacekeeping operations are no longer limited to
military activities. They now have broader mandates to
assist in elections, monitor human rights and carry out
police functions. Multidimensional peacekeeping
operations thus have large potential in addressing the
security of women. We have integrated the gender
perspective in some aspects of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. However, in post-conflict
peacebuilding efforts much remains to be done. As one
of the largest troop contributors to United Nations
peacekeeping operations, Bangladesh is ever conscious
of its responsibilities to incorporate essential elements
of resolution 1325 (2000) in the predeployment
training of peacekeepers. As a member of the
Peacebuilding Commission, we remain vigilant in our
focus on the provisions of the resolution. We
recommend that all relevant United Nations resolutions
should take note of resolution 1325 (2000) and call for
its full and effective implementation.

We also recognize that a strong Security Council
mechanism is needed to monitor implementation of the
resolution. Establishing a working group on women,
peace and security may be useful and a good option in
this regard. In our view, coordination among various
United Nations agencies and their reporting
mechanisms should be enhanced in order to implement
resolution 1325 (2000) at the grass-roots level. We
hope that with the updated Action Plan for 2008-2009,
we will succeed in overcoming the weaknesses through
concerted efforts. It is our belief that integrating gender
perspective across the United Nations system will keep
in View geographical, cultural and ethnic factors.
Adequate resources should also be mobilized to this
effect. Active involvement of the civil society and
non-governmental organizations is a sine qua non.

A critical factor in the successful implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) is high-level commitment in
administration and the establishment of an effective
accountability mechanism. Without explicit
commitment, the policy guidelines and its programmes
and plans are all of very little use. We believe that the
protection of women and girls from gender-based
violence and abuse is a primary and enduring
responsibility. There should be zero tolerance with
respect to the perpetrators. Ending impunity is a must.
It is crucial to mobilize leadership, secure
accountability, provide adequate resources, identify
challenges and address root causes in protecting
women and girls, in war as well as in peace.

