Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the outset, we thank the briefers for their
informative statements and assessments of the threat
of human trafficking in situations of conflict. It is
important for us to focus our attention at this meeting on
the crimes of the Islamic State in Iraq and Sham (ISIS)
and other terrorist groups, and on their consequences.

Against the backdrop of an unprecedented
upsurge in terrorist activity in the Middle East and
North Africa, we are particularly dismayed by the
ongoing atrocities committed by the insurgents of
ISIS against representatives of religious, national and
ethno-confessional minorities: Christians, Kurds,
Yazidis and others. In recent months, thousands of
Yazidis have been seized by terrorists and became live
merchandise. Women and children are sold into slavery,
forced into marriage or subject to sexual violence.
Fleeing oppression and the atrocities ofterrorists, many
Yazidis and other minorities have been forced to leave
their homes, and many have died.

We strongly condemn the criminal practices
perpetrated by terrorists. We call on States to step up
their efforts to combat this activity, to streamline the
exchange of relevant information, and to cooperate
in identifying channels for the financing of terrorist
activities. It is well known that individuals and
organizations involved in providing financial support
for terrorists, including through human trafficking, are
subject to Security Council sanctions.

The crimes ofISIS are part ofa global problem. Such
crimes are also committed by Boko Haram, the Lord's
Resistance Army and other terrorist organizations and
groups. They occur in situations of armed conflict
in various parts of the world. International human
trafficking is managed by well-organized criminal
groups. Every year, hundreds of thousands of people,
having been lured by deceit, sold or forced or subjected
to other violence, fall into the grip of sexual or economic
exploitation and become merchandise that generates
multimillion dollar profits.
Harsh measures are needed against the criminal
groups that organize or intermediate illicit transactions
with live merchandise. Solely by adopting a
comprehensive approach * and not merely, for example,
a more strict migration policy - can we achieve an
effective outcome in combating human trafficking. We
advocate strengthening the role of the United Nations
and its Office on Drugs and Crime in pooling the efforts
of the international and national bodies involved in the
work on eradicating modern slavery. We welcome the
work in this area. Given the division of labour within
the United Nations, the Security Council can make an
important contribution in combating human trafficking
perpetrated by terrorists and in the course of armed
conflict. That is particularly relevant when the scale
and urgency of the situation threaten the international
peace and security.

We believe that an important guide for our
work in this area remains the Global Plan of Action
againstTrafficking in Persons, adopted in General
Assembly resolution 64/293. We are convinced that its
implementation would help raise awareness of this issue
around the world and mark a significant improvement in
the cooperation of all stakeholders. Human trafficking
in persons, including its most horrific forms in regions
under terrorist control, can be eliminated only through
the coordinated efforts of all States and specialized
international organizations and by making full use of
the existing international legal framework.

