Mr. Eler (Turkey): 1 would like to thank the
United Kingdom for convening this very important
debate. I also thank the Secretary-General, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Bangura, the Special Envoy
of the High Commissioner, Ms. Jolie, and Ms. Anywar
of the NGO Women's Initiatives for Gender Justice for
their insightful statements.

In the twenty-first century, sexual violence is,
sadly, still widespread, particularly in armed conflict,
including its early stages and aftermath. Unfortunately,
in conflicts, national judicial and security systems
are often characterized by incapacity, leading to a
culture of impunity. Legal codes on sexual Violence
do not exist or cannot be implemented. An absence of
efficient criminal procedures and institutional capacity
is common. Even when laws and judicial and security
institutions are in place, a selective application of laws
and a lack of accountability often prevail. As a result,
victims are discouraged from seeking civil remedies,
and a culture of impunity prevails.

To address this problem, comprehensive solutions
should be sought by both ensuring the supremacy of
the rule of law and by building judicial and security
institutions. Gaps in legislation and implementation
must be addressed. Criminal responsibility must be
increased. Impunity must be ended both for perpetrators
and those in the chain of command. The investigative
capabilities of national institutions must be increased.
Additional services such as legal support, protection
for survivors of violence and training should be put in
place. This is quite a formidable list of tasks.

It takes personnel, resources and time to end the
culture of impunity. The continued support of the
international community is essential. Punishment for
the crime often serves as the most important deterrent.
To address sexual violence during conflicts and ensure
that these crimes can be prosecuted in the post-conflict
phase, the necessary documentation and evidence
must be gathered while the conflict is ongoing. The
United Nations, other international organizations,
humanitarian agencies and civil society have an
important task in this respect.

The Security Council deserves special credit
for connecting the concepts of sexual Violence and
impunity to international peace and security, passing
numerous resolutions and addressing the issue in
various meetings. We also welcome today's adoption
of resolution 2106 (2013). The Council's efforts help
strongly convey the message that sexual violence and
impunity are unacceptable.

I would also like to commend the Team of Experts
on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict
for its valuable work. Acting in close partnership with
all relevant stakeholders, including national judicial
and security institutions, international and regional
organizations, humanitarian agencies, civil society and
the private sector, the United Nations should continue
its technical assistance to countries suffering from
conflict. Internationaljustice mechanisms are essential,
especially when sexual violence is used as a war tactic
in the form of systematic rape and forced pregnancies.
In addition, especially in post-conflict set-ups, their
work complements that of national systems in the fight
against the culture of impunity.

I would like to touch upon three more concepts that
we deem necessary when addressing impunity. The first
is reparations. They are a form of transitional gender
justice and contribute to truth and reconciliation.

Secondly, monitoring and reporting on incidents
of sexual violence is important, as highlighted in the
Secretary-General's most recent report (S/2013/149).
We extend our full support to the endeavours of
the United Nations in this area. In this respect, as a
neighbouring country, Turkey took note with concern
of the findings of the recent report of the independent
international commission of inquiry on the Syrian Arab
Republic. In that regard, access should be granted to
the commission to conduct on-site investigations with
respect to the allegations of all human rights violations
in Syria, including sexual violence against women.

Finally, raising awareness at the local, national,
regional and international levels is key to combating
impunity. Many remain silent before sexual violence,
in the fear of being targeted, attacked, stigmatized or
shamed. We must ensure that raising one's voice against
this despicable crime becomes the norm, rather than the
exception.
The elimination of the root causes of conflict is
the best way to prevent sexual Violence and address
impunity. The establishment or restoration of the rule of
law, good governance and socio-economic development
is essential for sustainable solutions.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the Secretary-
General, the Member States and all relevant United
Nations bodies, in addition to all relevant stakeholders
at the local, national, regional and global levels that
have prioritized the issue of sexual Violence against
women in conflict. Special thanks go to Special
Representative Bangura, whose exemplary dedication
to fighting sexual violence in conflicts, including by
combating impunity, we continue to support.

