Ms. Nandi-Ndaitwah (Namibia): His Excellency
Mr. Hage Geingob, President of the Republic
of Namibia, appreciated the invitation that you,
Mr. President, extended to him to participate in this
debate. He, however, delegated me to represent him
owing to other equally important State responsibilities.
He wishes these deliberations success.

Namibia supports resolution 2242 (2015), which
was just adopted and which we believe is one of
the instruments that will make it possible to fully
implement resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace
and security. In the same vein, we would like to thank
Spain for organizing this debate today.

Exactly 15 years ago, on 31 October 2000, under the
presidency of Namibia, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1325 (2000). That resolution recognizes and
reaffirms the critical role women play in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts, as well as their role in
post-conflict reconstruction. Today's debate is very
important, as it gives us an opportunity to review the
progress made since 2000. No doubt, some remarkable
progress has been made both at national and global
levels. However, much still needs to be done.

I believe that as nations we have a lot to share
when it comes to resolution 1325 (2000). Although the
resolution is known as one on women and peace and
security, the main element is the importance of world
peace. Therefore, the full and equal participation of
women at all levels of peacemaking and peacebuilding
is central to sustainable world peace and for sustainable
development to be achieved. As women, we do not just
want to participate, but we want to live in a peaceful
world.

The successes ofthis landmark resolution has raised
international awareness on the unique and grave issues
that girls and women face during and after conflict.

In Namibia, we have always recognized the link
between peace and gender equality. That is what we
have learned from our long years of liberation struggle
for independence, in which women, including myself,
fully participated. Before returning from exile, in his
last general address to Namibians in exile, in 1989
in Angola, our founding President and father of the
Namibian nation, then President of the South-West
Africa People's Organization, Comrade Sam Nujoma,
called on Namibian women to be alert and not to allow
the country to be messed up once independence was
achieved. Therefore, we are convinced, and rightly
so, that women played and continue to play a role in
achieving and maintaining the peace we have enjoyed
since Namibia's independence 25 years ago.

Namibia attaches great importance to the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and it will
continue to play its part. Namibia was one of the
first countries of the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) to ratify the SADC Protocol on
Gender and Development. That Protocol calls upon
Member States to put in place measures to ensure that
women have equal representation and participation
in key decision-making positions and peacebuilding
processes.

I also inform members that we recently reviewed
our national gender policy and we have included
women and peace and security as one of our critical
areas of concern. That explains why Namibia is one
of the largest female police-contributing countries to
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, the Sudan. As a matter of fact, during 2010, we
deployed our first full female contingent of 31 officers
to Darfur, Namibian women in peacekeeping missions
have demonstrated remarkable commitment, high
competency and aptitude for innovation.

The move by the Chair of the African Union
Commission to establish an Office of the African Union
Special Envoy on Women, Peace and Security is highly
commendable. Since its establishment, it has been
busy contacting women in conflict areas in Africa and
helping them to decide how best they can contribute to
achieving peace in their respective countries.

This year's fifteenth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000) is an important and historic
event that should unite us in working to take concrete
action and rally a concerted international effort to
promote international peace in ways that involve
women at every level. On the eve of the launch of the
global study of the resolution's implementation, we
have an opportunity to evaluate what has worked and
what remains to be strengthened. At the core, while we
can acknowledge that improvements have been made,
we still see a critical shortage of female players in
peace processes around the world. That is especially
true in post-conflict resolution. Namibia therefore
stresses the need for the United Nations to appoint
more women in the areas of high-level decision-making
and peace processes, including special envoys,
special representatives, peacekeepers, mediators and
negotiators. And we urge women to work to achieve
leadership positions throughout the Organization.

It is our belief that ensuring a significant presence
of women peacekeepers in conflict and post-conflict
situations has the added advantage of creating safer
spaces for girls and women who have suffered from
sexual violence. Studies conducted by the United
Nations in support of resolution 1325 (2000), based
on experiences in operations in Cambodia, Kosovo,
Timor-Leste, Afghanistan, Liberia and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, have also demonstrated that
in dealing with women and children, female soldiers
do not face the same cultural constraints as their male
counterparts and are thus better able to gain information
from them. That ability to gain the trust of local
populations should be considered a vital component of
any peacekeeping operation. Furthermore, the evidence
shows that the presence of women can transform
male-dominated institutional cultures and promote
women's rights within security organs. And since it
brings different skills and competencies to bear, the
increased participation of women can help create a
more trusted and legitimate security apparatus.

Those charged with leading and supporting peace
processes, especially the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and regional bodies, should be committed
to bringing talented women into peace negotiations and
the signing and implementing of peace agreements. We
need the Security Council to move the agenda forward
from general exhortations to concrete directives on
how those entities involved in peacekeeping should
promote women's participation as special envoys,
special representatives, peacekeepers, mediators and
negotiators. I believe that resolution 2242 (2015),
adopted today, can lead us in that direction.

Finally, Namibia welcomes the forthcoming 2015
high-level review and the Secretary-General's report on
the global study (S/2015/7l6), reviewing the progress
that has been made at the national, regional and global
levels in implementing resolution 1325 (2000). The
global study, to be launched tomorrow, will help to
formulate the global vision and strategies we need to
make resolution 1325 (2000) a powerful tool for peace
and security. It should lay out concrete, action-oriented
programmes with measurable targets and indicators to
guide the resolution's implementation in the future. It
will improve the prospects for world peace if Member
States can use the study as a blueprint for serious
examination of their national policies and learn how
they can benefit from it.

While establishing the role of women in peace
operations, we must also tackle the root causes of
conflicts. Conflict must not become a norm in this
century. We must silence the guns. As human beings,
we have to realize that manufacturing products such
as arms and ammunition seems to motivate us to act
against our self-interest. Why not stop producing arms
and start developing more people-friendly industries
that can help us create the necessary jobs and wealth
we need for sustainable development? Our individual
interests should not cost us international peace, stability
and security. Namibia will continue to be committed
to achieving that, and we believe that the participation
of women will unquestionably enable us to succeed in
creating the world we want - a world of peace, in which
conflict can be resolved by peaceful means rather than
armed conflict.

