Ms. Power (United States of America): Madam
President, I would like thank the Secretary-General,
Special Representative Bangura, and Ms. Misaka for
their informative and powerful briefings.

In the past decade, the Security Council has
identified the scourge of sexual violence in conflict as
a matter of acute and urgent concern. We meet today to
assess progress in combating that pernicious form of
criminality and to consider next steps. We begin with
confidence that the standards we have established are
clear and the terrible knowledge that those standards
are regularly being ignored. We have made abundantly
clear that there should be zero tolerance for rape and
zero tolerance for other forms of sexual abuse in all
circumstances and at all times. The terror of sexual
violence is uniquely horrific and merits our continued
and determined efforts to eliminate it. Neither the fog
of war nor the associated breakdown of law provide
any explanation or excuse for actions that violate the
rights and disrespect the fundamental dignity of human
beings.

To articulate a zero-tolerance standard is, of course,
not difficult. Indeed, we have done it many times. But to
endow it with real meaning in real conflicts remains a
challenge of great urgency and one of many dimensions.
This is not work that should be delegated only to a Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, even one as capable as Special
Representative Bangura, or to women's protection
advisers in a peacekeeping mission or to UN-Women.
Those offices and officials and the United Nations as
a whole assuredly have an indispensable role to play,
but the key to further progress in reducing suffering
and in protecting the vulnerable is action by the parties
to conflict. Every Government has a responsibility to
establish standards, develop institutions and pursue
policies that protect its people from sexual violence,
whether perpetrated by the Government's own forces
or by others. That responsibility includes, as Special
Representative Bangura just put it, redirecting the
stigma from the survivors to the perpetrators.

That duty extends to men and boys, who have
suffered sexual violence to an extent we have only
recently begun to appreciate - in places like Colombia,
where boys were turned into sex slaves by illegal armed
groups; in Rutshuru, in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, which was under the savage control of the
Mouvement du 23 mars for much of 2013; and in Libya,
where the United Nations reported that armed brigades
used rape in detention as a form of torture.

In far too many countries, the victims of sexual
violence still have little, if any, effective legal recourse.
Untilthat changes,predators willnotbe deterred, victims
will hesitate to come forward and justice will remain
beyond reach. In places where Governments are weak,
we must help to improve their capabilities while also
holding accountable those who commit crimes. Among
the most culpable are the ruthless militias in the Central
African Republic, whose assaults on civilians have
almost literally torn the country apart, and where rape,
forced marriage and sexual slavery are widespread; in
Burma, where there are widespread reports of soldiers
raping women and girls; and, as we have just heard, in
South Sudan, where only this week militants have gone
on the radio - radio, which my Rwandan colleague has
called an evil multiplier - to incite the use of sexual
violence against named ethnic groups; in Yemen, where
child protection workers have attested to the abduction
and abuse of boys by Ansar Al-Sharia. With all of
that in mind, we should express special outrage at the
continued and widespread incidence of sexual abuse
practised by Syrian Government armed forces as part
of the regime's ruthless campaign to terrorize civilians
and drive families from their homes.

Despite chronic underreporting and difficulties of
access, we know more about the nature and scope of
the problem than ever before. The Secretary-General's
report (S/2014/181), the information-collection
mechanisms on which it is based, and the steadfast
leadership shown by Special Representative Bangura
are all welcome developments. In addressing sexual
violence, the United Nations must set the right
example in what it does both here in New York and in
places around the world where tensions are high and
United Nations peacekeepers or political missions are
deployed. Ms. Bangura has shown determination in
coordinating United Nations efforts across agencies
in order to ensure that the imperative of putting a stop
to sexual violence is addressed in training, included in
mission mandates and reports, and becomes a central
focus of enforcement activities and a major part of
holding perpetrators accountable for war crimes and
crimes against humanity.

As members of the Security Council, however, we
must do our part by exercising proper oversight and
pushing for the full implementation of the objectives
we set, mission by mission. In that connection, I note
that women protection advisers were deployed last year
to Somalia and Mali, and are expected this year in the
Sudan, South Sudan, Cote d'Ivoire and the Central
African Republic. In Somalia, the United Nations
has helped to train 12,000 police officers, and the
Government has supported the increased recruitment
of women police. An improved effort has also been
made to strengthen investigative and prosecutorial
capabilities in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
where sexual violence perpetrated by Government
and rebel forces has long been a source of chronic and
massive injustice.

We must also strive to help the Secretariat
achieve its goal of 20 per cent female participation
among United Nations police. But for that to happen,
each of our countries must themselves increase their
recruitment of women police into their domestic forces,
so that there is a far broader pool on which the United
Nations can draw. We must also insist on enforcing the
absolute prohibition on sexual abuse by United Nations
peacekeepers. Again, that requires that home countries
hold perpetrators of sexual Violence accountable once
they are sent home.

In conclusion, I would like to voice the strong
support of my Government and of the American people
for a concerted strategy across the globe to address the

problem of sexual violence, both in and outside combat
situations. For far too long, such abuses have been
treated as part of the spoils of victory or the rewards
of physical might. Let us be clear: sexual abuse is
among the worst of crimes, because it robs people of
the precious and inalienable right to be secure in their
bodies, and because it is inflicted out of cruelty. In our
efforts to stop it, we have made gains in recent years,
but we have a very long way to go.
