Ms. Klympush-Tsintsadze (Ukraine): First of
all, I would like to thank the delegation of France for
scheduling this traditional Security Council debate
on the issue of women and peace and security. I
would also like to express my gratitude to Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres for his clear commitment
to the women and peace and security agenda, and to
the Executive Director of UN-Women, Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka, for her briefing and for her tireless
efforts to ensure that this agenda is kept in focus for the
whole world.

Earlier this year, both the Secretary-General and
the Executive Director paid visits to my country.
My delegation greatly appreciates their tireless
commitment to women's rights and empowerment, and

we pay tribute to their continued efforts and support for
Ukraine in its pursuit of peace and security. I am glad
to report that two important initiatives were launched
in Ukraine during these visits: "The Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women in Action" and "Gender Equality at the Centre of
the Reforms". These two initiatives were made possible
by the financial contributions of the Governments of
Canada and Sweden, which we highly appreciate.

War and conflicts are devastating communities
across the world today. In recent years, we have also
seen widespread targeting of women and girls in
conflict zones. Since the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), the women and peace and security agenda
unfortunately remains relevant and critical in the face
of rising violence, extremism and deadly conflicts.
Seven Security Council resolutions have been adopted,
recognizing and outlining that conflict affects women
and men differently and that women have critical roles
to play in peace and security processes and institutions.

Ukraine strongly believes that the Security
Council should continuously reinforce the importance
of implementing existing women and peace and
security resolutions and overcoming the gaps identified
in the 2015 global study on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), as well as in the policy brief
entitled "Mapping women, peace and security in
the Security Council: 2016". Admittedly, in 2017 the
Council has improved inclusion of women, peace and
security provisions on all relevant agenda items. In
this context, we reiterate our support for the Informal
Expert Group on Women, Peace and Security, which
has promoted gender mainstreaming in the work of the
Security Council.

Law enforcement, security forces and peacekeeping
missions mandated to protect civilians must do a better
job of seeking out and listening to the needs of women
and giving priority to their participation and protection.
The international community must pay sufficient
attention to providing and delivering the necessary
protection for women in conflict-affected areas, in
parallel with ensuring meaningful participation by
women, so as to ensure complementarity between
both pillars. The deployment of senior gender advisers
and senior women's protection advisers is therefore
critical so as to ensure that missions have sufficient
gender expertise, authority and capacity to address
those objectives.

A growing body of evidence had shown that
perhaps the greatest but most under-used tool for
building peace is the meaningful inclusion of women.
That is one of the highlights of the global study's
findings. The participation of women at the peace
table improves the negotiation process, contributes to
a more comprehensive peace agreement and bolsters
the prospect of sustainable peace. It gives an important
window of opportunity for setting an agenda for
sustainable peace that includes the needs of an oft-
excluded half of the population.

While examples of women's involvement in
community-based peacebuilding abound, their
participation in peace processes continues to be limited.
This is a problem not only for the 1325 (2000) agenda
and its advocates but also for peacemakers and all
those who seek peace. That is why the topic of today's
discussion put forward by the delegation of France is of
great importance.

Ukraine recognizes the importance of equal and
full participation of women in all activities for the
prevention and resolution of conflicts, peacebuilding
and peacekeeping. I am proud to say that in the past
two years, during which Ukraine has been a member of
the Security Council, resolution 1325 (2000) has been
our great and long-standing daily priority. I would like
to take this opportunity to share some improvements
that my country has made in the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), specifically with regard to its
pillars on participation and protection, as well as to
highlight the challenges that remain, unfortunately, to
be addressed.

In 2016, the Government of Ukraine adopted its
national action plan for implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) for 2016-2020. Through implementation of
the plan we have been working to bring about greater
participation of women in decision-making in the areas
of national security and defence and peacemaking,
and to ensure the protection of women and girls and
prevention and response to gender-based violence.
The implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) is also
a constant feature of our annual national cooperation
programmes with NATO. Experience and best practices
of NATO countries are examined and included so as
to promote enhanced gender culture in the national
security sector in Ukraine. Moreover, this year our
Government has taken the decision to bring gender
equality to the highest levels ofthe Cabinet ofMinisters
of the country. Indeed, it was given the highest priority
when a Government Commissioner post on gender
equality was established.

The Government has also developed the State
target programme on recovery and peacebuilding in
eastern regions of Ukraine, which integrates a gender
perspective in all of its pillars. Our Government
integrates women, peace and security in ongoing
security and defence reform. With the support of UN-
Women, we have just accomplished a comprehensive
gender-impact assessment of the security sector
and will soon adopt a multi-year gender-equality
strategy for security and defence. These efforts aim
to comprehensively integrate gender-equality and
women's rights perspectives in all areas of security and
defence reform.

Over the past two years, Ukraine has achieved
progress in improving its recruitment policies, which
resulted in a steady increase of the number of women
working in the security and defence sector. Yes, the
numbers are still not ideal. However, women already
make up 10.6 per cent of the armed forces of Ukraine,
6.2 per cent of the national guard, 17.3 per cent of the
national police and 24 per cent of the State border
guard service. Currently, more than 10,000 women
serve in official combat positions in Ukraine. The
numbers continue to grow as a result of Government
action to repeal discriminatory legal provisions, which
previously impeded female military service.

While still a minority, Ukrainian women do play
a prominent role in the peacebuilding process. The
President of Ukraine has appointed a woman to a
position in charge of the process of peaceful settlement
in the Donbas region. There are also two women in
Minsk working groups dealing with humanitarian and
political issues. Building peace in my country requires
women's participation and influence, including in the
Minsk processes. It also requires action to stop the
attacks against women and make sure that women will
not be attacked with impunity. We will continue to work
towards the development of a full range of judicial and
non-judicial measures and institutional reform, in line
with international standards.

As long as foreign aggression continues, peace and
security will unfortunately remain a far-fetched and
almost unattainable notion for the majority of women
in the territory of Ukraine. Women will continue to
lack protection, live in fear, have almost no recourse
to justice, remain economically disadvantaged and live
with limited freedom. The situation in Ukraine and
the suffering as a result of Russian aggression show
the importance of striking a balance between the two
main pillars of the women and peace and security
agenda: protection and participation. We believe that
the Security Council must prioritize those two pillars.

The Russian aggression against Ukraine and its
temporary occupation of part of Ukrainian territory
has resulted in widespread human rights violations,
including sexual and gender-based violence. According
to the United Nations Human Rights Monitoring
Mission in Ukraine, since the beginning of the
aggression 32,252 conflict-related casualties have been
recorded, including 2,505 civilians killed. A direct
consequence of the Russian aggression against Ukraine
has been the displacement of individuals and families,
with 1.7 million internally displaced persons registered
countrywide. Of those, older persons make up 78 per
cent, women 58 per cent and children 8 per cent.

Regrettably, impunity for the human rights
violations and abuses committed in the context of the
Russian aggression against Ukraine, not least with
regard to sexual violence, prevails. That is partly due
to the fact that the conflict is ongoing and that a part of
Ukraine's territory remains under the control of illegal
armed groups, which are supported and managed by
the Russian Federation. While there is still much to
do, Ukraine has managed to make significant progress
towards the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda.

I would like to finish my statement with a quote
from the French philosopher and Nobel Prize winner
Albert Camus: "Peace is the only battle worth waging".
I am confident that it is our primary task to protect and
secure our fragile world in its entirety. I thank you,
Mr. President, for your able leadership oftoday's debate.

