Mr. Liden (Sweden): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union. Croatia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Albania, Montenegro,
Ukraine, Moldova, Armenia and Georgia align
themselves with this statement.

One year ago the Security Council, in adopting
resolution 1820 (2008), recognized that conflict-related
sexual violence can constitute a threat to international
peace and security. Resolution 1820 (2008) is a
landmark resolution and a vital complement to
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security. The European Union views its effective
implementation as pivotal.

Allow me to start by saying that the European
Union commends the Secretary-General for his report
on this urgent and important subject (S/2009/362). We
encourage the Secretary-General to report annually to
the Security Council on developments concerning the
implementation of resolution 1820 (2008).

The General Assembly has recognized that sexual
violence is a well-established method of torture and
warfare. It is deeply dehumanizing and must be
addressed at all levels, locally and internationally. The
European Union condemns sexual violence in all its
forms, including its use as a tool to advance political
and military objectives. We call on leaders of all
countries and organizations to take firm action to
combat sexual violence.

The issue of conflict-related sexual violence has
to be dealt with in a coordinated manner by the United
Nations system. All branches of the United Nations
should come together behind the vision that resolution
1820 (2008) proposed and that the Secretary-General's
report echoes. Gaps in efforts need to be identified and
addressed, and accountability must be established. The
United Nations needs to develop a better capacity to
gather information about cases of sexual violence and
to address the needs of the victims.

The European Union takes note of the idea of
appointing a senior representative with responsibility
to integrate the United Nations response to conflict-
related sexual violence. We would also welcome a
follow-up mechanism on sexual violence, and we
express our support for all efforts to create synergies
among resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820 (2008) and 1612
(2005).

We need to improve the way in which we
integrate women and gender aspects into broader
humanitarian and peacemaking strategies. Women must
be represented at every stage and level of peace
negotiations. Civil society actors involved in women's
issues should be consulted throughout those processes.

Peacekeeping missions can do more to address
conflict-related sexual violence by supporting national
efforts and by preparing themselves for the task in
advance. Issues of sexual violence, gender equality and
respect for human rights must be an integral part of the
concept of operations for peacekeeping missions,
including the predeployment training of peacekeepers.

There should be no alternative to a policy of zero
tolerance on this issue. The sexual crimes currently
being committed by parties in such situations as the
conflicts in Chad, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Sudan are unacceptable. Sexual crimes
committed by military personnel should fall under the
jurisdiction of civilian courts.

Short-term measures to improve protection must
be accompanied by long-term efforts to establish the
rule of law. We must ensure that respect for human
rights and gender justice is reflected in national
legislation and upheld in practice. Much more can be
done to ensure the effective implementation of Member
States' commitments on this issue. Impunity for
atrocities against civilian populations must end.
Institutions must be built to bring perpetrators to
justice and address discrimination against women and
children. The European Union supports the
development of a comprehensive United Nations
strategy to combat impunity for sexual violence.

The European Union will continue to implement
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008) by
mainstreaming a gender-sensitive approach in all its
policies and activities, especially those relating to
crisis management and long-term development
cooperation, and through targeted measures to protect
and support women and children.

At a more general level, the European Union will
integrate issues related to women and peace and
security into its development strategies and its dialogue
with partnership countries. A strong focus will be
placed on the rule of law and the responsibility to build
effective, gender-sensitive justice systems. Such
systems should aim to deliver justice to victims of
sexual violence and help bring an end to impunity.

The Security Council and the General Assembly
have recognized the destabilizing and dehumanizing
effects of sexual violence. We, the Member States,
recognize our obligations under international law to
refrain from violating human rights and to protect our
populations from such violence.

Backed by a consensus among Member States on
the gravity of this matter, the Secretary-General's
report provides us with a basis on which to move
forward collectively on the issue of conflict-related
sexual violence, through the United Nations. The
European Union will be an active partner of the
Organization in that endeavour.

Finally, with regard to another issue, let me add
that the European Union welcomes resolution 1882
(2009) on children and armed conflict, which was
adopted on Tuesday, 11 August. The resolution is an
important step forward that will contribute to an
improved situation for children worldwide.

