Mr. Menelaou (Cyprus): Let me congratulate you,
Sir, on organizing this open debate. I shall read out a
shortened version of our statement and submit the full
text for the record.

Cyprus aligns itself with the statement made on
behalf of the European Union and would like to add the
following comments in its national capacity.

Resolution 1325 (2000) and its follow-up
resolutions have beeen instrumental in promoting
the women and peace and security agenda in Cyprus.
They have served as leverage for reform through the
increased involvement of women in the peace process
and by increasing the number of women working in the
foreign service and serving in senior decision-making
positions in the public and private sectors.

Cypriot women's civil-society organizations
have been increasingly active in efforts to achieve
justice, reconciliation, peace and the reunification of
Cyprus. Our recent historical experience has given
Cypriot women an unfortunate but real example of
the importance of the women and peace and security
agenda. They have experienced the disproportionate
effects of war. They have realized how crucial it is
to make their voices heard, as well as the importance
of being included in the peace process. Their own
experience has made them active in international
peace and humanitarian organizations such as the
International Committee of the Red Cross.

Cyprus has consistently supported the activities
of women's organizations in promoting peace and
reconciliation. Among other things, in 2008, we helped
establish a women's multicultural centre, with the aim
of bringing together women from both communities in
Cyprus and promoting gender equality, reconciliation
and peace. Last April, we established a technical
committee on gender equality in the context of the
ongoing negotiations for a resolution to the Cyprus
problem. That bi-communal committee will work
towards making women's voices heard and promote
gender equality at all stages of the peacemaking
process. The work of the committee draws from the
experience with, and the recommendations on, the
women and peace and security agenda.

Fully conscious that sustainable peace cannot
be achieved when we leave out half of the world's
population, and of the fact that we, as well as the
international community, have a long way to go in order
to fully implement the women and peace and security
agenda, we commit to continue, through our national
action plan on gender equality for the period 2014-2017,
to strive to eliminate deeply rooted stereotypes, among
the main obstacles to gender equality, and to ensure
women's active participation in peacemaking efforts,
as well as to work to increase women's participation
in public and political life, to redouble our efforts in
support of women's increased participation in the peace
process and to continue our consultation with civil-
society organizations in order to ensure that women's
voices are heard louder and with the attention that they
deserve.

In conclusion, let me reiterate our commitment
to the women and peace and security agenda and the
efforts to update it following the global study on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). I also express
our full support for resolution 2242 (2015), adopted this
morning, of which Cyprus was a sponsor.

