Mrs. Chatardova (Czech Republic): We align
ourselves with the statements delivered by the observer
of the European Union and on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security.

Let me start by commending South Africa for the
apt choice of the full and effective implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda as the
theme for today's debate. Taking the step from general
proclamations to the practical everyday implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda abroad as
well as in our own countries is crucial to achieving a
real-life change.

The Czech Republic is currently working on our
second national action plan for the years 2021 to 2025.
In the process, we are building on accomplishments
of the first national action plan. For example, in 2018,
37 per cent of our military personnel deployed in
United Nations peacekeeping missions were women.
On the other hand, we are also keeping in mind the
lessons learned from the implementation of the first
national action plan. That is why we pledged to include
specific targets and indicators in the new impact-driven
national action plan to strengthen accountability and
monitoring of progress. The accomplishment of the
women and peace and security agenda remains one of
my country's priorities.

Furthermore, we would also like to sincerely
thank today's briefers for sharing their insights and
the Secretary-General for his latest report on women
and peace and security (S/2019/800). Both serve as a
timely reminder that, with the twentieth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000) fast approaching, serious gaps
remain in its implementation. The report includes two
especially worrisome findings.

First, we share the concern about the record-high
levels of political violence targeting women with
killings and assaults, sexual violence, harassment,
abductions and forced disappearances. The physical
security of women politicians, civic leaders and human
rights defenders is crucial for their full and meaningful
participation in political processes, and therefore also
for progress of the women and peace and security
agenda as a whole.

Secondly, the report concludes that, out of nearly
132 million people in need of humanitarian aid and
protection, an estimated 35 million women and girls
require life-saving sexual and reproductive health
services and interventions to prevent gender-based
violence and respond to the needs of survivors. Sexual
and reproductive health and rights are at the core of the
women and peace and security protection dimension,
and therefore have to be translated into concrete actions
on the ground.

In conclusion, we would like to once again urge all
States that have not yet done so to join us and the more
than 80 other Member States in adopting and acting
upon their national action plans on women and peace
and security. The time to act is now.

