Mr. Von Ungern-Sternberg (Germany):
Germany associates itself with the statement made
earlier by the presidency of the European Union and
would like to add the following remarks:

Peacebuilding and peace consolidation require
patience and determination. Without any doubt, they
also require the involvement of both men and women.
Far too often, however, the full potential of women is
not used, or they may even be completely left out of
the process. And far too often, women who actively
work for peace and reconstruction are discriminated
against or even become targets of violence. One month
ago, the head of the Department of Women's Affairs of
the southern Afghan province of Kandahar was brutally
murdered.

We must not recede in the face of those obstacles.
The international community, national Governments
and all actors at all levels must all continue their
efforts to make women matter in the building and
consolidation of peace. Security Council resolution
1325 (2000) has been a landmark decision to that end.
We must continue to strive to achieve its full
implementation. It is important to ensure that the
special experiences, abilities and needs of women are
taken into consideration when designing and
developing new instruments, policies and projects in
the area of conflict prevention, conflict management
and peacebuilding. Therefore, we welcome the call for
the new Peacebuilding Commission and the
Peacebuilding Support Office to integrate a gender
perspective into their work. This must be implemented
now - in the field as well as in New York.

Let me point out some indispensable elements.
Women need justice. A gender-sensitive judicial system
will benefit all, not only the victims of sexual violence.
Women need safety. Germany has therefore launched
various projects aimed at promoting the presence of
women in the Afghan police force. And women and
women's non-governmental organizations must be
active agents in the construction of civil society and
democratic institutions. In that context, they can also
make valuable contributions to the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

Sexual exploitation and abuse and the solicitation
of prostitutes in peacekeeping operations is still an
issue. It is extremely unfortunate that, six years after
the adoption of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000), we have still not come to grips with that issue.
We strongly support the zero-tolerance policy of the
Department for Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and
welcome the Department's efforts to effectively fight
sexual exploitation and abuse of the most vulnerable
by those who have come with a mandate to protect. To
that end, I am glad to announce, Germany will finance
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations' anti-
prostitution campaign by contributing more than
$300,000. We hope to formalize that pledge in the
coming days. We are confident that that campaign will
have a real impact.

Finally, I wish to return to my initial assessment.
We have witnessed some progress in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in the past
year. We have seen promising examples of women's
involvement in the consolidation of peace in Liberia,
Sierra Leone and Burundi. We welcome the inclusion
of a strong reference to resolution 1325 (2000) as a
cross-cutting issue in resolution 1719 (2006) on
Burundi, which was adopted this week. In Afghanistan,
under the Bonn Agreement and the new constitution,
women are taking an active part in the consolidation of
peace and in the building of a new political reality, be
it in parliament or in the Government, at the national
and provincial levels.

But much more needs to be done. Germany, as a
member of the group Friends of resolution 1325
(2000), will therefore continue to work for equal
participation and full involvement by women in the
maintenance and promotion of peace and security.

