Mr. Gertze (Namibia): Allow me to take this
opportunity to congratulate the United Kingdom on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of March and for bringing this important matter
for deliberation before the Council.

Namibia aligns itself with the statements delivered
by the observer of the African Union and by the
statement that will be delivered on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

The topic under discussion is important in the
general context of human rights, but more importantly,
it is critical to the issue of governance as it relates to
peace and security, as well as the underlying causes of
human trafficking in conflict situations. The reality
is that conflict situations generate human rights
violations, thereby benefiting the traffickers and their
political and economic backers. There is little need
for me to repeat the horrors that face those exposed to
trafficking and modern day slavery, as well as other
forms of victimization. Besides being denuded of their
human dignity, trafficked and enslaved persons are
too often isolated from any potential help they may
receive through multiple and intersecting forms of
discrimination.

Namibia has been independent for 27 years this
month. Hitherto, we have worked hard to ensure that
any kind of trafficking is addressed and stopped in its
tracks Namibia is of the view that good governance,
peacebuilding and conflict prevention are essential to
the deterrence of crime, trafficking or slavery in any
form. Namibia therefore subscribes to the undertaking
of the African Union to silence the guns on the African
continent by 2020. Good governance will require
not only good-neighbourliness, but also regional
cooperation. It is essential that in conflict and post-
conflict situations, trust is restored in law enforcement
and its ability to keep populations safe.

Trafficking in persons, organized crime and
terrorism have been acknowledged in General Assembly
resolution 70/291 and Security Council resolution 2331
(2016). Victims of trafficking, especially women and
children, are vulnerable to prostitution, forced labour,
servitude, forced marriages and even the use of sexual
violence as a weapon of conflict. All of those, however,
are attributes to the lack of good governance.

Another important aspect of good governance and
the maintenance of peace and security is to ensure
that our youth and women have access to economic
advantages such as education and employment. It is
here that we must recognize the essential role of the
Sustainable Development Goals and their role in
eradicating poverty, reducing economic stressors that
can lead to youth unemployment and creating the kinds
of discontent that can undermine peace and security.
As we build economies, we must ensure development,
peace and security. In the absence of such governance
systems, human beings fall between the cracks and
are more vulnerable to the evils of trafficking of both
human beings and commodities.

Namibia has long recognized the importance of
good governance and, since its independence, has
worked hard to put in place governance and security
systems. We have placed safeguards in our Constitution
to ensure the independence of the judiciary and
legislative bodies. In addition, more recently, we have
been working to ensure legislation to protect victims
of crime as well as of whistle-blowers. Moreover,
Namibia's national development plan rests on four
pillars. One of them is to promote good governance
through effective institutions.

The Security Council has to remain steadfast
in its mandate to uphold and ensure world peace and
stability. Those who are trafficked or are vulnerable
to the crime of trafficking, particularly in conflict
situations, depend on the Council to act decisively on
matters brought to its attention in that regard.

As we all know, trafficking in persons is not
always a visible problem. Often, victims or potential
victims have been threatened into remaining silent.
Therefore, Namibia believes that using the guiding
principles of the women and peace and security agenda
can also enhance the effectiveness of the Security
Council and the whole United Nations system in its
coordinated efforts in tackling trafficking in persons,
forced labour and modern slavery. The global study
on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), for
instance, has shown that women peacekeepers elicit
positive responses from victims of sexual exploitation,
rape, forced marriage and even trafficking. The United
Nations systems should therefore work to ensure the
inclusion of women peacekeepers and improve victim
access to them.

Namibia has also been a strong proponent of female
negotiators in conflict resolution. In that regard, the
Council can play an essential role by insisting that
delegations are gender-balanced. In that context, we
commend Secretary-General Guterres for his strong
and consistent appeal for Member States to include
more women in United Nations missions.

Finally, I assure you, Mr. President, of Namibia's
firm and continued support for addressing issues of
peace and security as they relate to human trafficking,
forced labour, slavery and other similar practices.

