Mr. Selim (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to thank the Kingdom of Spain and the President of the
Government of Spain for taking the initiative to convene
today's meeting on women and peace and security on
the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), and for inviting us to participate.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his efforts to highlight this important issue, including in
his most recent report on the resolution's implementation
(S/2015/7l6), which particularly emphasizes the
problem of resolving the crises facing us of the lack
of financing and inequitable selectivity in allocating
financial resources, as well as the direct links that the
report highlights among development issues, including
the importance of supporting countries' efforts to help
their peoples achieve their aspirations and of protecting
women in armed conflict and post-conflict situations.
Egypt supports the Secretary-General's call to promote
the role of women in its peacekeeping operations and its
mediation and conflict-resolution efforts.

Our discussion of the issues related to resolution
1325 (2000) has touched on the lack of adequate
attention to some of the chief problems it is aimed at,
in particular the degree to which women suffer under
foreign occupation, as well as the effects that can result
from an overemphasis on the connection between
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, which can weaken the systems
available for providing protection in both peace and
war through the politicization of positions on the
various issues linked to the two types of law. Another
is insufficient attention to the priorities of national
sovereignty and respect for national legislation, along
with a reliance on unofficial studies that may not be as
precise in evaluating the progress made in achieving
goals for women and peace and security.

Terrorism is a threat to peace and security, along
with the armed conflicts that afflict many States and
regions around the world. In most cases, in fact, it forms
an integral part of every conflict. That is a threat our
communities face, and the threat level has increased of
late. It has affected States' abilities to carry out their
aspirations in terms of development and prosperity.
Although terrorism threatens the whole of society,
women are the most vulnerable. That is a cause to
which we will accord great interest as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council.

Egypt accords great interest to issues of women
and their role as a pivotal element in building and
maintaining peace. That interest is based on Egypt's
efforts in promoting the position of women in different
areas. It goes hand in hand with Egypt's broader vision
of the empowerment of women at all levels. Egypt has
supported the goals and rationale of resolution 1325
(2000) since its adoption, back in 2000, given the
importance of this and subsequent resolutions with
respect to the cause of women in conflict and post-
conflict situations. In that regard, Egypt's support has
taken many forms at both the regional and international
levels.

The National Council for Women of Egypt
has worked out a national plan for follow-up and
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in the
framework of the active role played by women in the
area of international conflict resolution. Egypt has
become one of 17 African States to develop that kind of
national plan. Over the last 15 years, since the adoption
of the resolution, Egypt has held a number of activities
on that issue. Two regional workshops were organized,
jointly with the United Nations and the League of Arab
States. Egypt has accorded special attention to issues
of training and capacity-building. From 2013 to 2015,
the Cairo Regional Centre for Training on Conflict-
Resolution and Peacekeeping in Africa has held seven
training courses, two courses for the training of trainers
and a workshop, all dedicated to habilitating staff and
to exchanging expertise on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), under the theme "Inclusion
of gender in peacekeeping and peace building", to
be complemented by the holding of five additional
training courses in the same vein up to June 2016.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my
appreciation for the call to convene this important
meeting, in which we have been eager to participate in
the framework of Egypt's support for the efforts of the
United Nations, and the Security Council in particular,
to promote the role and status of women. Egypt will
also be sure to follow up on these issues regionally and
internationally in the context of its efforts to achieve
peace and security.

