Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea, I would like to begin my statement by aligning
myself with the statement to be made by Ms. Fatima
Kyari Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations.

I thank the Peruvian presidency and Ambassador
Gustavo Meza-Cuadra for convening this much-needed
debate during a year that commemorates the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1820 (2008),
through which sexual violence in armed conflict was
included on the Security Council agenda. I would
also like to acknowledge the work, deep commitment
and informative and alarming briefings of Deputy
Secretary-General Amina Mohammed, Ms. Pramila
Patten, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and Ms. Razia Sultana,
representative of the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security. They have contextualized sexual
violence in armed conflicts and are making an effective
and urgent appeal for the need for sustainable peace,
security and development.

As this is the first statement of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea on this important issue, I wish
to begin by saying that my country unequivocally
condemns sexual violence in both armed conflicts and
times of peace, as well as the use of sexual violence
as a weapon of war. We believe this to be one of the
worst attacks on human dignity, and we share the
deep concern of everybody in the Chamber about the
growing trend of such unacceptable acts in the world.

The Secretary-General's most recent report
(S/2018/250), which covers the period from January to
December 2017, notes progress on some efforts focused
on preventing and responding to sexual violence in
armed conflict in the context of post-conflict situations
and areas of particular concern, especially through
investments in human resources and information,
action policies and the architecture of the Organization.
We wish to highlight the outstanding work of the Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence
in Conflict, United Nations Action against Sexual
Violence in Conflict, the appointment of a victims'
rights advocate and a zero-tolerance commitment to
this type of abuse.

Nevertheless, the report also reminds us that
such incidents are not random or isolated, but rather
are an integral part of the operations, ideology and
economic strategy of the parties - State and non-State
groups - to many conflicts, and that such occurrences
have been compounded as a result of sexual violence
becoming a tactic of war and a source of income for
parties involved in conflict, be they groups of violent
extremists, terrorists or organized crime in those
territories or neighbouring countries. The movements
of people fleeing from conflict within and among
countries further complicate the situation.

Victims of sexual violence are often the most
vulnerable individuals: women, children and men of
all ages, sometimes refugees or migrants, who, due
to conflict, are caught in the crossfire and fall victim
to violence, sexual slavery, forced prostitution and
sterilization, human trafficking and other forms of
sexual abuse. Equatorial Guinea wishes to call on all
parties involved in conflict to commit to ensuring the
protection of civilians, in accordance with international
humanitarian law, bearing in mind the primary
responsibility of national Governments in that regard,
respecting the sovereignty of countries and supporting
their efforts in implementing the relevant Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions.

We cannot separate violence, including sexual
violence, from the root causes of conflict. Peace
cannot be achieved without investing in the sustainable
development of countries and gender equality. That
is the most effective conflict prevention strategy. In
that regard, we wish to recognize the ambitions of
the Agenda 2063 of the African Union and the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and its clear focus
on people-driven sustainable development, anchored
in gender equality, the empowerment of women and
equitable economic growth among and within countries.
We also recognize the framework of collaboration
and commitment of the African Union and the United
Nations in implementing the women and peace and
security agenda and in the fight against sexual Violence
in armed conflicts, the impunity of the perpetrators
of those atrocities and ensuring accountability for
those crimes.

Equatorial Guinea reaffirms the pivotal role of
implementing resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820 (2008), 2331
(2016) and other relevant resolutions to guarantee the
participation and empowerment of women in conflicts
and to promote and take the necessary action to avoid
attacks of sexual violence in those environments.

As our country is free from conflict, at the national
level we are focusing on the promotion of women,
gender equality and the fight against sexual violence,
within the framework of our sustainable development
strategy, Horizon 2020. Our country's willingness to
monitor, follow up on and propose actions, policies and
strategies aimed at promoting women, which is reflected
in the composition of our Security Council team, is
part of the action plan of our national education-for-
all programme, the national multisectoral action plan
on women and gender equality, and the work of the
Ministry of Social Affairs and Gender Equality, which,
among other activities, is responsible for national
campaigns to combat violence against women and girls.
It is also worth mentioning the Equatorial Guinea Child
Support Centre, an institution led by the nation's First
Lady, Mrs. Constancia Mangue Nsue de Obiang.

In conflict situations and their international
responses, Equatorial Guinea would like to recommend
that organizations in charge of coordinating
peacebuilding missions coordinate the application of
best practices by training all recruited contingents
during predeployment preparation, through integrating
the gender perspective and providing solid training on
sexual exploitation and abuse. Likewise, we advocate
continued support for the various components of
the United Nations architecture to combat sexual
violence in armed conflicts and for collaboration
among them and United Nations agencies for counter-
terrorism, organized crime, humanitarian response
and sustainable development, in order to safeguard
the recovery and reintegration of victims, especially
children born of sexual violence and women who have
survived such assault.

I conclude by saying that Equatorial Guinea
reiterates its strong condemnation of all those acts and
our support for the United Nations zero-tolerance policy
on sexual exploitation and abuse. We again express
our willingness to cooperate in this area as part of the
Security Council, based on the resolutions adopted in
that regard.

