Mr. Salgueiro (Portugal): To save time, I will not
read the complete text of my intervention, which has
been distributed.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union (EU). The candidate countries Turkey,
Croatia and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, and Serbia, as
well as Ukraine, Armenia and Georgia, align
themselves with this statement.

Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) is a
landmark along the road towards gender equality and
the full recognition of the role women play in society,
especially in peacekeeping, peacebuilding and post-
conflict situations.

The rights of women and girls, and gender
equality, are at the core of major international
instruments, such as the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and
Beijing + 5, and the 2005 World Summit Outcome. The
European Union abides by and seeks to promote the
full implementation of these international instruments,
not only within the EU membership but also in its
policies towards third countries. Commitments to
promote the role of women in peacebuilding and
enhance the implementation of Security Council 1325
(2000) are also reflected in the 2006 EU joint concept
for support to disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and the communication on gender in
development cooperation.

Nowadays, gender equality concerns are
mainstreamed into our development and cooperation
policies and in the framework of the European Security
and Defence Policy (ESDP), as well as in other EU
projects and programmes. We wish to highlight the
three-year partnership with the United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) launched in
April 2007 to build capacity and improve
accountability for gender equality in 12 countries, with
a specific focus on women in peacebuilding and the
implementation of Security Council 1325 (2000). Also,
the EU Conflict Prevention Network will be exploring
ways of assuring the effective implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) by the international community,
Governments and local civil society organizations.

The Council of the European Union has also
adopted conclusions on gender equality and gender
mainstreaming in crisis management, which are
currently being implemented at all levels of European
Security and Defence Policy (ESDP) missions. The EU
Council stressed the importance of fully implementing
resolution 1325 (2000) from the early planning stages
to the conduct and evaluation of ESDP missions and
operations.

Particular emphasis has been placed on the
inclusion of measures against sexual and gender-based
violence in transitional justice mechanisms, while
emphasizing that peacebuilding and reconstruction
plans should include comprehensive victim-protection
and support mechanisms. In that regard, the European
Union also welcomes the draft policy statement and
draft strategy on assistance and support to victims of
sexual exploitation and abuse by United Nations staff
and related personnel, as well as the upcoming work on
the criminal accountability of United Nations officials
and experts on mission. The European Union is
committed to working towards the creation of a clear
United Nations framework to respond to situations of
sexual exploitation and abuse, and will stay actively
engaged in the discussions of the Ad Hoc Working
Group.

On the other hand, we must not forget the
preventive dimension with regard to gender-based
violence in conflict and post-conflict situations. In the
European Union context, that includes the development
of rules of conduct - such as the generic standards of
behaviour, which are binding on ESDP staff and forbid
involvement in sexual exploitation, trafficking in
women and prostitution. The European Union would
support the elaboration of corresponding rules and
practices for United Nations operations and missions.

The EU is deeply concerned about the continued
use of sexual violence against women in current
conflict situations - such as in the case of the
situation recently reported by Mr. John Holmes, Under-
Secretary General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, and others, on the
appalling and unprecedented phenomenon of
systematic rape and brutality against women in eastern
Congo. Sadly, that demonstrates the importance of
furthering the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).

We believe that the impact of violence against
women has manifest consequences for the success and
sustainability of peacebuilding efforts. That is a subject
that demands the attention of the Security Council. The
European Union would welcome a report by the
Secretary-General on the global problem of sexual and
gender-based violence in both conflict and post-
conflict situations, to highlight the implications and
consequences for peacekeeping and peacebuilding
activities.

Support must also be directed to strengthening
judicial and legal systems, particularly in countries
experiencing protracted crises.

The European Union would like to take this
opportunity to congratulate the Peacebuilding
Commission for the achievements of its first year of
work. We believe that the Peacebuilding Commission
is a most appropriate forum for addressing gender
equality and for contributing to the active participation
of women in post-conflict reconstruction and
institution-building processes, including in decision-
making.

We recognize the efforts undertaken to consider
gender-equality issues in the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission, both in country-specific work and in
thematic discussions, as was highlighted in the report
on its first session. As recognized in the reports on
Burundi and Sierra Leone, the European Union urges
the Commission to also consider gender equality as a
decisive cross-cutting issue in the integrated
peacebuilding strategies to be developed in the future.

In addition, it is crucial to include women in
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes, while taking into account the capacity of

women to contribute to stability and decision-making
in society and the vulnerability and special needs of
women and girls. Let us also not forget the importance
of promoting men's awareness of their role in turning
gender equality into a reality in every dimension of
life.

The European Union welcomes the work of the
Office of the Special Adviser on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women and its reports on the progress
made in the implementation of the 2005-2007 System-
wide Action Plan, the proposals for an updated plan for
the 2008-2009 period, and the collection of good
practice and lessons learned in the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2005).

The European Union is aware that much remains
to be done, including at the national level, to ensure
that gender inequality is addressed. The EU also
supports the enhancement of mechanisms to further
advance the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
Monitoring and reporting systems must be improved in
order to ensure enhanced accountability.

Moreover, additional efforts need to be
undertaken at the level of the United Nations to
increase the number of women in senior positions and
in peacekeeping and peacebuilding missions.

Cooperation is essential. We will continue to
actively work with United Nations agencies, regional
organizations - such as the African Union, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
and NATO - non-governmental organizations and all
relevant stakeholders. We also believe that it is of great
importance to provide information to the broader
public on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).

We are ready to work together with the Secretary-
General and to take into account the recommendations
of his latest report on women, peace and security in our
policies and programmes.

