Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): I would like to
express our sincere gratitude to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Margot
Wallstrom and to the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Herve Ladsous, for their
briefings this morning. Our delegation welcomes the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2012/33) and the
comments made on behalf of the non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), specifically the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and security.

South Africa attaches great significance to the
subject matter under consideration, and we wish to
express our sincere gratitude to the Secretary-General,
the Special Representative and the entire United
Nations team that continues to work hard to ensure that
this scourge is completely eradicated. We would like to
commend the excellent job done by the United Nations
and the Special Representative to highlight the
challenges of sexual violence in conflict-affected areas.
Africa continues to bear the brunt of this evil, given its
high share of the number of conflict areas. This
scourge has to be completely eradicated sooner than
later.

South Africa remains deeply concerned about the
continuing trends of sexual violence in armed conflict
and post-conflict situations, in particular the deliberate
targeting of civilians, especially children. It is a fact
that women and girls are disproportionately affected by
the scourge of violence. Over the centuries, women
have formed the core of civilization and human
advancement. On our continent and in South Africa,
women have participated in the gallant struggles
against colonialism and oppression as equals, shoulder
to shoulder with men, in the struggle for justice,
emancipation and equality.
It is therefore a travesty that women are still
today subjected to the most degrading and
dehumanizing acts, in spite of their violent role in
history. We should therefore spare no effort to
comprehensively resolve all the outstanding conflicts
across the globe in general and on our continent in
particular. Those conflicts continue to be a fertile
ground for sexual violence, and rape in particular,
which is used as a weapon of war.

We have taken note of the fact that the Secretary-
General's report for the past year was prepared and
compiled after a broad and extensive consultation with
the l3-entity network - a fact greatly appreciated by
my delegation, given that it has enriched the report by
making it one informed by the conditions and
experiences on the ground. No doubt it is one of the
most comprehensive reports ever prepared on this
matter, and it represents to a large extent the great deal
of progress in dealing with this scourge. We are
particularly pleased that United Nations peacekeeping
and political missions, as well as country teams, were
primary sources of information for the report. For
South Africa that is crucial, because the report is
informed by the experiences of people who are at the
cold phase.

The Council has done an outstanding job over the
past few years to comprehensively address the
challenge of conflict-related sexual violence by
adopting landmark resolutions aimed at eradicating it.
South Africa welcomes the progress that has been
made so far in the preparations of the terms of
reference for women protection advisers, and we look
forward to their early deployment. We are mindful of
the limitations that continue to pose a challenge to the
reporting of incidents of sexual violence in conflict-
stricken areas.

It is our hope that the countries mentioned in the
report will do everything in their power to address all
the challenges identified, including bringing the
perpetrators to justice and reparations for the victims.
South Africa is concerned that African countries
continue to constitute the majority of countries where
there is an increasing prevalence of conflict-related
sexual violence. We are appalled that the incidents of
rape and gang rape increased in the recent conflict that
struck Cote d'Ivoire. In the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, rape, mass rapes and other sexual violence
continue unabated in North and South Kivu. That is a
matter of great concern to South Africa.

We welcome and fully support the establishment
by the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) of prosecution support cells to boost the
capacity of the Congolese justice system in the
investigation of war crimes, crimes against humanity
and sexual violence. We hope that all those initiatives
will help to bring all the perpetrators to justice and end
the culture of impunity.

We welcome the commitments that were made by
the Governments of countries of concern during the
visit of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General in relation to addressing impunity for sexual
crimes and the training of security personnel. We
appreciate the work done by the Team of Experts on
the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict,
especially its great work in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Liberia and South Sudan.

In the same vein, and equally important, are the
predeployment training modules that UN-Women and
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations have
developed. We welcome the modules that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General has developed
on the protection of civilians and sexual violence with
the African Union partners, under the auspices of the
Kofi Annan International Peacekeeping Training
Centre. We are of the view that the streamlining of
conflict-related sexual violence across all peacekeeping
training will go a long way in the efforts to
comprehensively address and eradicate that evil. We
would like to encourage all United Nations agencies
and departments to continue to work together in an
integrated and coordinated manner to effectively
implement such training. We hope that we will soon
see the fruits of those concerted efforts.

We are pleased with the development of a
framework of early warning signs specific to conflict-
related sexual violence by UN-Women, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the
broader United Nations system. That will assist a great
deal towards preventing those heinous crimes. We
equally appreciate the work of the Department of
Political Affairs in producing the United Nations
guidelines for mediators on addressing conflict-related
sexual violence in ceasefire and peace agreements.
South Africa supports the inclusion of provisions
dealing with conflict-related sexual Violence in
ceasefire and peace agreements, which must have a

12-2393]
direct linkage with the increasing role of women in
conflict resolution and management.

South Africa is mindful of the fact that, if all
those efforts and initiatives are to succeed, a great deal
of resources and funds are required. The international
community and the United Nations must do all they
can to ensure that resources do not stand in the way of
the implementation of all the strategies, initiatives and
efforts for the complete eradication of conflict-related
sexual violence. We support the call contained in the
2010 report on women's participation in peacebuilding
(S/2010/466) for the allocation of at least 15 per cent
of United Nations-managed funds for post-conflict
peacebuilding projects to advance gender equality, to
empower women and to address women's specific
needs in peacebuilding contexts, which includes the
prevention of and response to sexual violence.

South Africa supports the recommendations of
the Secretary-General that the Security Council
increase pressure on the perpetrators of conflict-related
sexual violence, that it utilize all means at its disposal,
and that, in this matter, it fully support the use of
referrals to the International Criminal Court. For us,
there is no gainsaying the fact that the International
Criminal Court has strengthened the fight against
impunity for the most serious crimes of international
concern against women and girls. We continue to stand
ready to work with other members of the Council and
the United Nations in general to enhance efforts
against impunity and to ensure that perpetrators are
held accountable. The perpetrators of these evil acts
should no longer be allowed to remain in uniform,
roam the streets, sit at negotiating tables, continue to
occupy positions of authority or command armed
forces.

We fully concur with the recommendation that
the Security Council should systematically reflect
conflict-related sexual violence in the authorization
and renewal of peacekeeping mandates and the renewal
of special political missions. In that respect, South
Africa has always supported the call for the
deployment of women protection advisers to
peacekeeping and political missions in order to
coordinate the implementation of conflict-related
sexual Violence.

For our part, South Africa continues to increase
the number of women deployed in United Nations
peacekeeping missions. About 45 per cent of the troops

12-2393]

we contribute to the United Nations are women, and
10 per cent of them have played leadership and
commanding roles. We will continue to do our part and
to contribute to international efforts to address the
scourge of conflict-related sexual violence.

In conclusion, we support the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in line with
the mandate, and we want to assure her of our
continued support.

