Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
We are grateful to Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, Ms.
Angela King and Ms. Noeleen Heyzer for their
presentations.

Women and children are those most affected by
armed conflicts. Women and girls are frequently the
specific and deliberate target of attacks by armed
groups and armies in conflicts such as those suffered in
Bosnia, the Congo, Liberia, Rwanda, Sierra Leone and
other countries. Attacks, violations, abuse, subjugation
and murders of women have outstripped other military
objectives and goals of conquest.

In conflict situations, women play very diverse
roles as refugees, as heads of families, as the backbone
of their communities, as peace activists and even as
combatants. Nonetheless, when mechanisms for peace
are designed, women and their experience and needs
are ignored or little valued, and they are excluded from
the formal processes of negotiation and peace-building.
Women - their social perspective, their understanding
of problems stemming from violence and their efforts
to reconcile - can make the difference between war
and peace. So that women, in particular those in
societies affected by conflict, can have a voice in peace
processes, it is fundamental to incorporate gender
perspectives into peacekeeping operations in a much
more systematic way, in conformity with Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000).

My delegation recognizes that there have been
advances in mainstreaming gender perspectives into
peacekeeping operations, but we are not satisfied. The
process is slow and the achievements are limited. With
women's active participation, their viewpoints and
their perspective, peacekeeping operations can have
better mechanisms for confidence-building in the
reconciliation of communities broken by hatred and
rancour. It is a question of facilitating, with the active
presence of women, communication between
peacekeeping missions and the local population so that
the international presence can truly contribute to the
restoration and consolidation of peace. In short, it is a
question of making peacekeeping operations more
effective.

In considering the establishment or the renewal of
a peacekeeping operation, we must take into account
the accumulation of principles, instruments and plans
formulated since the World Conference on Women,
held in Mexico in 1975, including the guidelines
adopted by the Security Council and by the Economic
and Social Council, and the study by the International
Committee of the Red Cross, as well as studies
undertaken by the Secretary-General and by the United
Nations Development Fund for Women - studies that
are about to be released.

In that regard, my delegation wishes to insist on
the need to take concrete steps that are measurable in
the short term, so that there can be closer cooperation
on this subject among the Security Council, the
General Assembly and the subsidiary bodies of the
Economic and Social Council; so that gender
perspectives can be incorporated in a truly systematic
way into all peacekeeping operation mandates; so that
verification mechanisms - preferably external - can
be established to ensure that those mandates are
implemented; and so that there can truly be greater
participation by women in all stages and at all levels of
peacekeeping operations, including those of planning,
implementation and assessment. The Member States of
the Organization must conduct more effective
campaigns to recruit women and, above all, to present
candidates for leadership and decision-making posts.
There are few women who have been in charge of a
United Nations peacekeeping mission. That must
change, and such change depends on Member States,
but also - and above all - on the Organization's
being consistent in its principles and guidelines.

In that regard, I welcome the recent appointment
of a woman as Special Representative of the Secretary-
General in Georgia. It is fundamental that training
courses for members of peacekeeping missions - as
well as for staff working for those missions at
Headquarters - incorporate gender perspectives. Any
operation must have at least one gender expert. And it
is also important that that function not always be
performed by a woman, as is usually the case. Strong
mechanisms should be established to investigate cases
of abuse and exploitation of women by armed groups,
by State authorities or by members of peacekeeping
operations.

In accordance with the foregoing, full
implementation of the provisions of international
humanitarian law, of international human rights law
and of emerging international criminal law should be
promoted. Systematic and generalized attacks on the
physical integrity and dignity of women - crimes
whose victims are women in conflict situations - must
be definitively prosecuted and punished by
international law as war crimes - as crimes against
humanity.

The recognition of a link among gender, conflict
and peacekeeping, as reflected in resolution 1325
(2000), is only one aspect of the broad subject of
mainstreaming gender perspectives, with respect to
which the United Nations must demonstrate its
leadership, most especially if it wishes its views to be
emulated outside the Organization.

