Mrs. Morgan Sotomayor (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I thank the Secretary-General for his
statement and welcome the valuable briefing by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Margot Wallstrom, as
well as the statements of Under-Secretary-General Le
Roy and Lieutenant General Gaye. Allow me also to
express Mexico's appreciation for the leadership that
the United States has shown in the fight against sexual
violence in armed conflict.

During its membership of the Security Council,
Mexico has sought to promote a broad agenda of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, pursuant to
the relevant provisions of international humanitarian
law. In these past two years, significant steps have
been taken to ensure that women and children will no
longer be the principal victims of the violence to which
armed conflict give rise.

One aspect of particular concern is sexual
violence in armed conflict or post-conflict situations,
as that subject cannot be approached simply from a
gender perspective. The impact on society of sexual
violence used as a tactic of war is so great that
addressing it must be an integral part of any strategy
for peace and security. Sexual violence encourages the
perpetuation of conflicts, promotes the displacement of
populations and limits development opportunities.
Certain groups, such as displaced persons, refugees and
persons with disabilities, are particularly vulnerable to
such crimes and require special attention.

Mexico believes that it is not enough to recall
that crimes of sexual violence against women have
been criminalized. It is necessary to act on our support
for strengthening the International Criminal Court
(ICC) in order to prosecute the perpetrators of sexual
violence in the context of armed conflict. For that
reason, we are closely following the work of the ICC in
the case brought against Jean-Pierre Bemba, and we
reiterate our firm support for the Court.

The atrocities committed against women and
children in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
and other regions of the world are permanent reminders
of the fact that existing norms are flagrantly flouted.
Ensuring respect for international law is an ongoing
challenge, for which the primary responsibility falls to
States. Mexico reiterates its call on States to fully meet
their obligations under international humanitarian law
and the norms of human rights and refugee law.

With the establishment of the mandate of the
Special Representative, an important step was taken to
address this phenomenon, and in the short time that she
has held that post Ms. Wallstrom has made it clear that,
while there are broad challenges, it is possible to
provide a comprehensive and effective response to
victims of sexual violence and to make that issue a
priority of our strategies for peace and reconciliation.

Through resolution 1960 (2010), adopted today,
the Security Council has strengthened the mechanisms
for the collection and analysis of information on the
ground. It gives the Special Representative an
additional tool by asking her to include, in the annex to
her reports, the names of parties to an armed conflict
on the agenda of the Security Council who
systematically commit rape or other forms of sexual
violence.

My delegation is particularly satisfied by the
coordination that Ms. Wallstrom has maintained with
the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy. It seems to us
that, concerning the particularities and special focus of
each mechanism, there are clear synergies and areas of
cooperation that can further optimize the impact of the
two agendas of protection for civilians in general and
women and children in particular.

We recognize that the Security Council has taken
determined steps to eliminate the problem of sexual
violence in armed conflict. It must continue its work
pursuant to resolution 1888 (2009) based on the
following four pillars: the fight against impunity; the
prevention of new cases and protection of vulnerable
groups; security sector reform; and comprehensive care
and reparations for victims.

The Security Council faces significant
challenges. It must ensure the functioning and impact
of the monitoring system and the presentation of
reports on sexual violence in conflict, and
systematically include components on gender and on
prevention of sexual violence in the terms of reference
of its field visits and the mandates for its peacekeeping
operations.

My delegation hopes that the Security Council
will step up its efforts to combat this problem more
effectively.

