Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Security Council's adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) on 31 October 2000 once again
reaffirmed the great importance of the whole range of
issues related to the contribution that women can make
to the maintenance and strengthening of international
peace and security, to the situation of women in times
of conflict and to their participation in peacemaking
and post-conflict settlements.

One result of focusing so clearly on those issues
was the report of the Secretary-General on women,
peace and security (S/2002/1154). The report is
comprehensive in scope and is thorough and analytical
in content. Its practical import is reflected in the
various tasks and recommendations it contains on how
to achieve equality between men and women, in
particular improving the protection of women and girls
in times of armed conflict and integrating gender issues
into the various aspects of peacekeeping operations.

In order to look at what the United Nations could
do in that area, we must look at the recommendations
on allocating the necessary resources - including
financial resources - for dealing with gender issues
within the framework of peacekeeping mandates. We
support the proposal to establish a senior gender
adviser post within the framework of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations. That will help to improve
coordination with regard to such matters in United
Nations peacekeeping activities.

In addition, I should like to draw members'
attention to the several recommendations contained in
Section III of the report, on the international legal
framework for taking the gender factor into account in
future ad hoc tribunals. We believe that the
establishment of the International Criminal Court will
obviate the need for future emergency tribunals. That is
clearly confirmed in the Council's approach of winding
down the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda in the near future. The gender factor is already
duly taken into account in the work of the International
Criminal Court.

We must not forget that the measures taken
through the United Nations are inadequate in
themselves. We must also take into account the special
needs of women and children in conflict situations, and
that must happen not only in words, but in fact. Women
must participate in all stages of conflict prevention and
settlement and in post-conflict peace-building.

A real contribution to resolving all those
problems can be made by civil society, including non-
governmental organizations, many of which have
considerable experience in the entire spectrum of
gender issues. No one would dispute that it is the
particularly vulnerable sectors of the population -
women, children, the elderly, the disabled, refugees,
displaced persons - who suffer most during crisis
situations and conflicts. But women and girls
themselves can also be combatants and can take an
active part in hostilities, and that is why excluding
women from negotiations on a peace settlement or on
establishing a post-conflict power structure is rather
like a delayed-action mine: their exclusion could
trigger new crisis situations.

In conclusion, I should like to thank the
Secretary-General and everyone else who participated
in preparing the report. In addition, I should like to
reaffirm our belief that women can play an important
part in conflict prevention and settlement and in peace-
building. To achieve that goal, we must try to ensure
that they can participate equally and fully in measures
aimed at the maintenance and strengthening of
international peace and security by, inter alia,
strengthening their role in decision-making with
respect to conflict prevention and settlement.

