Ms. Wallstriim: I am grateful for the opportunity
to address the Council on this important occasion.
Although it is my fourth briefing as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, today's meeting is in many ways
a first. It is not merely a reiteration or renewal of
commitments; rather, it is a decisive step towards a
comprehensive monitoring and accountability
architecture, aimed at shattering the vicious cycle of
impunity for wartime sexual violence.

Allow me to start by expressing my appreciation
for the leadership of the United States, all Council
members for their support of today's resolution, and
the more than 60 Member States that have co-
sponsored this landmark text and are participating in
today's debate. I would also like to particularly thank
3
the Secretary-General for his strong personal
engagement on this issue. My remarks this afternoon
will outline what the Secretary-General's report
(S/2010/604) and the resulting resolution mean for the
United Nations system in general, and my mandate in
particular.

When I accepted this mandate, I consulted an
array of United Nations, governmental and non-
governmental experts on one critical question: What
should be our measure of success? Over the past
decade, successive Council resolutions have
recognized that international peace and security is
indivisible from women's peace and security. And yet,
I began my mandate in the knowledge that today, as
throughout history, wartime sexual violence is never
adequately recognized, reported or remedied. Rape
persists in contexts of conflict and unrest across the
globe because, without the credible threat of
consequences, there is no deterrent. The impact on the
ground in other areas of Council practice, such as the
protection of children in armed conflict and the work
of sanctions committees, is real and proven.

Thus, our measure of success must be the
implementation of a system whereby timely and
reliable information on sexual violence flows from the
country to the global level, where it provides a basis
for accountability and action. Under the long shadow
cast by the mass rapes in Walikale, the United Nations
can do no less than bring all of its accountability tools
to bear. This must apply equally whether the victim is
an eight-year-old girl or an 80-year-old grandmother.
Today, we are poised to make that system a reality.

The report currently before the Council outlines
such a system, structured around four pillars: first,
monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements in
relevant countries; secondly, a mandate to list parties to
conflicts on the Council's agenda that are credibly
suspected of committing patterns of sexual violence;
thirdly, to use this list as a platform for engaging those
parties in a structured dialogue to obtain protection
commitments; and finally, tracking measures to prevent
and punish sexual violence that can result in either
de-listing or, in the case of persistent violators, referral
to sanctions committees.

In 10 years of the women, peace and security
agenda, there has never been an accountability
system that directly engages armed groups in
protection and prevention. This is despite the fact that
sexual violence - which devastates the lives and
livelihoods of countless women - has been recognized
as a grave breach of international humanitarian law
since the early 1990s. The new structure will help to
ensure that mass rape is never again met with mass
impunity. Instead of serving as a cheap and silent tactic
of war, sexual violence will be a liability for armed
groups. It will expose their superiors to increased
international scrutiny and pressure, seal off the
corridors of power and close all exits to those who
commit, command or condone such acts. This will
reinforce the line between a commander and a
criminal.

A reliable monitoring and accountability system
must be built on a common conceptual foundation. To
this end, the Secretary-General's report defines for the
first time the concept of conflict-related sexual
violence. This frame of reference will shed light not
only on the profile of the perpetrators, but the factors
that facilitate or restrain perpetration. It is, after all,
impossible to prevent what we do not fully understand.

When my Office reviewed the data being
collected from the field, it became evident that sexual
violence as a tactic or consequence of war was not
captured under existing categories. For instance, the
rubric "violence against women" does not reflect cases
against men and boys; the label "harmful traditional
practices" mischaracterizes sexual violence as cultural
or traditional; and the term "gender-based violence"
does not reflect the fact that gender discrimination is
not the only rationale for sexual violence as a method
of ethnic cleansing or a tactic of terror. As a number of
field colleagues have noted, the issue warrants specific
consideration.

It is also significant that this report also appears
under the General Assembly agenda item entitled
"Prevention of conflict". That is an appropriate -
albeit untraditional - lens, as rape increases the spiral
of violence, prolongs conflict and exacerbates its
impact on civilians. This approach helps to refute the
myth that sexual violence is opportunistic or inevitable
by illustrating causal links with security factors and
actors. It also counters the stereotype that women are
inherently vulnerable by highlighting how they are -
intentionally, or through lax command and control
structures - placed at risk.

Because sexual violence has traditionally been
viewed as the random acts of a few renegades or part
10-69655
of the spoils of war, it has been ignored in peace talks,
reparations schemes and funding frameworks for
recovery. Sexual violence is absent even from peace
agreements that followed wars where it was a major
feature of the fighting, such as in Bosnia, Sierra Leone
and Liberia. It has rarely been included in ceasefire
agreements, which only call for an end to acts
considered as part of the conflict. Historically, sexual
violence by soldiers was prosecuted with a view to
restoring military discipline, rather than upholding
women's rights. The perspective of the victim and the
question of reparations barely featured. In all of those
respects, the new analytical framework will have an
impact. Though we may never have all the answers, we
can ask more focused questions.

Indeed, after resolution 1820 (2008), the question
is no longer whether sexual violence is a peace and
security matter for the Security Council, but when. The
Secretary-General's report provides a number of
examples. They include sexual violence linked with
forced displacement, to control coveted territory and
lucrative natural resources, by spoilers to destabilize a
peace process, in the context of elections, to extract
information during detention or disarmament, and
sexual violence that has become normalized in
communities that have seen it go unpunished during
years of war as well as in countries that have integrated
known abusers into national forces. Such violence
cannot be separated from the broader security
challenges confronting the Council.

This understanding is borne out by what I have
seen in the field and heard from the survivors. The
words of one woman I met negate the traditional
hierarchy of wartime horrors that has trivialized rape
relative to murder and torture. She said: "They have
taken my life without killing me".

When I was in Bosnia and Herzegovina last
month, I was reminded that this hierarchy is also a
logic on which the perpetrators often rely. For instance,
at the start of the well-known Foca trial before the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, the three men charged with sexual slavery
could barely understand why they were being tried for
what was "only" rape, stating by way of defense: "But
I could have killed them."

The estimated 50,000 rapes that occurred during
the conflict in Bosnia have resulted in just 12
convictions in national courts. The process has been
10-69655
painfully slow. Women describe being treated in the
courtroom as just another exhibit from which evidence
can be extracted, saying: "It is better to be a criminal
than a victim in this system". Most women who
endured unspeakable brutality now endure the
indignity of seeing their former assailant in the street,
the bank or the supermarket, flaunting their impunity. I
met with women who, 15 years after the peace
agreement, still shake, sigh and weep, and one
described how the soldiers led her to the entrance of a
rape camp, which she remembers as the door to hell.

Rape victims are the only casualties of war that a
nation dishonours rather than honours. Their war
wounds represent not sacrifice, but shame. When I was
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, I learned
that not a single victim or community has received
reparations for sexual violence, not even the
approximately 2,000 survivors who have managed to
obtain a judgment in their favour. In Liberia, despite 14
years of civil war in which rape was rampant, and
despite the reintegration of ex-combatants into society
with no psychological counselling, the explanation I
heard most frequently for why rape remains the
number-one reported crime was "the way women
dress". The idea that women are deserving of this
violence, or used to it, or that it is their culture, makes
a mockery of the notion of universal human rights.
Women across the Kivus did not tell me "if only this
were not our culture"; they said "if only it were not for
the war".

Our current understanding of conflict-related
sexual violence is a credit to the Bosnian women who
broke the silence about rape as a crime of war. It is a
credit to the women of the Congo who continue to
work and build networks even in the face of terror. And
it is a credit to the human rights defenders on the front
lines.

But our monitoring and reporting must become
more systematic, timely and complete. Ultimately,
sexual violence is not just a tragedy we must redress,
but a threat we must prevent. My Office, in partnership
with UN Women and others, will develop an early-
warning matrix of risk factors to draw attention to the
red flags that may signal a spike in sexual violence.
Women's protection advisers will have an important
role to play in the new monitoring system.

Looking forward, significant challenges and
opportunities remain in implementing the mandate I
5
have been given by this Council. From the outset, I
have made ending impunity my top priority. I remain
convinced that in many ways, prosecution is
prevention.

I recently attended the opening of the Bemba trial
at the International Criminal Court, the first
international investigation in which alleged rapes far
outnumber alleged killings. This sends a powerful
signal that no military or political leader is above the
law and no woman is below it. Beyond prosecution,
there is a need for recognition and reparation. The aim
is to bring the perpetrators to justice, but also to bring
justice to the victims.

My Office will continue to support the capacity
of Governments affected by armed conflict to address
sexual violence. Specifically, the Team of Experts on
the Rule of Law will help Governments to enhance
accountability. I am delighted to have the newly
appointed Team Leader with me today in this Chamber.

I also add my voice to that of the Council in
encouraging troop-contributing countries to invite the
mobile support team on sexual violence to present
training scenarios to their troops prior to deployment.

While the resolution to be adopted by the Council
today is a welcome development, like any New Year's
resolution, what matters most is the resolve to uphold it
every day of the year. To that end, I urge the Council to
give sexual violence continuous consideration.

Long after the guns fall silent, the consequences
of rape remain. For women and girls who walk to
marketplaces, water collection points or schools on
roads still controlled by armed groups and return home
to communities teeming with ex-combatants, the war is
not over. Sexual violence has been called a war within
a war, but often it continues as a war within the peace.
War lives on in the children born of rape and orphaned
by violence, who line the roads in gangs, begging for
money and food, aspiring to be soldiers. By attacking
shared values, sexual violence destroys not only
people, but their sense of being a people.

We cannot bring justice to every victim
throughout the history of war. But what we are here to
do today, and from this moment on, is to ensure that
conflict-related sexual violence no longer goes
unreported, unaddressed or unpunished. That will be
our collective measure of success.
