Ms. Boissiere (Trinidad and Tobago): Trinidad
and Tobago welcomes the opportunity to make its
contribution to the debate on this significant topic
almost a decade to the day after resolution 1325 (2000)
was adopted by the Security Council. We also thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2010/498) on this important subject.

Trinidad and Tobago recognizes the competence
of the Council under Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter in matters related to the maintenance of
international peace and security and wishes to support
the efforts made by the Council to integrate a gender
perspective into that traditionally male-focused
thematic area. It is our view that the seminal character
of this resolution cannot be overemphasized, as it was
the first to recognize the need for the involvement of
both women and men in efforts to attain sustainable
peace and security. The significance of the resolution is
also observed because of its call for the integration of
perspectives on the special needs of women and girls in
relation to post-conflict reconstruction and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
initiatives.

Our support for the resolution is based not only
on our legal obligations under the Charter, but also on
our own national laws, which have entrenched the
inalienable rights of women into our domestic legal
framework. We note with satisfaction that resolution
1325 (2000) highlights the cross-cutting nature of
gender considerations in all areas related to peace and
security. In a similar manner, Trinidad and Tobago has
developed a draft national policy on gender and
development, which seeks to underscore the essential
contribution of women to national development and
integrate the gender perspective into all levels of
national policy.

Trinidad and Tobago also supports the important
role of United Nations specialized agencies and bodies
and the role they play in gender-mainstreaming
initiatives and the promotion of women. In this regard,
we are particularly encouraged by the establishment of
the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN Women), and we
congratulate Michelle Bachelet on her appointment as
Under-Secretary-General and Executive Director of the
Entity. Additionally, we have made annual
contributions to the United Nations Children's Fund
and, in the past, to the United Nations Development
Fund for Women.

We subscribe to the rule of law in the promotion
and maintenance of international peace and security as
well as in the empowerment and advancement of
women. In keeping with that approach, and in
recognition of the importance of the achievement of
some of the measures outlined in resolution 1325
(2000), Trinidad and Tobago, as a responsible member
of the international community, has implemented in its
domestic legal system not only its obligations under
the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and the Additional
Protocols of 1977, but also its obligations under other
instruments, including, the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women and the Convention on the Rights of the Child.

The vulnerability of women and girls in situations
of armed conflict and, in our specific circumstances,
armed violence, continue to engage our attention.
Consequently, we have implemented and continue to
implement measures to eliminate and mitigate the
effects of armed violence, particularly against women
and girls in our society. As such, and in light of the 15-
year review of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for
Action, which, inter alia, calls for the elimination of
violence against women, Trinidad and Tobago has
developed a procedural manual on domestic violence to
guide the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service in
addressing this issue. We also offer gender training
workshops to members of our armed forces.

Notwithstanding the importance of the
implementation of agreements on peace and security,
Trinidad and Tobago is of the view that the prosecution
of those accused of committing grave crimes against
women and girls during armed conflict is a key factor
in the attainment of lasting peace. As a result, Trinidad
and Tobago as a founding State of the International
Criminal Court has given domestic legal effect to the
Rome Statute, which established the Court, and has
also encouraged adherence to the instrument by
Member States of the subregion of the Caribbean
Community. Any failure to prosecute the perpetrators
of grave crimes against women and girls would not
only contribute to a culture of impunity, but would also
be at variance with resolution 1325 (2000).

In the spirit of advancing the dual agenda of the
attainment of international peace and security and the
empowerment of women, the Prime Minister of
Trinidad and Tobago announced during the general
debate of the sixty-fifth session of the General
Assembly (20th plenary meeting) our intention to
introduce in the First Committee at the present session
a draft resolution on women, disarmament, non-
proliferation and arms control. It is our view that this
draft resolution complements Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) by focusing on the participation
of women in processes geared towards the
advancement of disarmament and international peace

and security. The draft resolution seeks to emphasize
the value of women as contributors to the achievement
of international peace and security and encourages
Member States to promote and support their
involvement at the policymaking and other levels. The
draft resolution has since been introduced in the First
Committee as document A/C.1/65/L.39/Rev.l and has
already attracted support from Member States. Trinidad
and Tobago welcomes further support for this initiative
and looks forward to the adoption of the draft
resolution by consensus.

In conclusion, Trinidad and Tobago remains
committed to working with other Member States as
well as its partners at the regional and hemispheric
levels in order to provide an environment which
promotes the involvement of women in matter relating
to peace and security.

