Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank you,
Madam President, for convening this debate. I also
thank the Secretary-General, his Special Representative
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, as well as Ms. Rhoda
Misaka, representing civil society in South Sudan. I
would also like to align my country with the statement
of the European Union.

Sexual violence is a weapon as old as war itself.
Thanks to the action of civil society, our Council has
been seized of the matter and broken the complicit
silence that has surrounded that abominable crime.
However, this is not the time to celebrate. We have
failed to protect civilians in Syria. Women, men and
children are being sexually abused there, even as we
speak. France, as is well known, is working on a draft
resolution that would make it possible to refer the main
perpetrators and instigators of such crimes, whoever
they may be, to the International Criminal Court.

Although I have spoken of our failure in Syria, the
fight against sexual violence has also had its share of
victories. First, we have put an end to silence. From
a silent form of evil that was understood to be an
inherent part of war, we have made sexual violence
an issue affecting international peace and security.
In that regard, the creation of the mandate of the
Special Representative has been critical to enhancing
the international visibility of the issue. She can speak
directly to Governments at the highest level and is able
to present problems that they have often preferred to
ignore.

That political work is based on mechanisms that
provide us with information and awareness, which
are indispensable tools for action. Women protection
advisers within peacekeeping and political missions
are the cornerstone of that endeavour. In the Central
African Republic, where the State has collapsed and
everything needs to be rebuilt, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission has
a strong mandate to protect civil and human rights,
including with respect to sexual violence, thanks to the
deployment of women protection advisers.

In a second success, shame has changed sides. It
now weighs on the executioner and not on the victim.
The Secretary-General's list of shame exposes to the
whole international community the parties that are
using sexual violence in an orchestrated and systematic
manner and provides United Nations missions with a
solid basis for initiating a dialogue with such groups.

We should draw the logical conclusions from
such changes and prioritize the struggle against
impunity with respect to sexual violence. That task
redounds above all to Governments, which have the
responsibility to prosecute and punish. We must be
vigilant in that regard; too often, States announce with
great fanfare - and development agencies fall into line
with support - the establishment of special courts,
special prosecutors and extraordinary laws, which
serve only to cover up their lack of political will. We
have witnessed that over many years in Darfur. When
States fail to comply, the International Criminal Court,
whose jurisdiction is universal, can and must fulfil its
role.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, impunity
with respect to mass rapes has long been the rule.
There has recently been a degree of progress. That is
why we call upon the Congolese authorities to pursue
their efforts to prosecute those responsible for the rapes
in Minova, including the commanders of the Forces
armees de la Republique de'mocratique du Congo, with
the necessary rigour. An exemplary judgement in that
affair would send a message to all Congolese troops that
the era ofimpunity has come to an end. We welcome the
technical support being provided to the trials currently
under way by the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, whose mandate for the protection of civilians
has recently been strengthened.

None ofthose changes can take root ifwe do not fully
implement the mandate established by the resolutions
on women and peace and security by ensuring the full
and complete participation of women in the settlement
of conflicts. In the framework of its national action plan,
France has launched programmes of cooperation on the
matter of sexual violence and in favour of women's
political and economic empowerment in Africa and the
Arab world, in partnership with UN-Women, especially
in Mali and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Before concluding, I would like to add one point that
remains important for France. In peacetime, but even
more so during war, access to sexual and reproductive
health services is indispensable. We know that women
and girls exposed to sexual violence run the risk of
premature and unwanted pregnancies. The risk of
maternal mortality in such circumstances rises tenfold.
The refusal to provide abortion services represents
a violation of one of the principles of international
humanitarian law, which covers non-discrimination
with respect to the provision of medical services to
victims. Such discrimination, which adds a terrible
injustice to women who have been the victims of sexual
violence, must be brought to an end.

