Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Jordan for its initiative to convene today's open
debate. I thank Ms. Bangura, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
for her briefing and the representative of the NGO
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security for her
statement.

Women are an important force in achieving stability,
maintaining peace and promoting development. The
protection of women's rights and interests and the
promotion of gender equality represent advances in
human civilization. However in many armed conflicts,
sexual violence against women has been used by the
parties as a tactic of war. In particular, in recent years
terrorist and extremist forces have committed acts of
sexual violence in a number of locations, which has
gravely threatened the lives and safety of vulnerable
groups, including women and girls, and given rise to
serious international concern.

China strongly condemns and firmly objects to
the use of sexual violence as a tactic of war, including
any acts of sexual violence committed against women
and girls. We support the efforts of the international
community in its work against sexual violence in
conflict in the following four aspects.

First, in addressing the root causes of sexual
violence in conflict, only the achievement of peace and
the promotion of development can ensure the elimination
of sexual violence in conflict. The international
community must pay close attention to the promotion of
the socioeconomic development of relevant countries,
the genuine improvement of women's status, and their
achievement of full empowerment. As the primary body
responsible for the maintenance of international peace
and security, the Council should fully implement the
provisions of Chapter VI of the Charter of the United
Nations and pursue the peaceful settlement of disputes
through negotiation, mediation and good offices in
order to eliminate the root causes and breeding grounds
of sexual violence in conflict.

Secondly, the sovereignty of the countries
concerned must be firmly respected, while their
leadership role is ensured. The countries concerned
bear the primary responsibility for combating sexual
Violence in conflict and protecting the rights and
interests of vulnerable groups, such as women and
girls. The international community should support
relevant countries in adopting a zero-tolerance policy
in the fight against sexual violence in conflict. The
international community should firmly abide by the
principle of State ownership, State leadership and
State responsibility; fully honour the sovereignty and
will of the countries concerned; respect Governments'
measures taken in accordance with national conditions;
provide constructive assistance in the areas of capital,
human resources and technology; and avoid the
imposition of outside solutions.

Thirdly, it is necessary to integrate policies
and create synergies. In View of its responsibilities
and advantages, the Council should play a positive
role in countering sexual violence in conflict. The
Peacebuilding Commission, UN-Women and the
World Health Organization should play their respective
roles, work with each other in conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and post-conflict reconstruction, and
provide medical, legal and psychological services to the
victims of sexual violence, as well as a sound political,
security and social environment for the protection of
women's rights and interests.

Fourthly, counter-terrorism activities must be
intensified. Terrorist and extremist forces have
committed acts of brutal sexual violence, while
expanding the ranks of their Victims. The international
community should pay close attention to those
developments and link the elimination of sexual
Violence in conflict closely with counter-terrorism
initiatives. Acts of terror, whenever, wherever and by
whomsoever committed, must be resolutely combated
according to a uniform standard. Terrorism should
not be linked with a particular nationality or religion.
Counter-terrorism activities should be undertaken
on the basis of the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations; respect the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of the countries
concerned; give full play to the leading role of the
United Nations and the Security Council; and provide
a peaceful and secure living environment for victims
of sexual violence subjected to the threat of terrorism.

This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, as well as
the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) on women and peace and security. China
wishes to take this opportunity to work with the
international community to jointly cultivate a peaceful,
secure and stable international environment, effectively
ensure the rights and interests of women and girls, and
eliminate sexual violence in conflict situations as soon
as possible.

