Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China welcomes Angola's initiative to convene
this debate. China expresses its appreciation to you,
Minister Delgado, for presiding over this meeting. I
also wish to thank Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka, Assistant
Secretary-General Zerihoun, Ambassador Kamau
and Ambassador Antonio for their briefings. China
also listened attentively to the statement made by
the representative of the South Sudan Women's
Empowerment Network.

The current international security situation is
complex and challenging. In particular, regions like
Africa and the Middle East have long been mired in
war and conflict. Many women are victims of violence
and the threat of terror. On the other hand, women
are increasingly important players in the prevention
and resolution of regional conflicts. The international
community should step up protection of the rights and
interests of women in conflict and give women a greater
role in conflict prevention and resolution.

First, we should enhance protection for women
in conflict, it is incumbent upon the international
community to adopt effective measures to maximize
security assurances for women affected by conflict.
In providing humanitarian assistance to conflict
areas, we should focus in particular on the needs of
women and other vulnerable groups. The provisions
of relevant Council resolutions on the protection of
women in conflict must be implemented to the letter.
United Nations peacekeeping operations should, within
the purview of their respective mandates, assist host
countries in safeguarding the security of women in
conflict and should effectively implement a zero-
tolerance policy toward sexual violence.

Secondly, greater efforts should be deployed to find
political solutions to critical regional issues, and greater
importance attached to the role of women in conflict
resolution. The international community should work
hard to help design political solutions to conflicts
and overcome differences through dialogue. Women
should be encouraged to become important players
in mediation and to fully leverage their advantages
in advocating a culture of peace. United Nations
peacekeeping operations may also steadily raise the
percentage of female staff so that communication with
local women and girls can be improved.

Thirdly, women should be given a greater role to
play in building a culture of harmony and inclusiveness.
The international community should encourage women
to play a greater role in social life, and it should educate
young people so that they can resist the ideological
influence of violent extremism and the demagogic
rhetoric of armed groups and terrorists. Women should
be empowered to fully participate in all phases of
post-conflict reconstruction, actively encourage the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process
of combatants, and provide counselling and community
support for victims of violence.

Fourthly, women must be enabled to promote
economic and social development, thereby eliminating
the roots causes ofconflict. The international community
should step up economic empowerment efforts for
African women, help African countries reduce poverty
and promote economic development. African women
should be provided with better occupational-skills
training and with greater funding support for
entrepreneurship in order to comprehensively improve
incomes and livelihoods, with a view to promoting
the industrialization and agricultural modernization
of the continent, thereby eradicating the root causes
of conflict.

Last September, the Global Summit of Women was
convened under a joint China-United Nations initiative.
The Summit was attended by Chinese President Xi
Jinping and representatives from over 140 countries,
including 85 Heads of State and Government. The
event had a significant and far-reaching impact on
the development of the global women's cause. China
decided to contribute $10 million to the United Nations
Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women. Over the next five years, China will adopt
a series of initiatives to help developing countries
overcome the difficulties facing women and girls with
regard to their access to medical care and education,
strengthen training for local women and, through a
fund created in partnership with the United Nations,
roll out projects dedicated to capacity-building for
womin developing countries.

China attaches great importance to working with
Africa, promoting the cause of women and intensifying
support for African women in the political, economic,
cultural, educational and health domains. The 2015
Johannesburg Action Plan of the Forum on China-
Africa Cooperation called for intensified pragmatic
cooperation between China and Africa in the area
of women's affairs and for dialogue between female
leaders. The assistance provided by China in recent
years covers almost all African countries. China also
provided women and girls in Ebola-afflicted West
African countries, such as Sierra Leone and Liberia,
with a large amount of assistance in kind to support
Africa's efforts to upgrade its public-health system and
emergency-response capacity on all fronts.

Going forward, China will implement 200 Happy
Life projects across Africa and 100 village-level
agricultural development projects, build industrial parks
and vocational training centres on a collaborative basis,
and provide training for 200,000 technical specialists.
These cooperative projects will benefit the people of
Africa, and in particular bring new opportunities and
new hope for the development of African women,
thereby creating new conditions for conflict resolution.

China stands ready to continue working with
the international community to jointly help women
achieve comprehensive development and fully engage
in political, economic and social life so that they
can contribute more positive energy to the peace,
development and prosperity of the African continent
and makes their own important contributions.

