The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the United
Kingdom.

We welcome the Secretary-General's contribution
to our debate today and the continuing presence of the
Deputy Secretary-General this morning. The Secretary-
General's report (S/2009/362) highlights the challenges
that we face in coming to grips with the issue of sexual
violence in conflict zones, and it confirms and clarifies
much of what we suspected about the extent of the
problem. If we are serious about preventing and
resolving conflict, then we need to be serious about
addressing conflict-related sexual violence.

There is no shortage of will to take forward the
Council's work in this area, as Tuesday's adoption of
resolution 1882 (2009) on children and armed conflict
showed. There are still gaps that we need to bridge in
information, capacity, coordination and imagination,
and the Secretary-General's report draws these out
clearly.

The proliferation of sexual violence against
women and girls is in part aimed at marginalizing their
contribution to society. It deliberately degrades the role
that they can play in restoring the fabric of peaceful
communities. The Arria formula meeting that the
United Kingdom hosted in June highlighted the critical
importance of enhancing women's contribution to
peace processes.

Short-term measures to improve protection and
enhance women's participation in decision-making
have to be accompanied by longer-term efforts to
establish accountability and the rule of law. More
effective monitoring of patterns of sexual violence in
situations of armed conflict should allow the Council
to identify and mandate the action necessary to prevent
it.

We therefore welcome further reports from the
Secretary-General. We support his recommendation
that better use be made of commissions of inquiry, and
the Council should ensure that conflict-related sexual
violence gets the attention it deserves in the informal
Expert Group on the Protection of Civilians and in the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.

Let me add on a personal note that I share
completely Ambassador Rice's conviction that the time
to act is now. For those of us who took part in the
Security Council mission in May, it was impossible not
to be moved and angered by what we saw and heard.
The perpetrators of these appalling crimes want to
diminish women and exclude them from their role in
building peace. If I took any encouragement from our
meetings with those who have suffered, it was from
their determination not to just remain victims, but to
play their full part in finding and securing a lasting
peace in which their rights will be respected and their
security assured. That is what we must support 7 the
courage and determination of women who want to
make their unique contribution to peace.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Norway.

