Mr. Ipo (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): We
would like to welcome you, Sir, the Federal Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Germany, and thank you for
presiding over our work.

We would also like to express our Government's
solidarity with the Government and people of Sri
Lanka in the wake of the recent terrorist attacks that
left numerous victims.

My delegation commends Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres for the high quality of his report on
conflict-related sexual violence throughout the world
(S/2019/280), as well as Ms. Pramila Patten, Ms. Amal
Clooney and Ms. Inas Miloud for their detailed briefings
and the relevance of their recommendations. We
welcome the presence among us of Ministers, as well
as of Ms. Nadia Murad and Dr. Denis Mukwege, Nobel
Peace Prize Laureates in 2018, and express our deep
appreciation to them for their commitment to the fight
against conflict-related sexual violence.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by Ms. Fatima Mohammed on behalf of the
African Union.

As the international community prepares to
commemorate the twentieth anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000), on the impact and role of women in
conflict prevention and resolution, as well as the
tenth anniversary of the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, it is deeply worrying to note, as
resolution 1820 (2008) indicates, that sexual violence
is increasingly being used as a weapon of war and
terrorism and poses a challenge to international peace
and security.

Cote d'Ivoire believes that sexual violence
constitutes a serious violation of fundamental rights
and human dignity, and its multiple consequences
on victims have undeniable repercussions on peace,
social cohesion and economic development. It is also
regrettable to note that this phenomenon is increasingly
becoming a lucrative activity, as noted in the Secretary-
General's report. Rape - often gang rape - sexual
slavery, forced prostitution and many other forms of
sexual violence therefore fuel conflict and terrorism.

New security challenges, such as Violent extremism
and terrorism, sexual and gender-based violence and
stigmatization, are negatively impacting women's ability
to play their full role in peace, security and development
in Africa. However, it should be noted that excellent
progress has been made in the fight for the advancement
of women in Africa, particularly through the adoption
of more relevant legal instruments. The 2003 Protocol
to the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights
on the Rights of Women in Africa, better known as the
Maputo Protocol, and the African Union Agenda 2063
therefore represent significant progress in promoting
gender equality and strengthening women's role in
addressing peace, security and development challenges.

The persistence of gender-based sexual violence is
less a matter of the existence of normative frameworks
than of the effective implementation of sanctions
against perpetrators of sexual crimes. My delegation
therefore believes that accountability must, so to speak,
be one of the main lines of action of States and the
international community. To that end, the capacity of
national judicial institutions, as well as national and
international mechanisms for identifying perpetrators
of sexual violence in conflict, should be strengthened
to ensure that perpetrators are held accountable before
the competent courts.

Similarly, the presence of experts on sexual violence
issues within sanctions committees would also help to
better identify the perpetrators of sexual violence and
prompt action provided for by international legislation
in that area. In addition, there is a need for measures,
including psychosocial, medical and legal measures,
to be taken in the context of providing assistance to
victims, including children born out of sexual violence.

In the aftermath of its crisis, Cete d'Ivoire firmly
committed to fighting against sexual violence and
impunity. Those efforts have been acknowledged and
commended in the light of the fact that, since 2017,
it has been the first and only country to have been
removed from the annex to the Secretary-General's
report on conflict-related sexual violence. The Ivorian
Government has also adopted a national strategy to
combat gender-based violence, which has resulted
in the establishment of a national committee to fight
conflict-related sexual violence and the establishment
of a specific mechanism to combat rape.

The adoption of that strategy by the armed forces
of Cote d'Ivoire and the inclusion of the issue of sexual
violence in the training modules of training offices
and military academies have been decisive in the fight
against that scourge by reducing the number of sexual
violence from 478 cases in 2012 to 30 in 2014, 3 in 2015,
1 attempted rape in 2016 and then zero cases in 2017 and
2018. The revised code of conduct of the armed forces
of the Cote d'Ivoire also places particular emphasis on
crimes related to sexual violence and the ongoing zero-
tolerance policy on those crimes.

Aware that there is a correlation among peace,
social cohesion and the empowerment of women,
the Government of Cote d'Ivoire attaches particular
importance to financing microprojects through
microcredits. That policy of supporting women's
empowerment has enabled more than 200,000 women
to emerge from the clutches of insecurity. At the
political level, the Government is working towards
greater involvement of women in the country's political
life, through a law on the representation of women in
elected assemblies, which imposes a minimum quota of
30 per cent of women of the total number of candidates.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire notes that, despite the
general awareness of the situation of women and the
subsequent progress made through the adoption and
strengthening of national and international normative
frameworks, multiple challenges remain in the fight
against sexual violence in times of conflict and the care
of Victims. My country commends the leadership of
the United Nations and the support of its specialized
agencies, and reaffirms its ongoing commitment to the
fight against gender-based sexual violence.

