The Secretary-General: Let me start by thanking
you, Mr. President, for your initiative in holding this
meeting on women, peace and security.

Two years ago, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1325 (2000), a landmark step in raising
awareness of the impact of armed conflict on women
and girls, and of the vital role women play in conflict
resolution and peace-building.

Since then, the Council has continued to devote
close attention to this key aspect of international peace
and security. It has used the Arria formula to hear
directly from women living in countries mired in
conflict. During missions to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Kosovo and Sierra Leone, Council
members have met with women's groups and networks,
and last July the Council held a further open discussion
on the issue.

Resolution 1325 (2000) has also galvanized the
United Nations system into looking more critically at
our own work, and at how we deal with gender
perspectives not only in peacemaking, peace-building
and peacekeeping, but also in humanitarian,
disarmament and reconstruction activities.

More importantly, women at the grassroots level
around the world have found the resolution an effective
tool in bringing greater attention to their needs and
priorities and in supporting their efforts to contribute to
peace processes.

My report on women, peace and security, called
for in resolution 1325 (2000), is now before the
Council. It is based on the larger study distributed to
the Council earlier this week. I hope that members will
read it closely and sustain the momentum that has been
generated. Towards that end, I would like to draw the
Council's attention to a few issues.

The report stresses that, while many of the
experiences of women and girls in armed conflict are
similar to those of men and boys, there are important
differences. Existing inequalities between women and
men, and patterns of discrimination against women and
girls, tend to exacerbate their situation in armed
conflict.

Women and girls become particularly vulnerable
to sexual violence and exploitation. Women and
children make up the majority of the world's refugees
and internally displaced persons. Even in refugee
camps, which are meant to be safe havens, the
vulnerability of women and girls may continue,
especially if there is a proliferation of small arms.
Some women may be forced to follow camps of armed
forces, providing domestic services or being used as
sexual slaves.

But if women suffer the impact of conflict
disproportionately, they are also the key to the solution
of conflict. Women's groups and networks at the
grassroots level have provided many examples of the
imaginative strategies and flexible approaches required
for effective conflict prevention. They have worked
tirelessly and courageously in preserving social order
in the midst of chaos, and promoting reconciliation
through informal processes that receive very little
support. However, with few exceptions, women are not
present in formal peace negotiations.

The report calls for greater representation of
women in formal peace negotiations and for the
incorporation of gender perspectives in conflict
prevention activities and in mandates for peace-
building and peacekeeping operations, including those
set in motion by the Council. It also stresses the need
to increase the appointment of women at the highest
levels of decision-making, including as special
representatives, deputy special representatives and
special envoys.

The report also points out serious gaps in the
legal protections available to women. Certainly,
advances have been made in recognizing women's
rights. The legal framework is increasingly responsive
to the experiences of women and girls in conflict,
especially in cases of sexual violence, as we have seen
in the important work being carried out by the
international criminal tribunals. But much remains to
be done, particularly to improve prevention and to
combat impunity.

The report recommends the strongest possible
response to the sexual exploitation of women and girls,
including prostitution and trafficking, which can occur
in the context of peacekeeping, humanitarian activities
and other international interventions. The United
Nations and its Member States, in particular troop-
contributing States, must do their utmost to ensure that
an international presence provides protection and
security for all people - women and men, girls and
boys - and does not exacerbate inequalities or lead to
an increase in violence against women and girls. The
United Nations must not and will not tolerate sexual or
other abuse by any staff - civilian, military or
humanitarian.

Two important steps in this direction are the
investigation by the Office of Internal Oversight
Services (OIOS) of allegations of sexual abuse in West
Africa, the results of which were made public earlier
this week, and the work of the Inter-Agency Standing
Committee Task Force on Protection from Sexual
Exploitation and Abuse in Humanitarian Crises.

Since the allegations leading to the OIOS report
first arose, the United Nations has been determined to
act firmly and quickly, not just in West Africa, but on a
global basis. Improved systems for recourse,
investigation and discipline are being instituted.
Mechanisms for protecting those who depend on
international aid are being strengthened, and strict

standards of behaviour - expected of all United
Nations personnel and our partners in the non-
governmental organization community - are being

adopted. I welcome those steps and reaffirm my
commitment to working closely with all involved to
ensure full and speedy action wherever necessary.

Finally, the report emphasizes the need for
extensive capacity-building. If women are to play their
full part in negotiating peace accords, mediating
disputes, creating new Governments, rebuilding
judicial and civil infrastructures and the many other
activities that support peace, the world needs to make
an investment in building up their skills for doing so.
This will require both political will and a much larger
pool of funding.

In addition to my own study and report, an
Independent Experts Assessment, commissioned by the
United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM), has been made available to you. Elisabeth
Rehn and Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf travelled to many of
the world's conflict zones and talked to women and
girls who have experienced the devastating impact of
conflict firsthand. Their analysis, insight and
recommendations provide additional food for thought
to this Council, as well as for the wider membership,
the United Nations system and civil society.

The world can no longer afford to neglect the
abuses to which women and girls are subjected in
armed conflict and its aftermath, or to ignore the
contributions that women make to the search for peace.
It is time that they are given the voice in formal peace-
building and peacemaking processes that they deserve.
Sustainable peace and security will not be achieved
without their full and equal participation. Just as your
work can promote gender equality, so can gender
equality make your work more likely to succeed.

