Mr. Cho Tae-yul (Republic of Korea): Ijoin the
previous speakers in commending your initiative, Sir,
to convene this important debate on human trafficking
in conflict situations.

Human trafficking is an issue not only of human
rights but of peace and security, as well. Given its
close connection to corruption, organized crime and
terrorism, the devastating impact of human trafficking
on peace and security cannot be overly emphasized.
While conflicts generate an environment conducive
to human trafficking, human trafficking itself is also
a factor that exacerbates conflicts. That is further
compounded by the fact that vulnerable groups such
as women, children, refugees, migrants and internally
displaced persons are the most susceptible to human
trafficking in conflict situations. Indeed, violent
extremist groups, such as the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant and Boko Haram, not only employ sexual
violence as a weapon of war, but also strategically
use human trafficking to recruit terrorist fighters,
including child soldiers, and finance war and terror. In
short, those groups exploit the trafficking of vulnerable
populations as a means to strengthen and expand their
power and influence. Furthermore, human trafficking
is inherently transnational in nature, occurring in
every corner of the world and affecting developing and
developed countries alike.

Taking all of those factors into consideration, I
would like to highlight the following three points in our
discussions on the ways to combat human trafficking in
conflict situations.

First, all Member States, especially those directly
or indirectly engaged in or affected by conflicts, must
work together to fight against human trafficking in
conflict situations. Given its transnational nature,
human trafficking cannot be effectively addressed by
conflict-affected countries alone. Moreover, in coping
with that crime, due diligence should be exercised
to uphold the principles enshrined in all the relevant
human rights conventions and Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 2331 (2016).

Secondly, a coordinated approach is essential.
Those international agencies addressing the criminal
aspect of human trafficking, such as INTERPOL and
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, and
those dealing with the human rights and humanitarian
issues, including the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, UNICEF, the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
UN-Women, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the International
Organization for Migration, should work closely
together through coordinated responses and strategies
so as to strengthen synergies.
Thirdly, with a View to finding effective and
sustainable solutions to human trafficking in conflict
situations, maximum efforts should be undertaken
to protect and support victims and hold perpetrators
accountable. Campaigns to raise public awareness of
the serious consequences of human trafficking should
also be stepped up through the concerted efforts of the
international community. For its part, in recent years,
the Republic of Korea has taken concrete measures
to strengthen its institutional basis to combat human
trafficking both domestically and internationally. We
not only codified human trafficking as a serious crime
into our national legal system in 2013, but also ratified
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress
and Punish Trafficking in Persons, especially Women
and Children in 2015.

At the same time, as the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) this year, Korea, I believe, has a
role to play in coping with that issue in the context of
sustaining peace. The PBC, in fact, has been deliberating
on the importance ofregional approaches and collective
efforts in addressing such cross-border challenges,
especially in places like the Sahel region in Africa.
Furthermore, women and youth, the most vulnerable
groups to human trafficking, are also high on the agenda
of the PBC. This year, the PBC will further deliberate
on the empowerment of those groups so that they can
better contribute to the peacebuilding process, and I
hope that such discussions will add greater momentum
to addressing human trafficking in the broader context
of peacebuilding and sustaining peace.

I simply cannot speak about human trafficking in
the Chamber today without recalling my compatriots
who are suffering from that heinous crime, albeit in
a somewhat different context. Even as I speak, North
Koreans who have escaped their country in search of
freedom are exposed to the danger of falling victims
to human trafficking. Indeed, there is no peace and
security without human rights, and without peace
and security there are no human rights. That is all the
more reason why the Republic of Korea attaches great
importance to eradicating global human trafficking
in conflict situations and other circumstances. I can
assure you, Sir, of our commitment to playing our due
role in achieving that collective goal.

