Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): My
delegation congratulates the United States of America
on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. We are particularly pleased, Sir, to see you
presiding over this public debate.

If there is one area where the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) leaves most to be desired, it is
that of the many forms of unconscionable violence and
abuse which parties to armed conflict continue to
inflict against women and young girls. This situation is
in complete contravention of international standards.
The most heinous and most traumatizing form of abuse
against women is sexual violence. The seriousness of
this abominable phenomenon is multiplied when it is
perpetrated on a large scale. But all of that still does
not compare to the use of mass rape as a weapon of
war or as an instrument for ethnic cleansing or outright
genocide.

The international community must acquire the
means to gain access to the lawless regions where such
crimes are committed and must carry out investigations
of reported cases. In this context, the Council should
be able to order special operations, by virtue of the
principle of the responsibility to protect, in order to
establish and document the involvement of armed
groups committing sexual violence against women.
Such investigations would aim also to determine the
nature and the scope of the action to be taken to put an
end to these criminal practices.

Synergy should also be established between the
activities of human rights advisers, where they are
deployed, and the monitoring and information
mechanism established within the framework of
resolution 1612 (2005), which was initiated by my
country, Benin. This mechanism has been proven itself:
it has enabled us to identify the perpetrators of abuse
against children in situations of armed conflict.

Strengthening the legal provisions to fight
impunity would be of great use, because the credibility
of these provisions could serve as a deterrent to the
parties to conflict. The International Criminal Court
has a crucial role to play in this context.

At the same time, we must put an end to the
stigmatization of women who are victims of rape and
give them back their dignity by organizing awareness-
raising campaigns and by establishing structures for
psychological rehabilitation. This type of assistance to
victims and to communities affected by armed conflict
should be taken into account in the mandates of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations.

In general terms, protection against sexual
violence is an essential aspect of protecting civilians.
United Nations missions should analyse such violence
in order to define the concrete measures that can be
taken to prevent sexual attacks. It nearly goes without
saying that the deployment of women in the
contingents would make the fight against sexual
violence more effective because it could facilitate
contact and the gathering of sensitive information. But
the absence of women in these contingents should not
impede the development of effective strategies to
counter this phenomenon.

While amnesty for warlords is often the price to
pay in concluding peace accords, it is important to
ensure that serious crimes not be covered up, as long as
they are properly documented. These crimes should be
made imprescriptible worldwide so that those who are
suspected of having committed such crimes may be
brought to account as soon as possible in an
international or national jurisdiction as appropriate.

That said, we must enhance the awareness of law
enforcement agencies on the issue of sexual violence to
ensure that they effectively protect the population,
because it is not rare for all parties to an armed conflict
to be guilty of serious crimes against civilian
populations - who are just as fearful of Government
forces as of rebel forces.

The fight against sexual exploitation attributed to
members of peacekeeping operations must be
intensified. We must act more preventively than we
have by improving the awareness of contingent
members before they are deployed.

Care for victims of sexual violence is best
provided by women and by women's civil society
organizations. They should regard this as a field of
action in which they have a clear comparative
advantage. Their participation in negotiations to
conclude and implement peace accords and to establish
truth and reconciliation bodies would be an additional
guarantee of the mainstreaming of gender-specific
issues. They could also help to ensure that effective
prevention policies are adopted.

In this context, my delegation believes that it is
entirely appropriate for the Security Council to adopt a
resolution on this issue on the basis of the draft text
(S/2008/403) circulated by the United States as part of
the preparations for this public debate. This initiative,
as a whole, has the support of my delegation.

Last year, it was an honour for Benin to have
contributed to bringing about consensus in the General
Assembly on the resolution on rape (General Assembly resolution 62/ 134) that was initiated by the United
States. The Security Council's adoption of this new
draft resolution will give the United Nations the tools
to ensure better monitoring of zones of conflict with a
view to better protecting civilians.

