Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): My delegation
aligns itself with the statement made by the observer of
the European Union. Allow me to make the following
additional points.

First, women's networks play an important early
warning and preventive role. These include women's
situation rooms in Africa, which the African Union
(AU) has declared a best practice to prevent conflict;
the Au initiative to build a dedicated roster of women
mediators; and the creation of the Nordic Women's
Mediators' Network. Existing good practices should
be emulated and encouraged. We call on the United
Nations to consider developing a dedicated roster of
women mediators to reinforce inclusive, multi-track
prevention and mediation processes, and on countries
to submit more women mediator candidacies to United
Nations rosters.

Secondly, women suffer disproportionately from the
effects of armed violence in conflicts. They are killed,
robbed, raped, trafficked and forced into prostitution at
gunpoint. Women also bear the brunt of armed violence
as single heads of households and caregivers. Their
needs as ex-combatants and former child soldiers differ
from those of their male counterparts.

The Arms Trade Treaty has had an important
impact on highlighting the gender dimension of arms
control and disarmament. As reflected in resolution
2220 (2015), my delegation urges further strengthening
of the gender dimension in tackling the issue of small
arms and light weapons. Ensuring women's full and
meaningful participation in efforts to combat and
eradicate the illicit transfer and misuse of small arms
and light weapons must remain a priority. NATO
and Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council guidelines
on implementing resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, regarding small arms and
light weapons and mine action is a good example in
that respect. We also support the Secretary-General's
call to strengthen gender-responsive approaches to
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
security sector reform, further integrating the gender
dimension into relevant processes.

Thirdly, although human rights violations targeting
women increasingly figure in sanctions regimes, only
five of these, as noted in the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2016/822), explicitly include as designation
criteria acts involving sexual violence or violations
targeting women. We stress the need to reinforce the
gender expertise of relevant expert groups, further
enhance sanctions regimes' cooperation with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, and expand the designation
criteria in sanctions regimes where sexual and gender-
based crimes and specific attacks against women are
persistently perpetrated.

Fourthly, communication can be a powerful tool
for promoting the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda. The ways in which women
are depicted in the media can have a profound effect
on societal attitudes, perceptions of gender roles, and
the effective tackling of stereotypes that constrain and

limit women's role and opportunities in all spheres
of life.

However, according to the Global Media
Monitoring Project 2015, women are the central focus
of just 10 per cent of news stories, mostly as victims.
Only 4 per cent of media stories clearly challenge
gender stereotypes. Improving women's chances to
have their side of the story told as media protagonists
and media makers, through better education and access
to information, media, literacy, social, organizational
and communication skills should be part and parcel of
all United Nations-led operations and programmes on
the ground. This would, inter alia, allow us to better
challenge constraining inhibitions, inspire courage,
affirm the right of women to take the lead and offer
inspiring real-life role models to other women and girls
who are still struggling to have their rights and human
dignity taken into account.

Female journalists may offer particular insights
into the plight of women in conflict zones by accessing
women where access may not be possible to their male
counterparts due to prevailing restrictions and social
norms. Female journalists also produce more stories
centered on women than their male counterparts. As
such, they become important conduits for the women
and peace and security agenda. But women journalists
themselves often face serious risks as they seek to tell
the stories of conflict and transformation. A shocking
70 per cent of women journalists killed worldwide
are murdered. Besides physical attacks, intimidation,
harassment and rape, they are subjected to aggressive
targeted trolling and sexualized attacks online.
Resolution 2222 (2015), adopted under Lithuanian
presidency in May 2015, points to the specific risks
faced by womenjournalists. These need to be adequately
addressed, including through a much stronger focus on
tackling impunity.

Finally, let me reiterate Lithuania's strong
commitment to furthering the women and peace and
security agenda through concrete action. We are
currently renewing our resolution 1325 (2000) national
action plan and enhancing relevant cooperation with
our eastern partnership neighbours, including Ukraine,
where Russia-sponsored war in the east of the country
has severely affected women's personal safety and their
human rights. Lithuania is taking steps to increase
the involvement of women in peace operations in the
civilian and military fields. Last year, a third of our
personnel deployed to civilian missions abroad were
women.

As a founding member of the women and peace and
security national focal point network, Lithuania will
continue to engage actively in its work as well as on the
broader women and peace and security agenda.

