Mrs. Asmady (Indonesia): My delegation would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report (S/2004/814) on the situation
regarding women, peace and security. Not only does
the report encourage us with achievements to date but
it also challenges us to further action in order to fully
implement Security Council resolution 1325 (2000).
The resolution emphasizes the importance of women
being equal partners in building a culture of peace
globally, as a means of both prevention and cure for
conflict.

Indonesia supports the implementation of the
resolution because its provisions are in line with our
national policies. Operating on the principle that
women should enjoy equality in all spheres of society,
Indonesia supports gender mainstreaming into the
peacekeeping and peace-building work of the United
Nations system.

Towards this end, Indonesia fully encourages all
United Nations entities, other international
organizations and civil society to cooperate and, where
possible, to coordinate their efforts to bring women
into the decision-making process.

In addition to these measures, Indonesia
anticipates that greater use will be made of the Inter-
Agency Network on Women and Gender Equality
established under the Inter-Agency Task Force on
Women, Peace and Security. The Network should
strengthen efforts to ensure collaboration and
coordination throughout the United Nations system. It
could perhaps also be used to encourage coordination
beyond the United Nations system.

The undeniable fact, however, is that, while there
is widespread recognition of the valuable role that
women can play, their full involvement in peace
processes is unfortunately slow in coming. This
slowness constitutes the main stumbling block to
women's participation. With adequate funding,
progress could be greatly accelerated.

Because the resolution has not yet been fully
implemented, women continue to be vulnerable to the
many dangers posed by armed conflict, including acts
of sexual violence. Indonesia condemns the use of
sexual violence as a weapon of warfare in conflict
situations. However, categorizing such acts as crimes
against humanity deserves further careful consideration
before we settle on such a classification.

With regard to the human rights of women,
Indonesia is firmly convinced that their rights must be
respected at all times, even in situations of conflict.
International law underscores our continuing humanity,
even on the battlefield. Combatants must therefore not
sexually exploit women as acts of war. The challenge
to protect and promote the human rights of women and
girls in armed conflict is therefore a challenge that
must be met by all civilized societies.

In this respect, it is also imperative that
peacekeepers and civilian police not contribute to the
further suffering of women in situations of conflict.
Their involvement in such behaviour is both
unacceptable and a clear betrayal of the trust placed in
them. Their duty is to preserve the peace and help
create conditions for the rehabilitation of war-torn
societies.

To correct this situation, it is important and
necessary for all peacekeepers to be exposed to gender-
sensitive training programmes as part of their
induction. Likewise, they should also benefit from
HIV/AIDS awareness training programmes. On this
matter, Indonesia agrees that peacekeepers should be
held to the same standards of conduct as required of
combat personnel, according to the Secretary-General's
Bulletin.

To Win the peace and keep it, women must be
made parties to peace negotiations. They should also
be able to exercise their political rights, especially the
right to vote, in post-conflict societies. There must also
be systematic incorporation of gender perspectives into
the planning, implementation and monitoring of all
reconstruction programmes and budgets. This should
ensure that women and girls enjoy the same benefits
that men do in post-conflict societies.

Indonesia wholeheartedly supports the speedy
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). However,
we believe there is a need for further deliberation prior
to the implementation of the recommendations before
us. It is our view that the proposed changes must be
carried out throughout the United Nations system. This
point is being made because we apparently face the
risk that, as the author of resolution 1325 (2000), the
Security Council exclusively will decide on the issues.
Such an approach would deprive many developing
countries of the opportunity to make contributions to
the decision-making process.

