Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): Today thousands of
women continue to be suffer sexual violence in
situations of armed conflict, in violation of their human
rights and international humanitarian law - in
violation, indeed, of our conscience and human dignity.
These practices, wilful or wanton, horrify us and give
us pause. They must be stopped.

We are grateful, therefore, to the delegation of the
United States for convening today's debate on this
critical topic. And we were pleased to see the Secretary
of State presiding over this very important meeting. We
also deeply appreciate the leadership of the Secretary-
General and the Deputy Secretary-General on this
issue.

This meeting serves not merely as a forum to
condemn various forms of violence against women in
armed conflicts. Likewise, it is more than a showcase
of the strength and indestructibility of our
determination to end impunity and protect women in
situations of armed conflicts. This meeting is, first and
foremost, about fulfilling the full potential of women
in time of peace and in time of war.

It is from that broad perspective that Indonesia
views this meeting. All States, all societies, have
common interests, common core values and the
common objective that women should and must be
protected at all times, including in situations of armed
conflict. It is therefore imperative that we, the
international community, tackle these crimes with
vigour and with iron determination. No shadow of
ambiguity should cloud our action to end these
atrocities. Indonesia believes that the international
community has to continue to develop and implement a
variety of comprehensive strategies to address this
issue.

Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) is a
guidepost for our actions. The resolution calls for
parties to armed conflict to protect women from
violence and to end impunity for war crimes. However,
much remains to be done.

Rape and sexual violence are indisputably
violations of the laws of war and constitute a crime
under international humanitarian law. But another
problem that women face as survivors of sexual
violence is the existence of barriers to achieving justice
through the courts or through more informal
community-based mechanisms. Many survivors face a
great deal of exclusion in their communities if they
publicly reveal the sufferings they have endured.
Women victims are frequently shunned and ostracized.

Furthermore, the judicial systems in many armed
conflict areas are far from well functioning due to
structural inadequacy. Thus, the legal capacity of
national and local governments to act swiftly when
reports or warnings come in must be strengthened. The
judiciary plays the critical role of bringing to justice
the perpetrators of sexual crimes in armed conflict and
in ensuring reparations for the victims.

Security and police sector institutions play an
important role in responding to sexual violence in
armed conflict. Police sector reform should be
considered in places where sexual violence is
prevalent, and it should include an assessment of how
police services can best assist victims and prevent and
investigate these crimes, as well as of how police
officers themselves can be made more gender-
sensitive, how their activities can be regulated and how
they can be punished for engaging in these types of
crimes.

Peacekeepers also play an important role in
protecting women and girls from sexual violence where
they serve. More women should play key roles,
including as military observers, civilian police and
envoys and special representatives of the Secretary-
General.

Many survivors of sexual violence suffer from
grave long-term psychological and physical health
consequences, even once the brutality is over. There is
a great need for adequate medical services to meet the
needs of this population.

The greater United Nations system has to target
the needs of women for health care and treatment, as
well as other indicators of development that not only
help to treat the victims but also play a role in
preventing the worsening of a conflict and its ill effects
on women. Identifying the perpetrators is also essential
in order to shift the balance from victims living in
shame to shaming the perpetrators. For this, it is
crucial, as a part of a comprehensive attack against
these heinous crimes, that United Nations missions
conduct wide public awareness campaigns in their
respective mandate areas.
The protection of women in armed conflict
should be further strengthened; that much is clear.
Ultimately, however, our aim should be the prevention
of armed conflict itself. Here, the Security Council, in
cooperation with regional organizations, should play its
role in promoting the prevention of conflict and the
maintenance of international peace and security.

