Mr. Fedotov: Several tragedies took place
yesterday: the cowardly assassination of the Russian
Ambassador to Turkey and the despicable terrorist
attack in Berlin. May I express, on behalf of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), my
deepest condolences to the Governments of the Russian
Federation and Germany and to the families of the
victims. As the UNODC mandate includes counter-
terrorism, we stand ready to increase our support to
Member States to strengthen international solidarity
and cooperation in fighting the scourge of terrorism
and hatred.

Turning to the agenda item under consideration,
allow me to begin by expressing my gratitude to the
Security Council for its attention to this urgent issue.
Indeed, this is a historic meeting of the Security
Council, as the Council is set to adopt, for the first time
in its history, an action-oriented resolution dedicated to
human trafficking. I would also like to thank UNODC
Goodwill Ambassador Nadia Murad for helping to raise
awareness of the plight of trafficking victims.

Thanks to these efforts, heightened attention is
being given to the problem of human trafficking in
conflict and mass movements of refugees and migrants,
where we have seen this terrible crime acquire ever
more appalling dimensions.

In seeking to strengthen international responses, we
must keep in sharp focus the fact that human trafficking
is pervasive. It is transnational, and its victims are
everywhere. Trafficking victims have been detected in
106 countries and territories around the world.

Building effective action thus requires a strong
framework of international cooperation and shared
responsibility. I deliberately use the word "build", as
there is no single measure, no one step in any given part
of the world that can address this problem alone.

The building blocks we need can be found in the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress
and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children. This international treaty, concluded
more than a decade ago, is still young, but some 158
countries have now criminalized most forms of human
trafficking in their domestic laws, in line with the
Protocol. It is true that the full implementation of the
Protocol's provisions has yet to be achieved. However,
the Palermo Convention and the Protocol could serve as
a platform for a vast collective response to many of the
challenges raised by today's debate.

What we really need is to strengthen existing
frameworks, which represent a solid foundation of
international law and years of painstaking operational
cooperation that we can build upon to act against
modern-day slave traders, including in situations
of conflict and wherever we find such activities
taking place.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2016/949)
details the efforts of the United Nations system to
support Member States in improving the implementation
of this international law instrument.

Tomorrow UNODC will present its 2016 Global
Report on Trafficking in Persons, which it is mandated
to do by the General Assembly and which provides
a snapshot of the state of national responses to the
challenges of human trafficking. The report, based
on reliable data and information provided by Member
States, establishes that an increasing number of
trafficking victims from conflict-affected countries
such as Syria, Iraq and Somalia have been detected
in Europe, Asia and the Middle East. The report also
features a thematic chapter on the connections between
conflict, migration and trafficking. I hope that all
present will join us tomorrow at the launch.

Looking ahead, I would like to highlight the urgent
need for countries to improve identification and referral
processes tailored to the challenges of conflict zones
and mass movements.

UNODC is helping countries to enhance the
identification and protection of trafficking victims
among refugees and displaced persons fleeing conflict
in the Middle East and Africa, and we hope to expand
this work in future. At the same time, strategic law-
enforcement action must target upstream organized
criminals through intelligence-sharing,joint operations,
financial investigations and coordination within and
across borders.

The full arsenal of tools that we have to disrupt
organized crime networks and terrorist groups and to
fight money laundering and counter-terrorism financing
must be deployed. Criminals exploit weakness. Gaps
in our responses abet impunity and leave defenceless
people exposed. UNODC is committed to doing our
part to support the Security Council, to integrate
action against human trafficking, to promote justice
and accountability, and to protect the victimized
and vulnerable.

