Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having organized this important debate. I also want to
thank Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed
and the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila
Patten, for their valuable briefings this morning. We
would also thank Ms. Razia Sultana, who spoke on
behalf of the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace
and Security. We welcome the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2018/250).

Sexual violence in armed conflict is now one of
the most serious dangers facing our societies. It is also
a factor of forced displacement and migration that the
world is witnessing. Sexual crimes against women
are beyond imagination. They have become a weapon
of war.

The Kingdom of Bahrain calls for efforts to counter
the stigmatization of victims of sexual violence by
providing them with the necessary support for their
socioeconomic reintegration, which is essential to
protecting the social fabric of post-conflict countries.
We also call for strengthened efforts in the area of
prevention, early warning and rapid reaction. For these
reasons, the Kingdom of Bahrain decided to join the
Women, Peace and Security Focal Points Network.
Bahraini women live in a safe and stable country and
are represented in the Supreme Council for Women.
They provide support services to women in brethren
countries in armed conflict. The Kingdom of Bahrain
continues to denounce in the strongest terms barbaric
acts of sexual violence and calls for the prosecution of
their perpetrators.

At the international level, the Kingdom of Bahrain is
one of the first countries to sign and ratify a significant
number of relevant international instruments, in
particular the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women, and the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide.

At the national level, the Kingdom of Bahrain has
enacted national legislation based on international
instruments, such as a law against trafficking in persons,
laws establishing the National Institute for Human
Rights and the National Commission for International
Humanitarian Law, and a law for protection against
domestic violence. The Kingdom of Bahrain is eager
to participate in relevant international forums, voice its
opinion and follow up on results. Bahraini women have
participated in many local initiatives and international
forums seeking to activate the role of women in
achieving sustainable peace.

In the context of follow up and implementation of
the Kingdom's international commitments pursuant to
the conventions and treaties adhered to, many national
committees have been established, most importantly
the Committee to Follow Up on Implementing the
Security Council Resolutions, the High Coordination
Committee for Human Rights, the National Committee
for Combatting Human Trafficking and the High
Committee for the International Humanitarian Law.

