Mr. Zaayman (South Africa): I congratulate
you, Mr. President, and the Uruguayan delegation on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of May and for organizing this open debate on
the very important issue of sexual violence as a tactic
of war and terrorism.

My delegation wishes to thank the Deputy
Secretary-General, Ms. Amina Mohammed, for her
statement, and Mr. Adama Dieng and Ms. Mina Jaf
for their briefings. We also welcome the report the
Secretary-General (S/2017/249).

In war and conflict, women and children continue to
be the victims of deliberate attacks, including terrorist
acts, and indiscriminate and excessive violence. These
acts of violence, when carried out in a systematic and
widespread manner and as part of an attack against
innocent populations, stress an armed conflict and
become an enormous obstacle to its resolution and to
building peace.

Sexual abuse and discrimination are directly
linked to gender inequality, poverty, exclusion and
marginalization. Sexual violence is a deliberate and
intolerable violation of the victim's human rights.
When women and girls are preyed upon, abused and
raped, the international community has a responsibility
to speak out on their behalf and to act as their advocates
and guardians.

Over the years the international community has
come to a deeper understanding of the unique impact
that armed conflict has on women and children. There
is an agreement that the participation of women is
essential to ensuring conflict resolution, inclusive
reconciliation, peacebuilding and sustainable peace. In
that regard, resolution 1325 (2000) and all subsequent
resolutions provide the basis for a more focused and
systemic response to the role of women in conflict
and post-conflict situations. The Security Council
has also adopted a number of resolutions dealing
with sexual violence as a tactic of war and terrorism,
including resolution 2106 (2013), which calls for those
found to have committed acts of sexual violence to be
held accountable to the fullest extent. Despite these
laudable efforts, these atrocities continue unabated.
Our discussions and debates, such as this one today,
must result in continued meaningful action to protect
the victims of such abuses.

We underscore the need to make full use of the
instruments and tools created by the Security Council,
including all ofthese resolutions, and wish to emphasize
the following points.

First, South Africa believes that a crucial aspect of
ensuring that women are safeguarded from becoming
victims of sexual violence and abuse is to increase
the number of women peacekeepers deployed in
peacekeeping missions. That would provide for a safer
environment for women to report instances of sexual
violence and abuse, as well as their concerns and
overall perspectives about the security situation. It is
against that background that South Africa continues to
deploy more women peacekeepers in United Nations
peacekeeping missions and urges other Member
States to do the same. The contribution of women to
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts
is recognized as a contributing factor to the effectiveness
and long-term success of United Nations deployments.

Secondly, South Africa strongly supports the
Secretary-General's initiatives in deploying women's
protection advisers in United Nations missions. As
the Secretary-General has recommended, the Security
Council should ensure the accelerated deployment and
provision of adequate funding for such advisers. That
would facilitate the implementation of the resolutions
on sexual violence in conflict, including the new
monitoring requirements set forth in resolution 2331
(2016). Crucially, Member States should support the
inclusion of such posts in the mandates and budgets of
peacekeeping operations.

Thirdly, we support the Secretary-General's
recommendations that call for a mandatory component of
predeployment training for all peacekeeping personnel
on gender sensitivity, preventing sexual exploitation
and abuse and addressing conflict-related sexual
violence. That should also include better identification
and response to indicators of trafficking in persons in
areas affected by conflict, in line with resolution 2331
(2016). In that regard, South Africa established standby
investigative teams with the capacity to deploy to a
mission within 72 hours.

Fourthly, we also support the Secretary-General's
call on the Security Council to give due consideration to
theriskfactors andearly-warning signs of sexualviolence
in its monitoring of conflict situations, especially in
relation to periods of rising violent extremism, political
instability, elections, civil strife and mass population
movements. In that regard, the Security Council is also
urged to work with the Secretary-General towards the
development of a protocol for preventing sexual abuse
as part of peacekeeping mandates, and for the General
Assembly to include it in the budgets for high-risk
peacekeeping operations.

Fifthly, we call on the United Nations to intensify
efforts to fight this scourge by enhancing prevention
and swift responses to these crimes. As the Secretary-
General's report indicates, that would also include
dedicated and additional human and financial
resources. South Africa therefore supports the proposal
of the Secretary-General for the establishment of
victims-assistance-support functions at United
Nations Headquarters.

Sixthly, we also believe that efforts to fight sexual
violence in conflict need to take into account measures
to ensure adequate information, fact-finding and proper
documentation. Raising awareness of women's and girls'

rights and of the existence of sexual violence against
men and boys are equally important. In that regard, we
support the proposals of the Secretary-General for the
establishment of a system-wide consolidated repository
of case information.

In conclusion, the international community must
continue to work towards a non-discriminatory and
non-sexist global society in which all women and girls
are treated as equal citizens. The end of discrimination
against women will go a long way towards addressing
the root causes of sexual violence.

Finally, let us recognize that there cannot be peace
without justice. Demanding accountability from all
parties to a conflict, together with the fight against
impunity, remains our prime responsibility. Let me end
with a quotation from President Mandela delivered in
1997 at the National Men's March against Sexual Abuse:

"As long as we take the view that these are
problems for women alone to solve, we cannot
expect to reverse the high incidence of rape and
child abuse We will not defeat this scourge that
affects each and every one of us".

