Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): Let me to join others
in thanking you and in congratulating you, Madam
President, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I also commend you
for convening this open debate on women and peace
and security. I also wish to thank the Secretary-General
for his very comprehensive report (S/2017/861), which
highlights the main achievements and challenges in
advancing the women and peace and security agenda.
Similarly, on behalf of my delegation, I wish to thank
all the briefers for their very insightful contributions to
the subject matter under discussion today.

Botswana fully supports the clarion call by the
Executive Director of UN-Women to increase women's
participation across the peace and security continuum,
including in conflict prevention and resolution. My
country reaffirms its commitment to the implementation
of landmark resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security, which this organ adopted 17 years
ago. The resolution contributes significantly to efforts
aimed at women's empowerment and participation in
peace and security initiatives, particularly with regard
to conflict prevention, peace and confidence-building
measures. In furtherance of this noble objective, in
2015 a global study on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) was undertaken. In the same year, the
Secretary-General produced his report on women
and peace and security (S/2015/716). Above all, the
Global Acceleration Instrument for Women, Peace and
Security and Humanitarian Action was adopted.

The United Nations has made great strides in the
promotion of the women and peace and security agenda
through the establishment of UN-Women, which
amplified women's voices and created momentum for
women's leadership in the area ofpeace and security. In
addition, the establishment of the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, the appointment of the Victims'
Rights Advocate, the creation of the Trust Fund in
Support of Victims of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse,
and the Circle of Leadership on the prevention of, and
response to, sexual exploitation and abuse in United
Nations operations will go a long way in addressing
the challenges faced by women in the field and also
in combating and preventing sexual exploitation and
abuse. Through those initiatives, thousands of women
and girls have been assisted in various countries around
the globe.

Regrettably, women continue to bear the brunt of
armed conflicts, domestic violence, sexual abuse, rape
and humanitarian crises. The participation of women
in conflict prevention and resolution, peacemaking and
peacebuilding still remains low at the national, regional
and international levels, although studies show that
women's increased participation would significantly
contribute to sustainable peace and stability.

The international community has to continue to
address social norms that perpetuate sexual violence
and abuse against women, and promote respect for
international human rights law and humanitarian law. In
that regard, we emphasize the primary responsibility of
States to comply with their obligations to end impunity
and effectively use all available means to enforce
accountability by prosecuting all perpetrators of such
crimes and abuses. We call on States to take practical
steps to address obstacles in women's access to justice,
including by creating an enabling environment where
women can easily report incidents of violence without
fear or intimidation. We furthermore urge all States
to strengthen the capacity of their national criminal
justice systems in order to facilitate victims' access to
justice. Botswana recognizes the critical importance
of gender equality and its mainstreaming in national
development agendas, including of course in the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development.

In conclusion, I wish to applaud the Security Council
for regularly convening open debates on women and
peace and security since 2000, which has ensured that
this matter remains at the top of the global agenda. We
also support the work of various stakeholders towards
the advancement of the women and peace and security
agenda. I pledge Botswana's continued support for
these endeavours.

