Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we wish to
offer our best wishes to the United Kingdom delegation
for successfully guiding the work of the Security

Council this month. We also thank Ukraine for the skill
with which it led the work of the Council in February.
We also extend our gratitude to the Secretary-General
for his briefing, as well as to Messrs. Yuri Fedotov
and Kevin Hyland and Ms. Ilwad Elman for their
respective briefings.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela believes
that it is necessary to point out that crimes of human
trafficking, violence, sexual abuse and exploitation,
modern slavery and forced labour are, from any
standpoint, despicable practices that we firmly
condemn, in particular because they have proliferated
and spread in ongoing situations of armed conflict
throughout the world, especially those promoted by
terrorist groups and other violent non-State actors
operating in the Middle East and North Africa, such
as Da'esh, the Al-Nusra Front and Boko Haram. The
terrorist actions carried out by these organizations
have caused a human tragedy, whose main victims have
unfortunately been the most vulnerable 4 women,
girls, boys - who have been caught up in wars that
they did not start and have become commodities for
these criminal trafficking networks.

This barbarity is a serious obstacle to the long-
sought peace for which we have fought so hard in our
respective national and regional environments. That
is why the United Nations is the best forum to work
together to prevent and combat the spread of this type
of crime by addressing its root causes. We urge all
international actors to take effective action to eradicate
this scourge. We cannot let human life to be used as
spoils of war by these criminals. This is a truth that
cannot be ignored, in particular by all those who incite
and promote armed intervention and conflicts. Those
who are responsible should, at all levels, must be held
accountable before the law.

Despite the fact that this terrible crime and its
related practices affect all States to some degree, the way
it is discussed in the Security Council - namely, in the
context of armed conflict - requires us to recognize
that one of the reasons that there has been a worsening
of this crime in recent years has been the destruction
of State capacities in the countries concerned as a
result of interventionism by those countries that foster
the overthrow of Governments, destroy the social,
political and economic fabric and create conditions
for the expansion of international terrorism, which
today threatens international peace and security, while
violating the human rights of civilian populations
affected by those countries' criminal actions. That is
the case of Iraq, Libya, Syria and the countries of the
Sahel, to mention but a few, where today their leaders
and peoples are fighting diligently to restore peace and
stability following armed foreign interventions, which
has led to major trauma and human suffering.

We must not forget the fact that this is not a new
phenomenon, nor is it exclusive to terrorist groups.
The great Powers of the world have been the cause of
and main protagonists in promoting war throughout
contemporary history. They are also the principal
manufacturers and marketers of weapons. They are
the ones who need limitless natural resources, which
they seek in all circumstances, in order to meet their
unbridled appetite for consumption. They are the
ones who are primarily responsible for the excesses
of war, causing the massive flows of refugees, sexual
exploitation against civilians, forced labour and modern
slavery. The sponsors of these tragedies will be called
on to answer for their acts before the law and will be
judged by history.

Venezuela will never relent in its demands on the
various actors of the international community to put an
end to the supply of financial and logistical support and
weapons to terrorist groups and other violent non-State
actors that promote the crime of trafficking in persons,
enslaving men and women and using them as active
participants in armed conflicts, exploiting them in
numerous ways and exacerbating the cycle of suffering
and death. We have had enough with two-faced morality
and double standards in assessing and combating
crimes associated with trafficking in persons in conflict
situations. We must condemn human trafficking and
modern slavery, but we must also recognize that this
firm condemnation goes hand in hand with concrete
actions that involve putting an end to activities of those
who sponsor conflicts clandestinely or openly for their
own political and economic ends.

In this context, we must tackle the root causes of
these conflicts, as they foster the vulnerability that
makes people victims of trafficking. We must establish
effective accountability mechanisms and restore the
economic and social fabric of countries in post-conflict
situations. We must reinforce States' role in promoting
stability, eradicating poverty, economic development
and social inclusion, which in the end are the true
structuring factors for preventing traffickers who incite
human suffering out of petty interests from continuing
to thrive in the midst of armed conflict and even in
peaceful situations.

The United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons is a point of reference and a step
forward in outlining the international commitments to
eliminating this scourge. Further, the review of the Plan
of Action, which will be held in 2017, means that we
must renew and increase the will of all States to fully
comply with the inalienable duty to combat this crime,
expand preventive mechanisms, ensure accountability,
and gather data and evidence.

In addition, we welcome the initiative that this
complex phenomenon is being discussed in the
Security Council, and in particular the recent adoption
of resolution 2331 (2016) last December, but we believe
that it is crucial to recognize that the leading role for
taking up this issue belongs to the General Assembly,
in which all States actively participate, taking into
account the multidimensional and cross-cutting nature
of the scourge. Discussion should be focused primarily
on the prevention and eradication of trafficking in
persons, bearing in mind the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations, in particular respect
for the sovereignty and self-determination of peoples.

