Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French):
We would like to thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to take the floor.

(spoke in English)

On behalf of the Government of Canada, I wish
to thank the Indian presidency for convening this
open debate that provides focus on the important role
of women in establishing and maintaining peace and
security.

As our Minister for Foreign Affairs, the Honourable
John Baird, stated at the Montreal Council on Foreign
Relations in September, women are the key to the
development of pluralistic societies, and the full and
active participation ofwomen in all parts of civil society
and throughout society as a whole is very important in
that regard. Last year, our Foreign Minister met with
women in Libya to discuss the role women could play in
that country's transition. He also met with the Afghan
Women's Network at the International Conference on
Afghanistan in Bonn to hear their concerns. Canada also
advocated for, and facilitated the inclusion of, women's
civil society groups at the International Conference on
Afghanistan this year, and continues to work with the
Afghan Women's Network to raise awareness of issues
relating to women, peace and security among provincial
and national officials, parliamentarians and influential
community leaders.

(spoke in French)

Canada heartily welcomes the Secretary-General's
recognition of the need to take effective measures
to address conflict-related sexual violence such as
rape as a weapon of war, and calls for the protection
of human rights defenders. Governments have the
responsibility to deal with the issues of women and
peace and security. Civil society can potentially play
a constructive role. For example, in Sierra Leone, for
which Canada has the honour to chair the country-
specific configuration for peacebuilding, the defence
of women's rights by local organizations has led the
State to act to protect particularly vulnerable groups of
women, leading specifically to a new law criminalizing
sexual offences and imposing stiffer minimum
penalties for offenders. The law is a step forward in
holding perpetrators of sexual violence accountable in
that country.

Women can play an important role in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts and in peacebuilding.
We therefore call for the continued constructive
participation of women throughout peace processes,
mission drawdowns and political transitions.

(spoke in English)

In conclusion, Canada wishes to note that the
Secretary-General's report outlines the considerable
progress that the international community has made on
issues of women and peace and security, even just in
the past year, but we are equally cognizant that much
more remains to be done.

