Mr. Bellerive (Haiti) (spoke in French): First, I
would like to extend my condolences to the Russian
Federation and to Germany following the tragic
events in Ankara and Berlin. We firmly condemn such
unspeakable crimes.

On behalf of the President and Government of the
Republic of Haiti, I thank the Spanish presidency of
the Security Council for convening today's high-level
debate on human trafficking in conflict situations. I take
this opportunity to commend the Spanish presidency
of the Council and to offer congratulations on today's
highly inspired initiative.

Just a year ago, the Security Council highlighted
the adverse effects of human trafficking. Trafficking
undermines the rule of law. It promotes other forms of
transnational organized crime, exacerbates conflicts,
fuels insecurity and accentuates vulnerability. In a word,
it attacks fundamental freedoms and human rights.

The intolerable images that reach us from the main
theatres of conflict, particularly Syria, but also from all
over the Middle East and Africa, speak volumes about
the dreadful suffering and vulnerability of children,
refugees, displaced families and people uprooted from
their homes - potential victims who often become
prey to organized criminal intermediaries. The moving
testimony this morning from Ms. Ameena Saeed Hasan
and Ms. Nadia Murad Basee Taha brought home to us
the daily tragedies of people such as the Yazidis in Iraq.
Armed conflicts, whether the product of civil war or
regional or local conflicts related to terrorism, can result
in extreme versions of the consequences of the kind of
coercion usually associated with human trafficking.

Even peacekeeping operations are not exempt from
human trafficking. Among others, my country - where
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) mandated by the Security Council has
been deployed for 12 years - has been targeted by the
Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially
women and children, who has strongly condemned the
rise in cases of violence, abuse and sexual exploitation
involving women and children directly related to the
deployment ofpeacekeeping forces in conflict zones. A
number of voices have already been raised, particularly
in organizations devoted to the defence ofhuman rights,
to highlight the inadequacy of stakeholders' responses,
including the United Nations, to victims of exploitation
in assistance programmes and conflict, post-conflict
and reconstruction situations. The intolerable violence
done to the victims of trafficking in persons in conflict
situations is especially tragic and demands broad,
urgent and effective action.

Even if we rightly consider that armed conflicts
exacerbate the factors that leave people vulnerable to
human trafficking, we must not lose sight of the fact
that its underlying causes are poverty, unemployment,
the absence of socioeconomic prospects, gender-
based violence, discrimination and marginalization,
as emphasized in the United Nations Global Plan of
Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons. The answer
to the problem therefore depends largely on the creation
of a secure environment and conditions conducive to
the socioeconomic development, growth and expansion
of individuals and communities. We must therefore
tackle the source of the problem.

That is why the Government of Haiti believes
that in combating human trafficking, in general, and
in conflict situations in particular, it is essential to
act simultaneously on two major tracks: accelerating
development and strengthening world security, two
pillars that are also mutually reinforcing. The Republic
of Haiti supports the United Nations in its indefatigable
search for solutions to long-standing regional conflicts
and to ongoing and potential local clashes that add to
the flow of uprooted and displaced persons, refugees
and migrants and, as a result, fuel human trafficking.
We are in favour of any measure that is likely to
contribute to international humanitarian intervention
in conflict zones by ensuring better care and protection
for the most vulnerable groups, those likely to be
prey to organized crime. We particularly support the
importance of taking a more realistic approach that
focuses on preventing trafficking and exploitation
where they are likely problems in areas of transit, crisis
or actual or potential conflict.

Similarly, Haiti intends to be fully involved in
global action against trafficking in persons, as well as
in international and regional mechanisms countering
terrorism and organized crime. Over the past few years,
in accordance with the Global Plan of Action and the
Work Plan to Combat Trafficking in Persons in the
Western Hemisphere of the Organization of American
States, Haiti has enacted a range of measures designed
to prevent, suppress and punish trafficking in persons,
particularly women and children. With the help of the
United Nations, including MINUSTAH, the Haitian
authorities have implemented various programmes
aimed at improving the protection of human rights,
including strengthening its judiciary and security
forces, which have borne fruit. At the same time, other
efforts, focused on reducing poverty, marginalization,
exclusion and discrimination have helped to mitigate
some of the factors that leave various groups vulnerable
to trafficking.

But we are aware that much remains to be done to
increase the effectiveness of the fight against human
trafficking and protect its victims. Happily, Haiti
has just reached an important stage in the process
of consolidating democracy and the rule of law with
its holding of legislative and presidential elections in
November and the forthcoming announcement of a
new President of the Republic. The renewed stability
of Haiti's institutions is opening new horizons for its
people. At this historic turning point, the Government
of Haiti hopes that the United Nations will continue to
be at its side in order to help it acquire the necessary
public infrastructure to pull itself out of the gutter and
focus resolutely on growth, sustainable development
and improving its living conditions.

Trafficking in persons is a serious threat to
humankind and to human dignity and development.
I hope that the dialogue begun today in the
Security Council will result in concrete, practical
recommendations, whose implementation will make
a major contribution to intensifying the fight against
every aspect of this scourge, one of the worst forms of
modern slavery.

