Mr. Kodama (Japan): First of all, I would like to
express my appreciation to you, Sir, for convening this
important open debate on conflict-related sexual
violence. I would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Wallstrom; the Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Ladsous; and the Libyan representative of the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security
for their insightful briefings.

Japan welcomes the Secretary-General's recent
report (S/2012/33), which contains broad information
on parties committing or responsible for acts of rape
and other forms of sexual violence, including in post-
conflict situations and other situations of concern. We
expect that the monitoring, analysis and reporting
arrangements will be made fully functional in all
situations experiencing conflict-related sexual
violence, and that they will contribute to providing
more specific and detailed information on conflict-
related sexual violence both in the country-specific
reports and in the thematic reports of the Secretary-
General in the future.

We also appreciate that, for the first time, the
report lists parties that are credibly suspected of
committing or being responsible for patterns of rape
and other forms of sexual violence in situations of
armed conflict, as per the Security Council agenda.
Japan strongly condemns the parties listed and calls on
them to make specific, time-bound commitments to
ceasing acts of sexual violence and bringing
perpetrators to justice. If they fail to do so, the Security
Council must respond with appropriate measures,
including targeted measures, to hold those parties
accountable.

In that regard, we commend the fact that the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo decided last December to add Ntabo Ntaberi
Cheka, a militia leader responsible for mass rape, to
the sanctions list. We are also encouraged to hear that
earlier this month the Guinean court filed charges
against Lieutenant Colonel Moussa Tiegboro Camara
for the mass rape committed in Conakry in 2009.

Japan reiterates its full support for the mandate of
Special Representative Wallstrom and commends her
vigorous advocacy efforts towards ending conflict-
related sexual violence. We welcome the fact that the
Team of Experts has become fully operational and that
it has so far visited four countries. Japan encourages
those countries to continue cooperating with the Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict, and hopes that they will use the Team's

expertise to strengthen the rule of law, improve their
justice systems and reform their security sectors to
combat sexual violence.

As the Special Representative has pointed out on
many occasions, sexual violence is never a by-product
of conflict, and it can be prevented. We should focus
more on the prevention side of the issue. Japan
welcomes the framework of early warning signs
specific to conflict-related sexual violence that has
been developed based on collective analysis by the
broader membership of the United Nations system. We
encourage all stakeholders to incorporate the
framework of early warning indicators into their
immediate responses to conflict. We also expect that
the Secretary-General's next report will include more
analysis on the root causes of conflict-related sexual
violence from the perspective of prevention.

Finally, I would like to underline the important
role played by United Nations Action against Sexual
Violence in Conflict, a network of 13 United Nations
entities chaired by Special Representative Wallstrom.
United Nations Action is the key to a comprehensive
and coordinated approach to preventing and responding
to conflict-related sexual violence. Japan welcomes
United Nations Action's strategic framework for 2011-
12, which specifies the leading entities for each action.
We expect that United Nations Action will further
strengthen its network and activities on the ground,
particularly by making tangible the positive changes
for the survivors of conflict-related sexual violence.

