Mr. Faaborg-Andersen (Denmark): Allow me to
begin my statement by thanking the presidency for
convening this meeting and thereby once again
directing the attention of the Security Council to the
indispensable and vital role of women in all efforts to
build and maintain peace and security. Furthermore, I
would like to associate my delegation with the earlier
statement by the Permanent Representative of Portugal
on behalf of the European Union.

The report of the Secretary-General on women
and peace and security (S/2007/567) presents an
overview of achievements, gaps and challenges, as
well as recommendations for further actions to
accelerate the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000). The report concludes that the
United Nations system has made significant advances
in implementing resolution 1325 (2000). United
Nations entities are focused on mainstreaming a gender
perspective and human rights in the areas of peace and
security. United Nations capacity has been enhanced,
advocacy strengthened and partnerships with women's
organizations built.

However, the report also confirms the existing
institutional and organizational gaps and challenges in
the implementation of the resolution. That is
regrettable, as implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) is as important as ever. Women and girls in
conflict and post-conflict situations, wherever they
may be, cannot afford delay.

The 2008-2009 Action Plan is conceptualized as a
results-based programming, monitoring and reporting
tool. We welcome the sharpened focus on the five
thematic areas of prevention, protection, participation,
relief and recovery and the normative sphere, and thus
the shift from project to programme implementation. A
broader framework linked to national peace and
reconstruction processes is provided. It commits the
United Nations system to enhance coherence and to
integrate a gender perspective.
Our commitment to results-based programming is
deeply felt. We all recognize the importance of
guidelines, workshops and gender-inclusive procedures
as important stepping stones and important tools for
the required capacity development. But at the end of
the day it is the results that count. It is the
responsibility of the United Nations system, as well as
of national Governments, to increase the visibility of
the outcome and impact of the initiatives undertaken.
Have women and girls on the ground then been able to
register improvements? A year ago we regretfully came
to the conclusion that we do not really know. This year
the answer is the same.

I sincerely hope that next year, we will be able to
say that we have achieved increased protection of the
rights of women and girls during and after conflict.
Our ambition should be to take decisive steps towards
fully incorporating a gender perspective in
peacekeeping operations, peace negotiations and
Security Council missions. We have to come much
closer to full and equal participation of women in
peace processes at all levels of negotiations and in
decision-making.

One of the major lessons learned from the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in 2005-
2007 is that without concerted efforts with
Governments and civil society at the country level, the
implementation of the resolution will remain elusive.
Effective links between the Action Plan and the
national implementation efforts are not yet well
established and need special attention.

Denmark was one of the very first countries to
formulate a national action plan for implementing
resolution 1325 (2000), and we are currently in the
process of updating and revising the plan. Through a
broad and comprehensive approach we are doing so
with the full and active involvement of Danish civil
society. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Ministry
of Defence and the National Police in cooperation with
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and other
partners are developing a plan with strengthened focus
on women's active participation in peacebuilding
processes and decision-making at all levels and with
strong focus on visibility at the country level.

In our efforts to contribute to the implementation
of the resolution, Denmark has found that resolution
1325 (2000) is still little known at the country and
grass-roots levels. We urge the Security Council to
work on visibility alongside the actual implementation
efforts.

Protection of girls and women in conflict
situations is still crucial, and involvement of women in
peacebuilding processes broadens our perspective on
security. We should all like to see more lasting peace
agreements. Inclusive processes will make this all the
more likely.

