Ms. Beham: I thank you, Madam President, for
allowing the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) to participate in this important
debate. I too would like to thank the briefers for their
interesting and thought-provoking statements this
morning.

The Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe deals with early warning, conflict prevention,
crisis management and post-conflict rehabilitation.
It has a uniquely broad concept of security that
encompasses a wide set of areas that we believe
influence the stability and security of a country. It
is not just traditional security stemming from the
security forces such as the police and the military that
we address, but the politico-military dimension and
aspects ranging from the economic and environmental
to the human dimension, which includes the rule of law,
legal reform and human rights.

In fact, as the OSCE Heads of State and Government
endorsed in 2010, it is the inherent dignity of the
individual that is at the core of comprehensive security.
Thus, gender equality as a concept for ensuring the
dignity of women and men is one of the cornerstones
of our comprehensive security approach. That approach
recognizes, as I already indicated, that security analysis
should go beyond the traditional understanding of
security and include aspects of economic rights,
environmental security and human rights, including
women's rights. In the OSCE, we therefore view gender
equality as a basic concept for attaining security. That
is where we believe the OSCE comprehensive security
approach is largely congruent with resolution 1325
(2000), on the women and peace and security agenda.

I am here today as a representative of the OSCE,
the world's largest regional security organization, with
57 participating States, stretching from Vancouver to
Vladivostok. As such, I would like to emphasize that
we wholeheartedly support and try to proactively
contribute to the ongoing process of strengthening the
role of regional organizations under Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations.

In an effort to strengthen the strategic partnership
between the OSCE and the United Nations, we have
developed, among many other things, together with the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) and in close coordination with the
Special Rapporteur on the human rights of internally
displaced persons - whom we heard speak today - a
handbook on a collaborative approach to addressing
displacement and the protection ofdisplaced populations
and affected communities throughout the conflict cycle,
from early warning and conflict prevention to crisis
management, conflict resolution and post-conflict
transition and rehabilitation. That so-called protection
checklist has been fully gender mainstreamed and
includes separate references to sexual and gender-
based violence against displaced persons, in particular
women and children. As its name says, the protection
checklist offers very concrete operational instructions
and recommendations for field staff on how to protect
displaced populations and their rights, and it draws
from the unfortunately rich experience of the OSCE
and of course UNHCR in dealing with displacement.

Among the many lessons that we have learned from
tackling displacement is that there has to be a special
focus on the different experiences women and girls have
in the various phases of the conflict cycle and that the
different protection needs of women and girls have to
be taken into account when responding to displacement
situations.

Last week, the OSCE launched a study on national
action plans for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) in the OSCE region, which we undertook in
cooperation with the Peace Research Institute Oslo. The
study looks into the 27 national action plans that exist
among the 57 OSCE participating States and identifies
good practices, lessons learned and challenges that still
hamper the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda.

Although different protection issues feature high
on the women and peace and security agenda, the
national action plans that we studied focus mostly on
the protection of women against sexual violence. Many
of the national action plans in fact refer to protection
against sexual violence as an important reason to create
women and peace and security policies.

However, such an approach, as important as it is,
reduces women to mere victims and does not take into
account the many other significant provisions of the
women and peace and security agenda that call for the
participation of women in decision-making, conflict
prevention and resolution and peace processes. It
does not take into account the political and economic
empowerment of women and the crucial role of women
in rebuilding societies. Our study on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) and its follow-up resolutions
indicates that States tend to disregard the empowerment
aspect when designing their national action plans,
in particular when it comes to the domestic security
sector or the inclusion of women in conflict prevention
measures such as early warning, confidence-building,
dialogue facilitation, preventive diplomacy or
mediation. On the basis of the study, we will work
with OSCE participating States to improve that aspect.
We have heard some of them today speak about their
national action plans.

In an effort to strengthen the empowerment and
conflict prevention elements of the women and peace
and security agenda, to strengthen the linkage of formal
mediation and dialogue facilitation with informal
peace initiatives, and to ensure that women, including
displaced women, become active stakeholders in
peace processes, we published our Guidance Note on
Enhancing Gender-Responsive Mediation in 2013 and
are now working on its implementation.

In our most recent effort, the OSCE has again
proven its commitment to the principles of the women
and peace and security agenda in setting up its Special
Monitoring Mission to Ukraine as a response to the
ongoing crisis there. The Mission includes a gender
adviser in its core team at headquarters to assist with
gender mainstreaming in conflict analysis, in addition to
reaching out to women's groups from all sides. We have
created a gender focal-point network in the teams that
are deployed throughout the country. We also strive to
increase gender balance among the monitors. Currently
approximately 27 per cent of them are women.

Among other things, the Mission is monitoring the
situation of the internally displaced persons (IDPs), of
whom the majority are women, in order to ascertain
what their needs are. We are also looking at ways to
include women and women's organizations in the
formal negotiations to put an end to the conflict. We
have invited Ukrainian women to come to Vienna in
November to meet with OSCE senior representatives to
discuss the situation ofwomen in the conflict, including
as IDPs, and their suggestions for resolving the crisis.
We feel that it is of utmost importance that women now
become part of the peace process in Ukraine and of any
dialogue to settle the conflict and rebuild trust.

As we are approaching the fifteenth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), we need even
more concerted efforts to further the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda. There
has been much progress since the adoption of that
ground-breaking document, but much also remains to
be done. The OSCE will be happy to feed the findings
of our study on national action plans into the global
review of resolution 1325 (2000) led by UN-Women for
the upcoming anniversary, and we will be pleased to
contribute to that review by offering the results of our
work on the gender aspects of violent extremism that
leads to terrorism. Over the years, we have gathered
unique expertise in that area, and we are proud to share
it in order to improve the global fight against terrorism.

Regional organizations, such as the OSCE, working
on the maintenance of international peace and security
have a recognized role in promoting all aspects of
resolution 1325 (2000) and its follow-up resolutions,
which include the protection and empowerment of
displaced women. But it is obvious that States have
the primary responsibility for ensuring that the
provisions of the women and peace and security agenda
are translated into action. I strongly believe that an
enhanced cooperation between the United Nations and
the OSCE will benefit our member States, as well as our
Organization's efforts to strengthen the commitment to
global peace and security.

