Mrs. Furman (Israel): In a few months, we will
mark 14 years since the Security Council adopted
resolution 1325 (2000) and four years since it adopted
resolution 1960 (2010). While those resolutions are
the subject of frequent discussions and debates within
these halls, sexual violence continues to be used as a
tool of subjugation and war. It is a crime of humanity
against humanity and a plague that must be eradicated.
If a nation refuses to prosecute domestic sexual abuse,
marital rape and honour killings in times of peace,
then there is little hope for justice in times of war and
conflict.

I look around the world today and see an epidemic
of sexual violence. The number of victims is so large
and overwhelming that we often lose sight of the fact
that we are speaking about individuals: the husband who
spoke out against an oppressive regime and is forced to
watch as his wife is raped by Government forces; the
brother who is sexually violated in a detention centre
to force a confession; the daughter who is subjected to
gang rape and then forced to deliver a child because
abortion services are illegal in her country; the sister
in a refugee camp who is forced by her family to marry
her rapist so as to protect the family's honour.

Our family of nations is failing millions of families
throughout the world. The problem is particularly
widespread in the Middle East and Africa. In Yemen,
child abduction and sexual abuse are on the rise. In
Mali, young girls are being kidnapped and gang-raped.
In Somalia, women are being forced into marriage
and sexual slavery. In Syria, Government forces and
pro-Government militias have used sexual violence,
including rape, in detention centres and prisons across
the country.

By failing to prevent sexual violence, we are failing
an entire generation. In conflict situations, parents
keep their girls out of school to keep them safe. Without
an education, those girls are unlikely to find work and
more likely to become young mothers. And so the cycle
of poverty is passed from one generation to another.

Israel is proud to be among the 140 States that have
signed the Declaration on Sexual Violence in Conflict
initiated by Special Representative Zainab Bangura and
the Foreign Secretary of the United Kingdon, William
Hague. While the number 140 may sound impressive,
we must note that 48 Member States have refused to
join the call to end sexual violence in conflict. There
is no place for sexual violence in a civilized world. We
must stand together to prevent those barbaric crimes,
and we must stand united with the victims of sexual
violence so they will know that they are not alone.

The alarming report that we are discussing today
(S/2014/181) finds that sexual violence is almost
universally underreported. The reasons are well
known - victims are denied legal recourse or face
stigmatization and reprisals. Few countries have
programmes like those in Sierra Leone, where women
can safely report an attack to a family support unit. The
Secretary-General's report offers clear guidance on the
important steps that the international community must
take. Israel strongly supports the recommendations in
that report.

I would like to take this opportunity to commend
the work of Special Representative Bangura and United
Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict. The
work they are doing, including training peacekeepers
and providing technical support at the country level,
is laying the foundation for improving the situation
on the ground. Israel also values the work of the Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence
in Conflict, which is partnering with governments to
strengthen national legal systems.

The international community has a collective
responsibility to the victims of sexual violence in
conflict. All of us - Governments, civil society and
United Nations agencies - must work together to pass
stronger laws, strengthen enforcement mechanisms and
introduce tougher penalties for offenders. We must act
as a family of nations but, more importantly, we must be
a family of compassion. Every victim of sexual violence
has a name, a family and the right to live in peace and
dignity. Every one of them deserves our support.

