Ms. Wensley (Australia): Thank you, Mr.
President, for organizing this open debate.

As violence continues in the Middle East - and
the United Nations and its Member States struggle to
service a growing number of peace operations around
the world - some may wonder about the value of the
Council holding a thematic debate such as this. What
does it really achieve?

Well, my delegation certainly thinks it
worthwhile and welcomes the opportunity to
participate.
We consider it valuable for several reasons. First,
it contributes to the ongoing process of opening up the
Council, not just to non-members, but to new ways of
thinking about what constitute threats to international
peace and security and, more important, how to deal
with them.

Secondly, it helps us to move forward our broad
agenda for the advancement of women, raising
awareness of gender factors, moving consideration of
so-called women's issues out of the enclaves of the
Third Committee and the Commission on the Status of
Women and into the central, vital organs of the United
Nations.

Thirdly, this thematic debate should assist the
United Nations in dealing with a range of other major
challenges that it is confronting. There are real and
practical linkages to be made here with implementation
of the Millennium Summit report and of the Brahimi
report on peace operations; with the effort to establish
the International Criminal Court; with the United
Nations development agenda; and with the efforts to
reform the United Nations and make it more effective.
This debate could inform our thinking on how to deal
with all these major areas of concern.

Of course, we are not starting from scratch. The
building blocks are there, going back to the
codification of the laws of armed conflict in the 1949
Geneva Conventions and their additional Protocols of
1977, in which the special needs of women in
situations of armed conflict, both as combatants and as
civilians, were recognized through clauses providing
for their special protection.

As so many of the preceding speakers in the
debate have recognized, the negotiation of the Statute
of the International Criminal Court represented a
quantum leap forward, recognizing specific crimes
against women as both war crimes and crimes against
humanity.

But I want to focus more today on women not so
much as victims of armed conflict, as sufferers, as
vulnerable people whose rights need protecting, but as
contributors and active participants in problem solving.
This is the important direction in which our thinking,
as an international community, is evolving and where
the Council can bring much needed momentum and
muscle.

Just as we came to recognize- not so long
ago- the critical link between gender and
development, and to recognize that achieving
sustainable development required the active
participation and involvement of both women and men
in the development process, so we are moving, I think
relatively rapidly, to recognition that the same, Vital
linkage exists in relation to effective conflict
resolution, peacemaking, peace-building and post-
conflict activities.

As we have heard, the Council itself gave a
valuable boost to this in March this year, in the
statement it issued on International Women's Day,
when it recognized publicly the link between peace and
equality between men and women. Today's debate
builds on that acknowledgement - that equal access and
full participation of women in power structures and
their full involvement in all efforts for the prevention
and resolution of conflicts are essential for the
maintenance and promotion of peace and security. The
Windhoek Declaration of May 2000 and the Namibia
Plan of Action on "Mainstreaming a Gender
Perspective in Multidimensional Peace Support
Operations", which were informed by the laborious
three-year study conducted by the Division for the
Advancement of Women and by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, were another very important
step. Australia certainly can support many of their key
conclusions and recommendations: that the gender
dimensions of peace processes have not been
adequately recognized; that women have so far been
denied their full role in national and international
peacekeeping and peacemaking operations; that the
mandates of United Nations preventive peace missions,
peacekeeping operations and peace-building should
include provisions for women's protection and address
gender issues; and that peace support operations should
include appropriately staffed and integrated gender
units and gender advisers.

The recent review on war-affected children by
Graga Machel is also very important. A new chapter
that she added to the review, on the role of women and
the peace process, recognized that building peace from
the grass-roots level is an important aspect of women's
participation- that even as they are trying to hold
their families together in war and post-war conditions,
women are creating and sustaining peace at the
community level. But this chapter went further, to
argue that the role of women must go beyond this
informal grass-roots level; that women have potential
to make a greater contribution to peacemaking and
peace-building; and that they should be given an active
role in the formal processes of conflict resolution and
post-conflict reconstruction. I am very happy that so
many speakers in the debate have picked up on this
new chapter.

So the gaps - and the possibilities - in relation
to women's participation have been identified; the
linkages are becoming more evident and acknowledged
by authoritative voices; the lessons learned are being
examined and placed before the United Nations system
and before Member States; and the calls to action - to
factor women into the peace and security equation in
new ways - are loud and becoming louder.

The question is: how do we, how should we, heed
them?

Australia believes there are a number of practical
steps that can be taken. We are applying these in our
own development assistance programmes, in our region
in particular. I do not want to take the time of the
Council to go into details here, but we would be happy
to share our experience in programmes in Bougainville,
Solomon Islands and East Timor, which have been
designed to support the role of women in peace
processes, all the while operating alongside other
programmes to empower women and to provide greater
protection for them in situations of armed conflict.

But beyond our national efforts, we want to see a
more deliberate and concentrated effort at the regional
and international levels to increase women's
participation in peacemaking and peace-building
operations. At the very top of the spectrum, renewed
attention should be given to the consideration of
qualified women for appointment as special
representatives and deputy special representatives of
the Secretary-General and as senior field staff for peace
support operations. This requires effort on the part of
the United Nations and Member States to identify
suitably skilled and qualified women, both those
already within the United Nations system and those
from outside, for leadership positions. Partly as a result
of the initiative taken by the women Permanent
Representatives described earlier today by Ambassador
Claudia Fritsche of Liechtenstein and partly because
the United Nations Secretariat wants to update its
database, my Government has just completed a lengthy
and intensive exercise to do just that: identify suitably
qualified women. We hope that other Governments will
do likewise.

In addition to identifying suitable women for
these specialist tasks, or I might call them trouble-
shooting tasks, we should all be working to place more
women generally in the international legal system - in
the Tribunals, in the courts, in the International Law
Commission, which I understand has never had a single
woman serve on it in its 50-year history. What sort of
message does that send about women's participation?
We should also be thinking now and preparing actively
to be ready to meet the requirement of the Statute of
the International Criminal Court (A/CONF.183/9).
Perhaps not everybody has read the fine print and is
aware that article 36, paragraph 8, imposes on States
parties an obligation to take into account, when
selecting Judges, the need for a "fair representation of
female and male judges" within the membership of the
Court. This requirement is also found in the associated
article concerning the staff of the Prosecutor's Office
and the Registry. The inclusion of these gender
provisions, specifying the need for qualified women to
be employed in all organs of the Court, grew in part
from the United Nations experience with the two
special Tribunals and the report produced by the
Secretary-General that accompanied the Statute of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia.

Finally, just on the areas where we might
particularly focus, there is a new and growing
emphasis, which we are all aware of, in the United
Nations peace and security operations on the role of
civilian police. Here too there is very real scope to
consider and to incorporate a gender perspective. It is
obvious that we need more sensitive and more
sophisticated resources for gathering evidence,
interviewing victims, counselling traumatized persons
and interacting with communities in post-conflict
situations. Recruitment and training should give
appropriate attention to involving women in all these
areas.

I said at the outset that I felt that this was an
important debate. It gives much-needed impetus to a
clear trend towards greater involvement of women in
managing conflict and in peace processes. Australia
hopes that it will result in a renewed determination on
the part of both the United Nations and its Member
States to take the practical steps necessary to make this
happen. Frankly, they are all within reach, but they
need a good push; not just from Angela King, not just
from Noeleen Heyzer and the United Nations
Development Fund for Women, whose thoughtful
statements today should have inspired everyone
present, but also from individual Member States and
from this Council in particular. I have not seen a draft
of the resolution that the Council may be planning to
adopt, but I hope it will be strong and, above all, that it
will be action-oriented and will pick up the practical
suggestions that have been put forward today by a
number of delegations, such as those listed by the
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Korea
and more recently by the Ambassador of New Zealand,
speaking on behalf of the South Pacific Forum
countries. The resolution should help us all not just to
talk the talk, but to walk the walk of women's
involvement.

Speaking of talk, there is a lot of talk in the
United Nations about "smart sanctions". The phrase
has taken hold. Let us be smart in other ways by
factoring women deliberately and decisively into the
peace, security and conflict-prevention and conflict-
resolution activities of the United Nations. By doing
things differently, we can do them better.

