Ms. Marinaki: It is an honour to deliver this
statement on behalf of the European Union and its
member States. I would like to express our appreciation
to France, during its presidency of the Security Council,
for organizing this open debate. The candidate countries
Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the country of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine,
the Republic of Moldova, Armenia and Georgia; align
themselves with this statement.

The European Union's approach is built on the
foundations of human rights, peace and security,
development and gender equality. In that context,
promoting the agenda on women and peace and security
is essential to realizing our shared global ambitions for
conflict prevention, sustaining peace and sustainable
development. We welcome the first report Secretary-
General Guterres on women and peace and security
(see S/2017/861), and we fully support his commitment
to place gender at the centre of the United Nations
prevention platform. A few weeks ago, the European
Union and the United Nations launched the historic
Spotlight Initiative. With a European Union funding
commitment of €500 million, the Spotlight Initiative
intends to intensify and better target the efforts of the
European Union and the United Nations to eliminate
violence worldwide against women and girls.

In June, the European Union took over from Sweden
the leadership of the Call to Action on Protection from
Gender-Based Violence in Emergencies, a global
initiative to make sure that all humanitarian actors work
together to prevent and mitigate gender-based violence.
Also in June, the European Union signed the Council
of Europe's Istanbul Convention. With that signature,
we committed to further strengthen the existing legal
framework and capacity to eliminate all forms of
discrimination and violence against women and girls,
including domestic violence.

The European Union further highlights the
resilience of our zero-tolerance policy regarding sexual
exploitation and abuse. We have revised the standards
of behaviour for our civilian and military missions and
operations, and we support the efforts of Secretary-
General Guterres in that regard. One thing that
connects the Spotlight Initiative, our leadership on the
Call to Action and our implementation of the agenda on
women and peace and security is our firm belief that
preventing sexual and gender-based violence is critical
to conflict prevention. Conflict prevention is a keystone
of our Global Strategy for Foreign and Security Policy
and of our new European Consensus on Development.

The full and effective implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda remains a priority for
the European Union. Eighteen of our member States
have already adopted a national action plan on women
and peace and security, further complemented by an
implementation framework at a European Union-wide
level. In line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the European Union's Gender Action
Plan 2016-2020, we are devoting €6.5 billion every
year to external projects on development that address
gender equality and women's empowerment as either
a principal or a significant objective, with the aim of
carrying out more than 85 per cent of those projects in
the next year.

TheEuropeanUnionstrategyforresilience-building,
adopted last June, directs us to consider the gender
perspective in all our activities to support partner
countries in becoming more resilient to today's global
challenges. We remain committed to substantially
increasing women's participation in all aspects ofpeace
and security, including women's political participation
and leadership and their important role in the fight
against radicalization and violent extremism.

The European Union and its member States have
progressed towards better gender balance in our
diplomatic services and our field missions, including
in leadership positions. In our external action, we
have continued to work for women's full and active
participation in conflict prevention, resolution and
peacebuilding. In Afghanistan, we have helped female
members ofthe High Peace Council to play an active and
critical role in the peace agreement implementation. We
have also engaged in working alongside and supporting
the Syrian Women's Advisory Board of United Nations
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura, while in Uganda we
have closely engaged with the Women Situation Room,
a mechanism fully operated by and for women to
contain election-related violence and enable women's
political participation.

Turning to mediation, the European Union
continues its active involvement in mediation,
facilitation and dialogue processes. Our mediation
support team has been engaged in over 40 dialogues
and mediation efforts worldwide. More recently, we
have supported the training of Libyan women peace
activists in negotiation and mediation skills.

We appreciate the important work done in the
framework of the African Network of Women in
Conflict Prevention and Peace Mediation and on
the initiative on mediation in the Mediterranean.
We have actively engaged with the Nordic Women
Peace Mediators' Network and we are looking
forward to closely interacting with the newly created
Mediterranean Women Mediators' Network, which
was launched yesterday in Rome. The European Union
remains ready to contribute to better synergies and
collaboration between all those networks. We fully
support the United Nations network of women and
peace and security focal points. We will also continue
to promote the crucial role of women mediators at the
grassroots level.

Let me recall the strong European Union support
to the ambitious United Nations reform agenda of the
Secretary-General Guterres. Promoting gender parity
in the Organization, as part of the reform effort,
must go hand in hand with gender analysis and the
integration ofa gender perspective across all activities
of the United Nations.

The full participation of women and the full
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda should be a guiding principle for reforming the
peace and security pillar. Achieving gender equality
and ensuring the recruitment, promotion and retention
of women, in particular at senior levels and in United
Nations operations, will be critical. That requires
sustainable budgetary and human resources dedicated to
women and peace and security, including the systematic
recruitment and appropriate integration of gender
advisers as a standard part of the senior management of
all United Nations operations and teams.

Just as women and peace and security represent a
global agenda, the European Union has pursued global
partnerships and collaborations in that regard. Our
engagement and close cooperation with civil society
organizations will remain at the core of our efforts.
We reaffirm our determination to further develop our
strategic partnership with the United Nations and to
further strengthen our close cooperation with partner
countries and multilateral partners. We recently stepped
up our engagement in the initiative for the acceleration
of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) at the
regional level.

In conclusion, the United Nations can continue to
rely on the European Union as its staunchest supporter in
promoting gender equality and women's empowerment

around the world and in pioneering together our efforts
on the women and peace and security agenda.

