Mr. Molefe (South Africa): We would like to
congratulate you, Sir, and the Bolivian delegation
on the professional manner in which you have been
conducting the work of the Council for this month.

Focusing on the political and economic inclusion
of women during peace initiatives is most appropriate.
Research conducted by UN-Women has shown that
when women are included and participate in peace
processes, there is a significant increase in the
possibility of peace agreements leading to sustained
peace. It is generally understood that their participation
improves the chances of dispute resolution and provides
a safe space for women and girls to report allegations of
sexual exploitation and abuse.

The Secretary-General's reform agenda, with its
focus on conflict prevention as the core pillar, can
be enhanced by focusing attention on the women and
peace and security agenda. The focus on women's
contribution to conflict prevention should not detract
from our commitment to including women in all areas
of peace processes. In that regard, my delegation
welcomes the recent adoption of the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations. The Declaration reiterates commitments
made by Member States to implementing the women
and peace and security agenda and its priorities. That
will eliminate the disproportionate burden placed upon
women in times of conf lictbecause of sexual exploitation
and abuse, marginalization, forced displacement, loss
of livelihood and decreased access to education, health
care services and economic opportunities.
Having women in leadership positions illustrates
not only that governance and policymaking should be
inclusive of women's voices but that women should also
be key decision-makers. It further plays a role in gender
mainstreaming through the strengthening of democratic
processes to ensure the equality of women and that such
processes are sensitive to women's needs and entrench
women's perspectives and leadership roles.

The historic Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs), adopted in 2015, whose essential purpose is
to eradicate poverty and underdevelopment, highlight
the need for gender equality and the empowerment
of all women and girls. In addition to SDG 5, which
is dedicated to that objective, the SDGs recognize
the specific challenges that women and girls face
in realizing the other development goals. All of us
here must ensure that the objectives of the SDGs are
reflected in our national development plans and that we
all do what we can to ensure that there are adequate
means for achieving the Goals by 2030.

We wish to use this opportunity to highlight
some of the African Union (AU) instruments that
deal specifically with issues pertaining to women. Of
particular importance is the Protocol to the African
Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights on the Rights
of Women in Africa, better known as the Maputo
Protocol. The Maputo Protocol seeks to ensure and
guarantee women's human rights as formulated in the
Charter of the AU, including sexual and reproductive
health and rights. In recognizing Member States' duties
in relation to the Security Council's resolutions dealing
with women, peace and security, the Maputo Protocol
calls on all States parties to take appropriate measures
to increase the participation of women in peacebuilding
processes and for States to take measures to protect
women in situations of armed conflict. That includes
protecting women from sexual violence and other
harmful practices, such as child marriage and female
genital mutilation.

South Africa remains committed to ending and
condemning the widespread and systemic sexual
violence perpetrated against women and girls. That
instrument ofwar is a flagrant violation ofinternational
humanitarian law and international human rights. We
call on all parties to fully support the survivors of these
brutal acts and strongly condemn the use of sexual
violence in all its forms, particularly as a tactic of war
and terrorism and as an instrument of torture. Ending
this evil scourge, addressing the resulting trauma and
holding accountable those responsible for committing
these heinous acts is integral to the reconciliation and
peacebuilding process. Therefore, my delegation calls
on all parties in conflict zones to create and implement
commitments to combatting sexual violence, in
accordance with resolution 2106 (2013) on sexual
violence in conflict.

The Executive Director of UN-Women,
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, recently called for
renewed commitments and investments to meet the
Beijing Platform for Action's now 20-year-old target of
gender balance. She said,

"If today's leaders front-load gender equality, if
they start now to make good on those 20-year-old
promises, we can look forward to gender equality
by 2030 at the latest".

We must therefore stress that, ultimately, strengthening
democracy and resilience in peaceful and inclusive
societies requires women's empowerment, political
participation and leadership.

