Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
welcome the initiative of the United States delegation
in convening this public debate on women and peace
and security.

I thank the Under-Secretary-General for his
detailed briefing, and welcome his personal
involvement in this issue. I listened with great interest
to the statement of Ms. Amy Smythe about the
application on the ground in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo of the provisions of resolution 1325
(2000).

France fully aligns itself with the statement to be
made later by the representative of Italy - which holds
the presidency of the European Union - on behalf of
the Union.

I begin by welcoming the progress made during
the past year. Last year we recommended the creation
of the post of adviser on gender issues within the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations. I am pleased
to note that that proposal was adopted. I encourage the
Department to develop its local network of advisers on
gender issues. It is also essential that advisers with the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone, the United
Nations Mission in Liberia and shortly, I hope, the
United Nations Mission in Cote d'Ivoire, coordinate
their activities so as to ensure a better understanding of
the regional dimension of the problem. Reports to the
Council should include as often as possible information
on the situation of women and children. I invite the
Department and the Office of Ms. Angela King - to
whom I pay tribute - to cooperate closely on the
common objectives set out in resolution 1325 (2000).

The challenges regarding the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) are not to the Secretary-General
and the Security Council alone. They must be
addressed by the entire United Nations system, in a
spirit of cooperation and with imagination. They must
be addressed on a daily basis, not just once a year
during our commemorative debate. It is all well and
good to commemorate the anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000), but its provisions must be implemented in
every new mandate and United Nations operation. We
must continually try to increase the role and
contribution of women on the ground in United Nations
operations, particularly as military observers, members
of civilian police forces, human rights specialists and
members of humanitarian operations.

Much remains to be done. In his report
(A/58/323) on the implementation of the Millennium
Declaration, the Secretary-General stated clearly that
the differential impact of conflict on women called for
more effective responses from the international
community. Here I highlight three key words:
prevention, justice and participation.

First, with regard to prevention, I think of all the
young women and girls who suffer as a result of
conflict. Even if they do not lose their lives, their
childhood is stolen from them. How does such a person
get her life together again? What can she do in order to
re-weave the fabric of collective life? We will soon be
dealing with the question of child soldiers. France will
propose a draft resolution. I will personally make sure
that our debates address very precisely the specific
question of the reintegration of girl soldiers.

Secondly, with regard to justice, women must not
only be the beneficiaries of, but must take an active
part in, the fight against impunity.

In this regard, I would like to call attention to the
advances that have been made in connection with the
establishment of the International Criminal Court. The
Rome Statute, through its dual aspects of prevention
and punishment, is a key element in the protection of
women. It is innovative in that it recognizes for the
first time that certain acts of sexual violence are among
the most odious of crimes punishable under
international law. But the International Criminal Court
sets an example in another respect as well, since it is
one of the most feminized institutions among all the
international courts. This precedent deserves to be
noted, and I encourage each of us to draw inspiration
from it.

Lastly, and most importantly, let me touch on the
issue of participation. We all are convinced that the
stabilization and reconstruction of societies
undermined by conflict cannot be lastingly successful
without the active participation of women in public
life. Indeed, that is one of the central themes of the
Beijing Platform for Action. Accordingly, Security
Council missions in the field should always include
contacts with women's associations.

During our most recent mission to Central Africa,
I was struck - as was Ambassador Tafrov, as he has
just noted - by the dynamism of the women we met.
We all were impressed by the commitment shown by
Ms. Petronille Vaweka, President of the Ituri interim
assembly. Such examples deserve to be better known
and appreciated, for they can change the way people
think and inspire them. I wish therefore to pay tribute
to all those women who are not resigned to the status
quo and who look to the future. Let me recall here the
example of Ms. Lindh, whose political commitment
cost her her life.

The challenges faced in the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) are a matter of
collective responsibility - on the part of international
organizations, States and civil society. In that respect, I
would be interested in knowing Ms. Smythe's
assessment of the relations between the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) and the various Congolese
administrations concerned with gender issues, in
particular the Ministry of Social Affairs and the Family
and the Ministry of Human Rights.

