Ms. Rovirosa (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico welcomes the convening of this important open
debate on women and peace and security because it
gives us the opportunity to present our views on the
matter.

Gender equality, progress towards the
empowerment of women and the promotion of
international peace and security are essential elements
of my country's foreign policy. Mexico recognizes that
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) constitutes a
milestone in gender mainstreaming in connection with
peace and security.

Nonetheless, we are concerned by the limited
progress that has been made in this area. We continue
to witness recurring cases of widespread and
systematic sexual violence in situations of armed
conflict. The international community cannot remain
inactive given this alarming situation. Such abominable
acts of sexual violence constitute war crimes and
crimes against humanity when they are committed as
part of a generalized and systematic campaign against a
civilian population, as stated by the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court.

For that reason, Mexico joins with the Council in
demanding the immediate and complete cessation of all
acts of sexual violence. We cannot tolerate such
abuses, whereby women and children continue to be
the principal victims of deliberate attacks by armed
groups and armies.

However, if that appeal is to be morally effective,
it is necessary to put an end to incidents of sexual
exploitation and abuse committed by United Nations
personnel, in particular peacekeepers. Mexico believes
that, although the United Nations has made progress in
developing standards of conduct for peacekeeping
personnel and in the strategy to protect and support
victims of exploitation and sexual abuse committed by
United Nations personnel, greater efforts must be made
to ensure that we have an effective international
response mechanism that can undertake timely action
to deal with cases of gender violence in conflict and
post-conflict situations. Mexico reiterates that we must
continue to develop and implement mandatory training
programmes on gender issues for United Nations
personnel involved in peacekeeping operations and in
the provision of humanitarian assistance.

08-3908]
Mexico reiterates its unequivocal rejection of the
use of sexual violence as a strategy of war and joins
the Council's call on all States to bring the perpetrators
of such acts to justice. Likewise, we agree that
effective measures must be taken to prevent and
respond to acts of widespread or systematic sexual
violence in order to contribute to international peace
and security.

We hope that the report that has been requested of
the Secretary-General through the draft resolution
before the Council will clearly identify practical
proposals regarding strategies to minimize the
vulnerability of women and girls to this type of
violence. It is essential that our political will to
eliminate sexual violence in situations of armed
conflict be reflected in concrete outcomes. We cannot
allow more time to pass. We have a moral obligation to
act now, in a decisive manner.

Mexico is a staunch promoter of international
humanitarian law. My country believes that the use of
sexual violence, because of its very serious
humanitarian consequences, together with the use of
weapons that are excessively injurious or have
indiscriminate effects, such as antipersonnel mines and
cluster munitions, should be excluded entirely from all
military doctrines.

