Mr. Zehnder (Switzerland) (spoke in French): We
thank the Russian Federation for having convened this
debate, and the Secretary-General and the two briefers
for their unflagging commitment to this issue.

When it comes to peacebuilding, the international
community's record this past year is uninspiring. Not
since 1945 have there been so many displaced persons,
many of whom are women and young girls. Armed
conflicts in Syria, Yemen and Iraq are ongoing, causing
immense suffering to their civilian populations. In
these challenging times, it is essential to promote
partnerships with civil society, and in particular with
women's networks. Colombia is a perfect example of
the role that civil society women's networks can play
in peace and peacebuilding efforts. In that regard,
I thank the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace
and Security and all affiliated organizations for their
tireless efforts to promote the women and peace and
security agenda here in New York.

Switzerland's national action plan is a Government
instrument that contemplates a participative mechanism
designed specifically for civil society. This year will
see the third review of that plan. In that regard, civil
society organizations have drafted an alternative
implementation report. Switzerland will consider its
conclusions when it updates the national action plan
in 2017. Reports on the implementation of the national
action plan are regularly submitted for parliamentary
oversight. As for the fulfilment of the commitments
undertaken last year, we would like to highlight three
points.

First of all, in order to support political dialogue
in Libya and the process of drafting the constitution,
Switzerland has facilitated women's discussion groups.
Thirty-eight women's groups of different backgrounds
negotiated and drew up a peace programme, which
they launched at a high-level meeting in Geneva in
November 2015.

Secondly, non-State armed groups must be
considered in the implementation of the agenda
on women and peace and security. Switzerland
continues its efforts to facilitate direct dialogue with
those groups, which must recognize the principles
of international humanitarian law and commit to
respecting existing rules, including those regarding
sexual and gender-based violence. In that connection,
Switzerland supports the Women's Initiative for Gender
Justice, a non-governmental organization that aims to
rehabilitate and reintegrate former child soldiers of
the Lord's Resistance Army in Uganda and victims
of sexual violence in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo by providing psychosocial support and access
to medical assistance. The project also contributes
to holding perpetrators of sexual and gender-based
violence accountable under national and international
law. For example, the documentation of sexual and
gender-based violence that was made possible through
this project was used against two Congolese rebel
leaders at the International Criminal Court.

Thirdly, sexual and gender-based violence is a
major, pressing issue. Accordingly, Switzerland will
make sexual and gender-based violence a priority in its
humanitarian commitments. That will include fostering
access for victims to various services, mainstreaming
the topic in the various areas of humanitarian aid and
supporting partner humanitarian organizations in their
work in the area of sexual and gender-based violence.

Switzerland continues to be one of the major donors
to UN-Women and has increased its contribution to
CHF48 million Swiss for the period from 2015 to 2017.
Earlier this month, we also inaugurated the new UN-
Women Liaison Office at Geneva. As the Secretary-
General stated, Member States continue to shoulder the
primary responsibility for implementing the agenda for
women and peace and security. Switzerland is ready
to embrace that role and renews its commitment to the
women and peace and security agenda.

