Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): I congratulate you, Sir, on
organizing this open debate of the Security Council. I
wish to thank the Special Representative of the

Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and
the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations for their briefings. I would like express
great appreciation for the work of the Office of the
Special Representative, as well as that of the United
Nations Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and
Sexual Violence in Conflict.

While Italy aligns itself with the statement that
has been delivered by the observer of the European
Union, we wish to make some additional remarks in
our national capacity.

We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2012/33). The
report provides us with a comprehensive picture of
what clearly remains a daunting challenge for the
international community. It shows that the past year
has seen several new and ongoing armed conflicts in
which sexual violence has been widespread and, in
some instances, used by armed forces and armed
groups in order to punish, humiliate and destroy
civilian populations. The report also reveals worrisome
emerging trends, such us the use of sexual violence in
the context of political struggle, and in this context we
hope that the Security Council will be able to agree on
a presidential statement today.

Against this background, I would like to focus on
some key messages. The first concerns the fight against
impunity. As we have stated on previous occasions
before this body, we cannot expect to eradicate sexual
violence if we do not ensure that those who are
responsible are systematically brought to justice. The
message must be clear - sexual violence is not cost-
free. We welcome therefore the inclusion in the report
of a list of parties credibly suspected of committing or
being responsible for patterns of rape and other forms
of sexual violence. The list must become a basis for a
more active engagement of the Council towards
perpetrators of conflict-related sexual violence,
including taking measures through the relevant
sanctions committees, referring them to the
International Criminal Court and mandating
international commissions of inquiry.

Secondly, as committed as we are to targeting the
perpetrators of sexual violence, we must give full
priority to the health, safety and dignity of survivors.
National and international programmes for post-
conflict reconstruction must ensure that their needs are
met and voices heard. Adequate and timely resources
are required to sustain processes that are meant to be
lengthy and complex.

Thirdly, prevention is always key. The Secretary-
General's report also serves this purpose, as it provides
the information needed not only to react, but first and
foremost to prevent. We look forward to the
progressive strengthening of the monitoring, analysis
and reporting arrangements mandated by resolution
1960 (2010). We also encourage the adoption of
national and regional early warning systems that could
draw upon the United Nations Matrix of Early-Warning
Indicators of Conflict-Related Sexual Violence.

Fourthly, there is a need to systematically include
the issue of conflict-related sexual violence in the work
of the Council, especially when authorizing and
renewing the mandates of peacekeeping and special
political missions. The progressive deployment of
women's protection advisers to United Nations
missions is also critical.

Finally, it is necessary to include women and
women's rights in peace talks. Women are formidable
negotiators, mediators and peacebuilders. Their
participation in preventive diplomacy is insurance
against any attempt to minimize or neglect the
consequences of the use of sexual violence.

Italy contributed to the drafting of resolution
1820 (2008), which first recognized the link between
the systematic use of sexual violence and the
maintenance of peace and security. We continue to
keep this commitment high in our human rights
policies. In December 2010, we adopted a three-year
action plan to implement resolution 1325 (2000) on
women and peace and security, which places the
protection of women and girls against any form of
violence among its main priorities and objectives.

Let me also recall that next week the United
Nations Commission on the Status of Women will open
its annual session. This will be an opportunity for all
delegations to confirm their commitment to promoting
and protecting the rights of women and girls in all
circumstances, including in conflict-related situations.
As a member of the Commission, Italy will not miss
this opportunity.

I wish to conclude by reminding all of us of the
issue at stake. The report in front of us is not just about
information and numbers. It is actually about
individuals, their often tragic stories and their hopes

for a better future. Let us not forget that they count
on us.

