Ms. Juul (Norway): Security Council resolution
1325 (2000) is more than the text of a good decision. It
is a process: a process of implementation, but also a
process of awareness and understanding. It is necessary
at the decision-making level, as well as at the
implementation level, to constantly strive for an
improved understanding of the situation and the role of
women in conflict.

The process leading to resolution 1325 (2000)
and the seven years that have passed since its adoption
has brought about an increased understanding of the
role, needs and vulnerability of women and girls. It has
provided us with a useful platform to redouble efforts
to ensure that women are included in peace processes,
so that their needs can be addressed and the peace
processes thus effectively sustained.

We must nevertheless conclude that we are still
far from where we should be. Women are still too often
neglected in peace negotiations; they are not allowed to
participate on equal terms with men. Women's
perspectives are still disregarded and their concerns
and needs overlooked. Women and girls are still targets
and victims of injustice, assault and sexual violence.
And impunity for atrocities committed against women
remains largely unresolved. Most shameful of all to us
here in the United Nations, the Secretary-General's
declared zero-tolerance policy is still not getting
through to civilians and soldiers, and allegations of
sexual misconduct by United Nations peacekeepers
continue.

After seven years and commendable efforts by
Member States, the United Nations and the Security

Council, we should have been doing better. We must do
better. As a step in that direction, Norway encourages
the Council to take the following specific decisions:
first, to develop a monitoring mechanism to improve
its contribution to preventing and redressing violence
against women in armed conflict, as proposed by the
Secretary-General; secondly, to develop a transparent
mechanism to ensure that gender issues are specifically
addressed and reported on in all United Nations peace
operations; and thirdly, to mandate a reporting
mechanism on sexual violence within peacekeeping
missions.

The challenge does not stop there. We need to
expand efforts beyond traditional institutional
boundaries. We must realize the multidimensional
aspects of consolidating peace, which will be elusive if
half of the population's concerns are ignored. We
cannot allow stovepiping to hinder actual progress on
the ground.

Last month, here at the United Nations, the
Foreign Ministers of Brazil, France, Indonesia,
Norway, Senegal, South Africa and Thailand invited
interested ministers and delegations to consider areas
where foreign policy more or less directly affects
global health. Conflict prevention, conflict resolution
and post-conflict reconstruction and peacebuilding are
such areas. It is well understood that improved health
is an important peace dividend. In our view, it is less
well understood why and how that is, or how
insufficient attention to health issues may contribute to
the collapse of peace processes.

In his summing up, the Foreign Minister of
Norway referred to that - inter alia, by pointing to
conflict as an area where sufficient attention has not
been paid to focusing on health, and where specific
focus could drive change, such as through the
development and use of gender-specific health
indicators to better assess peace and reconstruction
processes; establishing road maps for health recovery
as a peacemaking tool; and gaining empirical and
gender-specific knowledge of the effect of health
interventions at different stages of conflicts.

Given that work's focus on the health impact of
conflict on women and girls, I would like to take this
opportunity to insist that we still need to improve our
understanding of that impact, and that we need to act
on it. One neglected area in that regard is health
recovery after conflict. The scars - which are often
mental as well as physical - take considerable time to
heal. Health services that can contribute to normalcy
and hope in the lives of women and girls take
considerable time to establish and to work. Conversely,
ignoring the health impacts of conflict can hamper
stabilization and the consolidation of peace.

We look forward to continue work with our
partners to ensure that the relationship between conflict
and health issues is better understood and taken into
account in the areas of peacebuilding and conflict
resolution. We invite members of the Security Council
to join us in that effort.

