Mr. Bui The Giang (Viet Nam): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate on the
first report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/362) on
the implementation of resolution 1820 (2008). I am
also thankful to the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report and his highly focused briefing
today.

More than a year ago, following the Security
Council's open debate on widespread and systematic
rape and other forms of sexual violence against women
and girls in armed conflict, this Council adopted
resolution 1820 (2008), leading to visibly improved
awareness of sexual violence across the United Nations
system, the international community and many conflict
areas. Since then, sexual violence has been dealt with
in many reports of the Secretary-General and outcome
documents of the Security Council, as well as many
other United Nations forums.

The adoption of resolution 1882 (2009) on
children and armed conflict early this week, with
criteria expanded to include in the annex lists of the
Seeretary-General's reports parties that engage in
patterns of killing, maiming and sexual violence
against children, once again reaffirmed the Council's
resolve to halt those violations.

Given the increasing sexual abuse and violence in
many parts of the world, which we categorically
condemn, Viet Nam supports efforts to fully translate
into practice the 2007 United Nations Action against
Sexual Violence in Conflict initiative and other
measures aimed at preventing and responding to sexual
violence in armed conflict in the areas of humanitarian
assistance, awareness-raising, advocacy, capacity-
building and training, legal, judicial and institutional
reforms, and the provision of services to victims, and
so on. We support the ongoing efforts of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the United
Nations Development Fund for Women and other
agencies to integrate sexual violence into protection of
civilians mandates and to develop important materials,
such as gender guidelines for military personnel in
peacekeeping operations and the Analytical Inventory
of Responses by Peacekeeping Personnel to War-
Related Violence against Women.

Much remains to be done in the struggle against
sexual violence in armed conflict. Greater efforts
should be made to promote the empowerment of
women and to improve women's participation in the
early stages of peace processes, particularly in conflict
resolution and peacebuilding. Along that line, we
support a more proactive engagement of the United
Nations in increasing women's participation in peace
negotiations, as well as in political and peacekeeping
missions, as an effective way to better support women
and girl victims on the ground, while helping to foster
women's empowerment in societies emerging from
conflict.
Measures to protect women and girls from sexual
violence in conflict situations should be designed and
implemented as part of a broader strategic framework
that covers social, economic and development issues.
As such, one of the best ways to prevent and respond
to sexual violence is to further mainstream gender in

early recovery planning and financing at the national
level. The United Nations, particularly the
Peacebuilding Commission, the United Nations
Development Programme and donors, should further
assist national Governments in building gender-related
capacity and developing gender-sensitive programmes
to help survivors of sexual violence with a wide range
of services - from access to justice, relief from stigma
and ostracism, and provision of mental and
psychological health care to support for greater
physical, economic and social security through
employment and income generation, and involvement
in decision-making.

Underlining the high importance of international
assistance and cooperation, we remain of the view that
States bear the primary responsibility to protect their
populations from all types of violations, including
sexual violence. At the same time, my delegation
believes that, in order to ensure the best possible cost-
effective performance of the whole system, it is
imperative to promote more efficient use and better
coordination of existing mechanisms and structures,
while giving initiatives on creating new ones serious
and comprehensive consideration.

Finally, members may rest assured of Viet Nam's
resolute determination to work constructively, together
with all international partners, towards the strict
implementation of all relevant international laws and
Security Council resolutions, most directly resolution
1820 (2008), to put an end to sexual violence and to
ensure a worthy place for women and girls in the life of
humanity.

