Mrs. Vallaud-Belkacem (France) (spoke in French): I would first like to thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this debate on sexual violence, which, as
we understand it, is too often the tragic fate of women
in conflict situations. I would also like to express our
deep appreciation for the briefings by the Secretary-
General, by Ms. Bangura, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Sexual Violence in Conflict,
and by Ms. Jolie and Ms. Anywar.

We live in a world today where rape is used
as a weapon of physical, psychological and social
destruction, a world where in some places where
women's bodies have become a real battleground. Such
sexual violence committed in conflict should in no way
be forgotten or go unpunished, and that is what we have
come here to say today. The international community, of
course, has been dealing with this question for some 10
years now, through the Council's adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) and succeeding resolutions, and that has
led to commendable progress - condemning such
violence unanimously, calling for the intensification
of efforts aimed at better protecting women and, of
course, at combating impunity, but also by establishing
an important principle that I would like to recall here,
that of women's equal participation in the reconciliation
and reconstruction process. We must not forget that the
best way of protecting those women is by making them
stakeholders, rather than only subjects.

Significant progress has been made since then,
above all political progress, due in particular to the
efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict. I would like
once again to commend her commitment, as it has
strengthened international awareness on the subject.
I also thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for
the zero-tolerance policy that has been set forth here
against all forms of exploitation or sexual abuse
attributed to United Nations staff, in particular forces
deployed on the ground. That policy must continue
with the same determination and firmness, because the
United Nations must be nothing more than exemplary
in that context.

There has also been judicial progress. The ad
hoc tribunals established by the Council and the
International Criminal Court (ICC) have gradually
included sexual violence as crimes under their
jurisdiction. The recognition of sexual violence, in
particular rape, as a war crime, crime against humanity
or possibly genocide represents a major step forward; it
is an effective tool in the fight against impunity and a
deterrent, which is exactly what we are seeking.

There has also been legislative progress, with the
recent adoption of the Arms Trade Treaty as the first
legally binding treaty to regulate arms transfers. It
recognizes the link between the international arms trade
and gender-based violence, which France has strongly
supported. We very much hope that such analysis will
continue to prevail in our future discussions.

Nevertheless, we are far from done with our work.
The scale and intractable nature of sexual violence in
current conflicts are intolerable. In the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, despite the mobilization of
the international community, sexual violence remains
ubiquitous. Committed by all parties, it is carried out
by the Mouvement du 23 mars and by the Forces arme'es
de la Republique democratique du Congo (FARDC).
The Minova tragedy in South Kivu, where more than
130 women were raped in November 2012 by soldiers
of the FARDC who were tasked with their protection,
reminds us of that brutal reality. France will pursue its
efforts to ensure that the perpetrators of those crimes
and their commanders are prosecuted and punished.

I am extremely concerned by the humanitarian
tragedy affecting Syrian women. Women have played
a leading role in peaceful demonstrations; they have
mobilized on the ground to rebuild a new Syria and
to play an important role within the Syrian National
Coalition. They represent a key element of the solution
that we must urgently seek for the country.

It is known that the regime and its militias have
used sexual violence to terrorize the population since
the crisis began. Today, given the militarization and
radicalization of the conflict, Syrian women are being
silenced, whether in Syria itself, where they continue to
be targeted by the Syrian regime, or in refugee camps,
where forced marriages continue and their vulnerability
is magnified.

We should like to see United Nations reports,
particularly that of the independent international
commission of inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic,
as well as the information conveyed by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, which
contains tangible information on the crimes I have
just described, to militate for a swift referral to the
International Criminal Court. The perpetrators of those
crimes must understand that they will be punished in
a manner commensurate with their savagery. France
also supports the principle of women's participation in
terms of the Geneva 11 discussions on Syria.

In Mali, the President of the Republic has
underscored that the French intervention was in fact also
based on the need to defend the rights of female victims
of violence. The deployment of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, the political process currently under way and the
elections to come will, we hope, assist in re-establishing
peace and stability in the country. However, the sexual
violence committed by armed groups in the north in
2012 has traumatized Malian society. Justice must be
pursued for all victims of sexual violence. They must
be provided with psychological and legal assistance.
The Malian authorities, with the support of the United
Nations and the ICC, cannot avoid that issue.
In my opinion, and in conclusion, four actions
must be continued in the fight against sexual violence.
These four actions seek four goals, the so-called "four
Ps" rule: preventing violence, protecting victims,
prosecuting perpetrators, and women's participation in
the peace and reconstruction process.

Those four actions consist of, first, strengthening
protection on the ground. Women's protection advisers
play a key role. France wishes to see their deployment
in peacekeeping and political missions extended beyond
the missions in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and in Mali, and, above all, that they be provided with
appropriate resources to carry out their work.

Secondly, there is a need to ensure victims' access
to services, particularly sexual and reproductive
health services. Young girls, adolescents and women
victims of sexual violence can suffer, above and
beyond psychological trauma, serious physical harm
from violence. Adolescents and women are exposed to
early, unwanted pregnancies. We must therefore fully
consider all aspects of that reality.

Why do the sexual and reproductive rights of the
victims of sexual violence continue to be contested?
Restricting access to sexual and reproductive health
care is an infringement of a woman's right to control her
own body. Substantial progress was made in the recent
session of the Commission on the Status of Women, in
forging consensus to affirm those rights at the global
level. We must consolidate those achievements and
ensure that victims of sexual Violence have access to
effective sexual and reproductive health care.

Thirdly, we must take to the fight against impunity
with earnest; stigma and shame must switch sides so
that the victims are no longer those who suffer the
consequences of the crimes. That task falls above
all to Governments, which have the responsibility to
prosecute and punish. However, as has been said, if
the State is unable to so act, the International Criminal
Court, which is universal, must and should play its role.

Finally, the participation of women in conflict
resolution efforts is, I believe, the only sustainable
response. The international community's
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) must
continue uninterrupted. Since its adoption, awareness
of such results has increased, but is slow in having an
impact on the ground. In Mali, Syria, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Afghanistan, Cote d'Ivoire, the
Central African Republic, the Sudan and Libya, women
must fully contribute to their country's stabilization. I
believe that no transition will be sustainable unless we
take into consideration and ensure the participation of
one half of humanity.

In that respect, national action plans on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) are a crucial
instrument and must be broadened. As part of its plan
of action, France , in partnership with UN-Women, has
undertaken coop erationprogrammes aimed at combating
violence against women in Africa and the Arab world.
Recently, we allocated specific funds to programmes
in Mali implemented by local non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), in particular to support women's
participation in political processes. In the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, more than €2 million have been
earmarked since 2012 to support Congolese NGOs
combating sexual violence and strengthening women's
participation in decision-making processes. Along
those lines, the President of France recently announced
the convening of a summit on peace and security in
Africa in Paris in December.

In conclusion, I wish to underscore that, in addition
to the indescribable savagery of sexual violence that has
been addressed here, it is also important to recall the
tragic observation made recently by the World Health
Organization that one in every three women worldwide
has been subjected to domestic or sexual violence. No
region has been spared from the Violence. However it
is true that, like ignorance, it behaves as an epidemic
that can reach epidemic level in some countries. It
is therefore absolutely crucial to continue to work
unfailingly on all of those issues, because women's
rights, like human rights, are universal and indivisible.

