Mr. Gone (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We have every faith in you and will
provide you with support during your term.

My delegation is very pleased to participate in
this high-level open debate on trafficking in persons
in conflict situations, which gives us the opportunity
to discuss this important issue. Allow me also
to congratulate the speakers this morning on the
contributions they made to our debate.

Trafficking in persons in conflict situations is of
particular concern. The images and testimony provided
by the media in conflict zones show to what extent this
phenomenon is not only a serious violation of human
rights, but also a real threat to international peace and
security. Last Thursday, 9 March, at the United Nations,
at a high-level event on the fight against impunity for
atrocities, we heard a moving account by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict. We also heard at the event the
heart-rending account by a young Yazidi woman who
had been held hostage by Islamic State jihadists and
we heard her plea for the Security Council to take up
the fate of her people in Iraq. Testimonies, such as that
of this young Iraqi, could also be that of the people in
the Lake Chad basin, of many countries in conflict
and of many refugee camps in Africa and around the
world. Since this morning, many speakers have recalled
such practices, which are well known and varied. They
include sexual slavery, the use of victims for labour,
forced domestic work and forced recruitment into
armed groups.

The Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), of which my country is a member and which
is affected by this phenomenon, has since 2002 regularly
adopted several action plans, the most recent of which
covers the period 2016-2020. These plans propose,
among other things, the adoption of national legislation
penalizing trafficking in persons, measures to protect
and assist victims, and public awareness campaigns. In
this context, the strategic and operational support of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
to ECOWAS has made a significant contribution to the
prevention and suppression of trafficking in persons in
West Africa.

My delegation would like to take this opportunity
to thank the United Nations for its multiform support
through UNODC for the implementation of the
ECOWAS action plan. In line with this regional
strategy, Cote d'Ivoire ratified, on 25 October 2012,
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and signed the Protocol to Prevent,
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially
Women and Children, supplementing the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime. We also adopted law 2010-272 on the prohibition
of trafficking in persons and the worst forms of child
labour and the law of September 2016 on combating
trafficking in persons.

Given the unprecedented scale of the phenomenon
of trafficking in human beings in times of conflict, the
mobilization of the entire international community is
more necessary than ever. In this regard, my delegation
welcomes the adoption last December of resolution
2331 (2016) . In particular, my country encourages all
Member States to encourage the implementation of
existing national and international legal instruments
to combat this scourge, in particular by bringing the
perpetrators of these crimes before the competent
criminal courts.

The existence of international organized crime
networks mean that States, civil society organizations
and the United Nations system must coordinate their
actions. As has been pointed out throughout this debate,
trafficking in persons in times of conflict most often
flourishes in an environment that has been weakened
by a decline in the rule of law. Support for strong State
institutions appears to be an essential in this regard.
The strengthening of the capacity of civilians fighting
this phenomenon should also be encouraged.

While the correlation between hotbeds of conflict
and the resurgence of trafficking in persons seems
undeniable, we also must bear in mind such situations
as poverty and low levels of education. The Government
of cote d'Ivoire believes, therefore, that the fight
against trafficking in persons in times of conflict
and in times of peace must take a comprehensive
approach. The appropriate implementation of the
Sustainable Development Goals in fragile countries is
an opportunity. It is also important to support States
affected through the creation of databases to better
identify the phenomenon of trafficking in persons in
order to improve victim assistance.

At this moment, when the Commission on the
Status of Women is holding its sixty-first session, and
against the backdrop of the empowerment of women,
my delegation hopes that today's debate will help to
give hope to all victims of trafficking in human beings
in situations of conflict.

