Ms. Van Ardenne (Netherlands): First of all, I
should like to associate myself with the statement to be
made shortly by Italy on behalf of the European Union.

Resolution 1325 (2000) is the framework for
Dutch policy on women, peace and security. As I see it,
the great advantage of resolution 1325 (2000) is that it
presents women not simply as victims, but also as
active agents in conflict resolution. We know that
peace is more likely to last if all parties - men and
women - work together to achieve it. Sadly, three
years after the adoption of the resolution, women are
still scarcely involved in efforts to resolve conflicts.

It is good that we celebrate the anniversary of the
resolution every year. But it is also up to us to make
sure that there is something to celebrate. Gender must
be part of the Security Council's day-to-day business.
It must inform the analyses the Council makes and the
decisions it takes. The recent resolution on Liberia,
resolution 1509 (2003), which refers to and also builds
on resolution 1325 (2000), is a good example of how
things can be - but unfortunately seldom are - done.
It is good that non-governmental organizations are
keeping up the pressure. It is often thanks to them that
the voices of women reach the Council. In that regard,
I should like to express my appreciation for the work
done within the framework of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC), as described by Ms. Amy
Smythe, Senior Gender Adviser of MONUC.

We, the Member States, need to do a number of
things. We must always ask for feedback from the
Secretary-General's Special Representatives and also
for feedback in reports to the Security Council. We
must put women candidates forward for key posts such
as Special Representative. We must see to it that we
strengthen the position of women and give more
thought to them in peace and security operations. The
same applies to disarmament campaigns and mine
clearance, from which women are the first to benefit.
Finally, we must learn from one another's experiences
in the field through stronger and better cooperation and
communication.

Last year, my Government commissioned a study
of women's roles in conflict prevention, conflict
resolution and post-conflict reconstruction. I can
recommend that analysis, which sheds light on the
complex role women play in conflict and post-conflict
situations. We used it to evaluate and strengthen Dutch
activities. One result is that we are now investing in a
better balance of men and women in the Dutch armed
forces. And we train them better to protect women and
girls in warfare and to involve women in peacemaking.
We are trying to persuade aid agencies to do the same,
so that women and girls in refugee camps and
elsewhere will be better protected. We are now
providing more active support to women's groups
taking part in peace talks - as in the Sudan last
year - because we have seen that that can make peace
more durable. In Afghanistan and Iraq, too, we are
calling attention to the role of women in the difficult
process of reconstruction.

In its new stability fund, the Netherlands has
pooled official development assistance and non-
official-development-assistance funds. The aim is to
respond more flexibly to security and stability issues,
laying a foundation for reconstruction and
development. We must shake off our endless
institutional concerns. Instead, we must focus on the
needs and potential of both men and women trying to
rebuild their lives and their countries. Their suffering
in the Great Lakes region, the Horn of Africa and the
Middle East calls for new solutions. We owe that to
them.

