Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to say how pleased I am, Mr. President, that
you have taken the initiative to hold this public debate
on women and peace and security. France fully aligns
itself with the statement that will be made shortly by
the Finnish presidency of the European Union.

Last year, as we marked the fifth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), we took stock
for the first time of the implementation of that
landmark text. That review enabled us to identify some
progress, especially in terms of the role of women
being taken into consideration in resolutions adopted
by the Security Council. Unfortunately, it also revealed
a number of gaps and unkept promises.

The question is whether we have made progress
since then. The report (S/2006/770) submitted by the
Secretary-General on the first year of the United
Nations System-wide Action Plan for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) provides us,
I believe, with some useful indications. In this regard, I
would like to warmly thank Ms. Rachel Mayanja,
Special Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of
Women.

The area where resolution 1325 (2000) has most
changed things appears to be in the area of
peacekeeping operations. We can see in this the result
of several factors that have come together. The first of
these factors is the more systematic integration of the
issues of women and peace and security in the
mandates given by the Security Council. The second is
the relatively clear distribution of the roles of various
actors in the framework of peacekeeping operations,
which guarantees better coordination. The third is the
extremely positive role now played by the gender
advisers and gender focal points, who are present in all
operations. Here, I would like again to congratulate
Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno for the key role played by
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations in this
area.

At the same time, I would like to endorse the
condemnation contained in the presidential statement
that the Council will adopt today, concerning cases of
sexual abuse committed by peacekeeping personnel.

Do we have the means to move forward on other
aspects, such as the protection of women against
violence perpetrated in the context of armed conflicts
and the participation of women in post-conflict phases?

With regard to the protection of women during
conflict, the Darfur crisis and the situation in Ituri
show that violence, especially sexual violence, against
women unfortunately continues to be widespread, and
often is carried out with impunity. The Secretary-
General's in-depth study on all forms of violence
against women (A/61/122/Add.1) highlights the gap
between progress that we have made in the normative
sphere - whether it be through Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000), through progress in
international humanitarian law or through the Statute
of the International Criminal Court - and the
continuing situation on the ground. This year, France
and the Netherlands are submitting a draft resolution to
the General Assembly one of whose elements will be a
request to each United Nations organ to examine the
means that it can employ to reduce this gap between
norms and the reality on the ground.

We believe that the new Human Rights Council,
which is now able to follow situations throughout the
year and to meet on an emergency basis, has an
important role to play in this area, whether by
responding to serious violations of women's rights, by
addressing recommendations to other bodies or by
supporting cooperation actions undertaken by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights.

The establishment of the Peacebuilding
Commission should also enable us to move forward on
the participation of women in the post-conflict and
reconstruction phases. The need to integrate a gender
perspective and to involve representatives of civil
society, including women's organizations, was
specifically mentioned in the mandate of the
Peacebuilding Commission. The first country-specific
meetings recently organized on Sierra Leone and on
Burundi confirmed the validity of this reference and
the centrality of the role of women in building
sustainable peace.

What do we see as the priority areas for ensuring
the full and complete participation of women in
peacebuilding and reconstruction? First is the
rehabilitation of victims, particularly victims of sexual
violence. How can lasting peace be restored when
women, who have already been victims of violence
during the conflict phase, see themselves ostracized
within their own communities? It is particularly
important that disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes take full account of the fate
of women who have been associated - most often by
force - with combatant groups.

The second area is the administration of justice.
How can women express themselves and take part in
civic life if they have to be in contact with their former
tormentors and live in fear? How can we ask them to
turn to the justice system if that system is synonymous
with further humiliation, denial and potential reprisal?
That is why the fight against impunity and the adoption
of a gender-specific approach by the judicial system
are indispensable.

The third area is participation in decision-making
processes. Women's access to elective office is a key
element. In that regard, we cannot fail to welcome the
examples of Rwanda and Burundi. But we also need to
make sure that women, especially through women's
organizations, are involved in all the administrative
processes.

The final area is the establishment of institutions
that practise parity. The phase of rebuilding institutions
provides a unique opportunity for countries emerging
from conflict to set up institutions that conform to the
most advanced legal standards. Instruments such as the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women must be a point of
reference for all who are involved in reconstruction
activities.

I listened very closely to the speeches by
Ms. McAskie and Ms. Heyzer. We continue to bear in
mind what we were told by the NGOs at their Arria
formula meeting yesterday afternoon. I would like to
thank them for their contributions, which will continue
to spur our action in the Council as regards the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

