Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Belgium fully aligns itself with the statement made
on behalf of the European Union, and in my national
capacity I would like to make the following observations.

My delegation would first like to thank the Angolan
presidency for having organized this debate and for the
opportunity for us to participate. My delegation also
thanks all the participants for their statements.

The participation of women in conflict resolution
is a priority for Belgium at both the national and
international levels, illustrated by the fact that one of
the six pillars of our own national action plan on women
and peace and security is dedicated to it. Women must
be able to decide their own fate and contribute to
conflict prevention and resolution and peacebuilding.
Numerous studies show that women's participation
increases the effectiveness of humanitarian aid, the
credibility and quality of peacekeeping operations, the
rate of economic recovery in post-conflict situations
and the durability of peace agreements.

Belgium wishes to commend all the initiatives
taken in Africa to increase the participation of women
in the prevention of violence and early warning
systems. However, it is disappointing to note that
the participation of women in conflict prevention,
peace processes and post-conflict political transition
remains a great challenge. In our view, mixed-gender
representation remains the best way of ensuring a
balanced decision-making process that takes into
account the whole population and all other important
factors.

To contribute to that goal on the African continent,
Belgium contributes €2 million to the implementation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo of the UN-
Women project there that supports the rights and
participation of Congolese women in the framework
of resolution 1325 (2000). That project invests in
supporting economic empowerment and training
within the area of women's leadership. In Mali,
Belgium co-chairs with UN-Women the group of
donors on the issue of gender. Belgium welcomes the
increased number of women in the Malian Government
following the latest ministerial reshuffling and sees it
as a positive development in the acceptance of women's
key role. Nevertheless, my country regrets that women
continue to be underrepresented at the decision-making
level from the outset of mediation processes, and poorly
represented in the implementation phase. Belgium hopes
that its 2015-2017 national action plan on women, peace
and security will help to address those shortcomings.

In conclusion, I should like to stress that Belgium
will continue to pursue the implementation of its own
plan of action and to give priority, both on the policy and
operational fronts, to the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). Belgium calls on all countries to take
into account the resolution's provisions on protection,
participation and prevention. In the same vein, Belgium
encourages all African countries to ratify the Maputo
Protocol, also known as the Protocol to the African
Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights on the Rights
of Women in Africa. Women are a force for peace. It
is essential that they be able to play their role fully as
political actors in the service of peace, security and
post-conflict reconstruction.

