Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand
appreciates the opportunity to mark the twelfth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) and thanks both
last month's President, Guatemala, and now India for
organizing this very important debate.

It is appropriate that this particular debate should
focus on the role ofwomen's civil society organizations.
Resolution 1325 (2000) was neither created in a vacuum,
nor did it result from the foresight of Member States.
Rather, it was women's civil society organizations that
were particularly instrumental in the initial passage of
resolution 1325 (2000), as the culmination of many years
of active campaigning, and they continue to play a key
role in ensuring the inclusion of gender perspectives in
all United Nations debates on peace and security issues.

We particularly note the important role played by
women's organizations in our own region. They were
vital components of peace processes in Bougainville in
Papua New Guinea and in the Solomon Islands. And we
anticipate that Papua New Guinea will speak on that
in some detail shortly. As Luxembourg highlighted in
its statement to the Council, that was also the case in
Timor-Leste. Again in our own region, in September
of this year, we were very pleased to see the launch
of the first Pacific Regional Action Plan on Women,
Peace and Security, on which occasion Prime Minister
Puna of the Cook Islands underscored the contribution
that Pacific women's civil society organizations had
made to the development of that Plan. We repeat that
sentiment in this forum today. Indeed, we emphasize
the need to mainstream gender perspectives across all
issues in the peace and security agenda.
We also welcome the Secretary-General's report
on women and peace and security (S/2012/732) and
draw attention to several points. First, in planning
for the transition phase in peacekeeping missions, we
must ensure that we do not lose gender expertise and
the United Nations-led advances for women, peace and
security. It is critically important that the full women,
peace and security agenda be considered as part of the
planning for drawdown and handover, as has just been
highlighted by the representative of Sweden in her
statement.

Secondly, we must continue to push for an enhanced
role for women in political-level peace discussions,
both as mediators - again as highlighted by the
representative of Sweden 4 and as principal political
actors. That can be best achieved through the increased
political representation of women in both elected and
appointed posts, a point that was highlighted by Croatia
among others.

We are pleased at the growing acknowledgement
of the need to address the negative impact of armed
violence on women and the need to integrate gender
perspectives into disarmament policy and practice,
particularly with regard to small arms and light
weapons. For most ofus, those arms are indeed the real
weapons ofmass destruction, killing over halfa million
people each and every year.

In that regard, we particularly commend the
leadership of Trinidad and Tobago in bringing to the
United Nations the issues of women, disarmament,
non-proliferation and arms control, and we are very
pleased that this year's First Committee draft resolution
(A/C.1/67/L.35/Rev.1) was adopted by consensus.
We hope we can make further progress, drawing
on the positive outcomes from this year's United
Nations Conference to Review Progress Made in the
Implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. New Zealand
particularly highlights the importance of further
research and analysis to improve our understanding of
the role that women can and must play in that area.

At a time when many national action plans
are up for review, New Zealand is very pleased to
acknowledge that, as we continue to develop our own
plan, we are learning much from the experience of
many others. Overall, however, we must all continue to
push ahead with the women, peace and security agenda
through ongoing and enhanced collaboration among
Member States, international, regional and subregional
organizations and civil society. New Zealand will
certainly play its part in that important endeavour.

