Mr. Munoz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Approximately a year has elapsed since the Secretary-
General submitted to us his report containing a large
number of recommendations, which we firmly
supported, but it seems that progress towards their
implementation has not been as positive as we
expected.
I will begin my statement by quoting verbatim an
excerpt from that report, which we believe to be
particularly significant because it explains in simple
terms the situation we are dealing with at this meeting
and which has given rise to this and other discussions.

"Women do not enjoy equal status with men
in any society. Where cultures of violence and
discrimination against women and girls exist
prior to conflict, they will be exacerbated during
conflict. If women do not participate in the
decision-making structures of a society, they are
unlikely to become involved in decisions about
the conflict or the peace process that follows."
(S/2002/1154, para. 5)

We fully concur with this statement, since it
makes clear that, in order to achieve the full
participation of women in all stages of a conflict
situation, from prevention to reconstruction, it is
necessary to approach the problem from a broader
perspective in which gender equity is achieved in all
areas of action.

Why the failure to achieve gender balance and
equity? No consensus has been reached on the various
explanations put forward. In the framework of a recent
seminar held last November in Chile on the role of
women in peacekeeping operations, reference was
made to various perspectives on this topic. Some say
that the problem is that women have greater difficulty
in advancing within a static, rigidly hierarchical
organization; others hold that the culture of an
organization determines what is believed regarding
what men and women can achieve. If it is believed that
a job can be done only by a man, women will not be
expected to succeed. Others say that it is a cultural
problem, in that women are not seen as providers -
that men are the primary providers.

As the Secretary-General said a few years ago, if
we accept that in a given society gender equality is
more than a means in itself, if we believe that the
empowerment of women is vital for overcoming the
challenges of sustainable development, if we argue that
the participation of women is a requirement for
building good governance, if we insist that the rights of
women are factors in the effectiveness of humanitarian
assistance, if we are convinced of all these things in the
context of all the societies we are trying to help at the
global level, how then can we be incapable of
implementing this very concept in our own society,
including within our own home?

The time has come to bridge the gap between
paper and reality. Among the many, extensive
discussions, almost all aspects have been addressed on
including the gender perspective in the phases of all
peace processes, because there is much information on
the problems of women and girls in the field - their
strengths and weaknesses. However, in practice we
have not known how, or have not been able, to
implement those aspects.

We believe that one of paths that should be taken
to achieve full implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) is to seek and develop effective monitoring
mechanisms to enable more systematic control of
implementation. If we had them, perhaps we would
have a clearer view of what was achieved a year ago.

I wish to raise one of the proposals made last year
by the representative of the United Kingdom, which
was to request one member of the Council each year to
oversee the implementation of our decisions on
including the gender perspective, working with the
relevant Secretariat bodies to achieve that objective.
Perhaps this is the time to explore that type of
initiative. My country, at least, is willing to participate
in that exercise. Consideration could also be given to a
specific chapter devoted to gender-related items
connected with resolution 1325 (2000) being included
in the reports submitted by the Secretariat on
peacekeeping operations.

The proposals made at the seminar held in Chile
included some interesting ideas that I wish to raise
here. One concerned developing regional perspectives
to identify implementation strategies for the resolution.
In that regard, appropriate regional bodies, inside as
well as outside the United Nations system, could help
with implementation.

Another proposal at the seminar was that
mechanisms be developed for systematic linkage
between the Security Council and civil society. The
creation of a gender unit within the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations was also suggested, and we
are glad that it has become a reality, as announced by
Mr. Guehenno.

With regard to civil society, I wish only to
reiterate that the task of achieving full implementation
of this crucial resolution is shared: Governments, the
United Nations system, of course, and civil society will
contribute. We must emphasize civil society in
particular because many women's networks working in
the field, selflessly and devotedly, have played an
absolutely crucial role, at least in my country, in
improving the condition of women.
In peacekeeping operations, which have moved
from inter-State conflicts to intra-State conflicts with
economic, social or ethnic root causes, there is much to
be done so that the United Nations, particularly the
Council, may progressively improve its ability to
respond and continue to develop mechanisms to
address these situations. Ensuring that women have
their due role to play in this process is a priority
commitment. The delegation of Chile reiterates its
commitment to achieve that goal, jointly with the other
members of the Council.

