Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): My delegation commends
your effort, Mr. President, in organizing this open
debate on an issue of critical importance. We thank
Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila Patten, for
their informative briefings this morning.

For far too long, sexual violence has remained a
grim and inevitable reality of armed conflicts, which
has often been employed systematically and with
impunity, to coerce, punish, humiliate and instil
fear among the targeted civilian population. Even
as the international community has come together to
collectively condemn such acts of unimaginable horror,
sexual abuse of women and girls continues to be used
as a tactic of war in conflicts around the world. While
sexual violence remains a designated war crime and a
crime against humanity, for survivors its impact goes
well beyond the ordeal of the harrowing experience
itself. Stigma and marginalization often outlast the
conflict, and the trauma haunts survivors for the rest of
their lives. The recent report of the Secretary-General
on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2018/250) rightly
emphasizes how the effects of such violence can echo
across generations.

The Security Council has been proactively taking
up this issue under its women and peace and security
agenda. The legal framework and institutional focus
are in place, but complicated geopolitics around
various conflicts and divisions within the Chamber
have allowed perpetrators to continue to carry out these
heinous atrocities with impunity. From Myanmar to my
own country's neighbourhood, the world continues to
watch in horror as several State and non-State actors
employ rape and sexual abuse as a deliberate policy
to subdue and oppress entire populations. A lack of
verifiable and independent reporting from many of
these hotspots is letting those who commit and condone
these acts go scot-free.

In order to combat impunity for these crimes and
protect women and girls from systematic abuse, the
international community needs to recalibrate and
revisit its response. Let me make four specific points
in that regard.

First, the Security Council, as the primary body
tasked with the maintenance of international peace
and security, should focus on addressing the root
causes of conflict to remove the breeding grounds for
such crimes.

Secondly, mechanisms to independently investigate
and verify reports emerging from conflict situations
where sexual violence is taking place are critical to
dealing with the challenge.

Thirdly, we must also take concrete steps to
enhance the capacity of national institutions and
improve criminal justice systems in countries facing
armed conflict.

Fourthly, justice does not only mean punishment for
the perpetrators. It also means redress for the survivors.
Victim protection and rehabilitation should remain a
top priority. The stigma attached to victimhood must be
redirected towards the perpetrators. They are the ones
who should be made an example of, not just as a matter
of retribution but also as a preventive measure.

My country has always advocated the integration of
the gender perspective into the peacebuilding paradigm
to promote the cause of sustaining peace. As one of the
world's leading troop-contributing countries, Pakistan
has set the highest standards in fulfilling peacekeeping
mandates, including protecting vulnerable segments of
the population, especially women and children, from
violence. We fully support the Secretary-General's
zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse.
Pakistan was among the first countries to sign the
Secretary-General's voluntary compact on the subject.
We have also contributed to the Trust Fund in Support
of Victims of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse.

To share our experience and promote best practices
in peacekeeping, we have established a United Nations
peacekeeping training institute in Pakistan, which
offers specially designed modules to help peacekeepers
respond effectively and protect innocent civilians
from sexual violence. We also believe that increasing
participation by female peacekeepers and encouraging
more women to take up mediation roles will help in
the stabilization and reconstruction phase of post-
conflict rehabilitation.

For my country, protecting the vulnerable,
including women and children, is not only a global
peace and security imperative. More important, this
is an obligation of humanity. We remain resolute and
steadfast in our commitment.

