Mr. Gad (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to thank Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka,
Executive Director of UN-Women, for her valuable
briefing, along with the other briefers and all my
colleagues on the Security Council and other relevant
bodies. Over the past two decades, the experience of
the Security Council has demonstrated that women's
participation in peacemaking and peacebuilding
produces better results in achieving and sustaining
peace while avoiding conflict. Women can participate
actively in such efforts only if they are economically
and politically empowered. In the context of following
up on implementing the recommendations in the global
study on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
we would like to stress the following points.

First, Egypt supports resolution 1325 (2000), on
the importance of creating institutional frameworks
for women's participation in peacemaking, and in
that context, we welcome the creation of women's
mediation networks, which we believe should be based
on diverse models, since there is no single model that
is implementable in every conflict, and which should
therefore be created based on the requirements and
specifics of each conflict. We should not interfere in
the establishment of such networks or impose particular
forms on them. They should evolve spontaneously from
each individual conflict, starting locally and going
up to the national level. The international community
should limit its role to capacity-building. Given the fact
that there are so many of these networks all over the
world, we believe that it is important to link them under
one coordinating mechanism that can enable them to
exchange their experiences and lessons learned. The
day before yesterday, in collaboration with UN-Women
and the African Union, Egypt organized a meeting on
this topic attended by women mediation networks from
Africa, the Mediterranean, the Nordic countries and the
Commonwealth States, focusing on ways to coordinate
their networks and provide them with support while
ensuring their sustainability and creating a coordination
mechanism for all of them.

Secondly, we appreciate and support the United
Nations strategy for gender parity, which we consider an
integral part of the reform of the United Nations system.

Thirdly, we reiterate our concern about the
increasing suffering of women and girls as a result
of terrorism in areas of armed conflict, as well as the
fact that the suffering of Palestinian women under
occupation has been persistently ignored in the women
and peace and security agenda.

Fourthly, women's economic empowerment is a
high priority for Egypt in the context of our chairship of
the Group of 77 and China this year, and is something
that must continue to happen in times ofpeace, conflict
or post-conflict, as it too enables women to play a
greater part in decision-making, peacebuilding and
lasting peace.

Egypt is making every effort to implement the
women and peace and security agenda. With regard
to combating sexual exploitation and aggression, we
have worked to raise awareness among our forces
participating in peacekeeping missions by introducing
a full, thorough model into their predeployment
training programme as a response to the Secretary-
General's zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation
and abuse. Egypt also organizes advanced training
sessions for military commanders in that regard. The
Cairo International Centre for Conflict Resolution,
Peacekeeping and Peacebuilding, which is responsible
for training peacekeeping troops, has published a
guidance manual on preventing sexual exploitation
and aggression in peacekeeping operations that is
distributed to Egyptian peacekeeping troops. It is
available to all other troop-contributing countries and
has been translated into English and French.

At the regional level, the Cairo Centre organizes
training sessions for African and Arab military
personnel and police officers participating in
peacekeeping operations.

Egypt also joined the African Women Leaders
Network because we believe in the importance of such
networks and in strengthening them. We call upon
the international community to make greater efforts
to provide financial support for the sustainability of
such forums.

At the international level, Egypt was among the
first States to join the Circle of Leadership on the
prevention of and response to sexual exploitation and
abuse, as well as the Women, Peace and Security
Focal Points Network. We have undertaken this year
a voluntary commitment to prevent sexual exploitation
and aggression.

In conclusion, we call for a renewed political
and ethical commitment to empowering women
economically and politically in regions and States that
have recently emerged from conflict. Women are the
primary drivers of transformation from conflict to
development and from societies shattered by armed
conflict to healthy societies that are capable of moving
forward towards achieving sustainable peace.

