Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): It has been five
years since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), a
resolution with which Bangladesh, then sitting in the
Council, was very closely associated. I wish to begin
by thanking you, Mr. President, for giving us the
opportunity to take stock of the progress made in
implementing the resolution since then. I also wish to
praise Romania for the excellent conduct of the
Council's presidency during the current month.

In the past, conflicts were largely inter-State or
inter-empire. More recently, they have been intra-State,
with subregional and regional ramifications. In many
ways - more than in the past - civilians form the
bulk of the victims. Two millennia ago, the Greek sage
Aristotle wisely observed that all wars were waged for
the sake of getting money. Not much has changed since
then. But our power of analysis has grown over time,
and we now observe - perhaps more keenly - that
poverty, the struggle for scarce resources and socio-
economic injustices lie at the heart of conflicts. And all
of them, sadly, entail grave violations of human rights.

It does not take much scrutiny to come to the
conclusion that the most vulnerable segment of the
civilian population comprises women and children.
That is evident everywhere. Women and girls are often
viewed as bearers of cultural identities. Thus, they
become prime targets. When women suffer, so do
children. In addition, children are used as instruments
for the perpetration of violence, as that can be done
easily and cheaply. The current hotspots of the world
are replete with such examples.

Women know the price that they and their
children have to pay in conflict situations. It is natural,
therefore, that they are keen and often better equipped
to prevent and resolve such situations. They have
sought to do so over generations as peace educators,
both in their families and in their wider societies,
fostering a culture of peace within and across
communities. They often, therefore, aptly serve as
bridge-builders of understanding across rivers of strife.

It is in that perspective that Bangladesh, as a
member of the Security Council, worked closely in the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). The resolution was
primarily based on a simple thesis. It was that women's
equal access to and full participation in all layers of the
power structure, as well as their full participation in the
prevention and resolution of conflicts, are essential
elements for making and sustaining peace. The
Bangladesh presidency issued a statement to that effect
on International Women's Day in March 2000.
Eventually, the process culminated in the resolution.
Needless to say, Bangladesh remains committed to its
full implementation.

Drawing from our domestic experience, we
believe that gender mainstreaming and empowerment
are critical factors for development. Access to
education and health care, coupled with the provision
of microcredit facilities, can unleash the
entrepreneurial skills of individuals. We know that
such empowerment of women helps stave off extremist
thought and action. That includes the scourge of
terrorism. Today, by adhering to those very values,
Bangladesh itself is undergoing a quiet but significant
societal transformation. Prime Minister Begum
Khaleda Zia and her Government have an unflinching
commitment to those goals.

The United Nations should work as a conduit for
disseminating homegrown ideas and best practices,
such as microcredit and non-formal education, that
have proven to work in my country and many others
societies of comparable milieu. Those ideas can be
applied in post-conflict societies with the major
involvement of women. They will form the bulwark of
peacebuilding.

Success in implementing the resolution, in our
view, has been mixed. While we have integrated
gender perspectives in some aspects of United Nations
peacekeeping operations and also in some post-conflict
peacebuilding efforts, much work remains to be done.
We encourage the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations to continue its efforts in that direction. The
excellent presentation this morning by Under-
Secretary-General Jean-Marie Guehenno, as well as his
leadership qualities, give us the confidence that the
desired results will come to fruition. Bangladesh, as
one of the consistently top contributors of troops to
United Nations peacekeeping operations, remains
conscious of its responsibilities to incorporate essential
elements of resolution 1325 (2000) into the pre-
deployment training of its peacekeepers.

The non-participation or insignificant
participation of women in peace agreement
negotiations is still a problem. Those peace agreements
inevitably fail to address the special needs of women.
Although women suffer most as victims of conflict,
they are excluded from peace dividends. Our
endeavours to resolve those conflicts and address their
root causes will fail if we do not empower women. The
formal participation of women in peace negotiations
and decision-making processes is key to the
effectiveness of conflict prevention.

The 2005 world summit outlined several policy
frameworks important to millions of women and girls
in conflict and post-conflict situations. The
operationalization of the peacebuilding commission by
the year's end would be a giant step in that direction.
Increased focus on conflict prevention; responsibility
to protect populations from genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity; the
effective promotion and protection of human rights;
and enhanced rule of law are some of the achievements
of the summit that would go a long way towards
empowering women in the longer term and towards
enhancing their role in conflict prevention and
resolution.

We welcome the proposed system-wide action
plan on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
It is our hope that it will be instrumental in integrating
gender perspectives across the entire United Nations
system. Such gender mainstreaming, of course, must
take into account geographical, ethnic and cultural
factors. To be successful, the action plan will require
the necessary resources - financial, material and
human. That would have to be at all levels. The active
participation of civil society is a sine qua non.

Every generation must seek to bequeath to the
next a better world. Ours must do the same. For that
purpose, we must identify some ideals and seek to
achieve them. It is such pursuits that lend vigour to our
societies and create the positive ferment that is the
primum movens of civilizations. Also, they help us to
achieve greater heights across a broader spectrum of
human endeavour.

