Mr. Galbavy (Slovakia): I wish to thank the United
Kingdom delegation for convening today's open debate
on modern slavery, human trafficking and conflict. The
problem is global, affecting poor and rich countries
alike. Today's debate is also timely as it is takes place
in conjunction with the ongoing sixty-first session of
the Commission on the Status of Women. Women and
girls are the most targeted group in terms of human
trafficking and exploitation.

While aligning ourselves with the statement made
by the observer of the European Union delivered earlier,
I would like to briefly make the following points on the
subject in my national capacity.

Human trafficking and modern slavery have
become one of the most profitable and fastest growing
areas of activities of transnational organized crime,
holding millions of people in inhuman conditions,
violating their dignity, personal freedom and human
rights. Poverty is at the root of the problem, as is lack
of awareness of both victims and the general public.
Emergencies, such as massive movements of people
caused by terrorism, war, poverty and oppression,
create an enabling environment where vulnerable
groups of people become easy targets and victims.

Human trafficking takes many different forms
and targets men, women, girls and boys alike. As has
been mentioned, according to the International Labour
Organization, there are 21 million people around the
world trapped in some form of modern slavery, including
trafficking, debt bondage and child labour. New forms
and ways of this criminal activity frequently emerge.

We need a mix of strong policies at the national
level and concerted action at the international level.
States must not only criminalize slavery and punish
perpetrators but also must make every effort to prevent
it and offer protection and remedy to victims. We must
also do more to address root causes of radicalism,
violent extremism and international terrorism.

Slovakia is committed to doing its share in the
fight against modern slavery. We have ratified all major
international treaties and implemented the relevant
European Union legislation. We have strengthened
our criminal code and our code of criminal procedure,
in order, in particular, to increase protection of child
victims. We have established an institute for national
anti-trafficking coordination at the State Secretary level
of the Ministry of the Interior and adopted the National
Programme to Combat Trafficking in Human Beings
for the years 2015-2018, with the aim of effectively
combating human trafficking through coordinated
activities of all entities involved at the national level.

In conclusion, once again, allow me to thank you,
Sir, for convening today's meeting. My delegation will
continue to engage in a constructive manner in our
collective efforts to effectively mitigate the scourge of
modern-day slavery.

