Mr. Schulz (Germany): At the outset, let me thank
you, Sir, for convening this debate. We welcome the fact
that the Security Council is increasingly putting the
elimination and prevention of conflict-related sexual
violence at the heart of its agenda. The Secretary-
General's report (S/2017/249) clearly states that sexual
violence is an unacceptable violation of human rights.
Voices such as that of Ms. Mina Jaf remind us of the
need for urgent action and zero tolerance by all of us.

Let me add our voice to the chorus of those who
have thanked Ms. Zainab Bangura for her excellent
work as Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict. Germany
has worked closely with her and her Office to make
a real difference in the lives of survivors of atrocities
in Syria. We look forward to continuing that close
partnership with her successor, Ms. Pramila Patten. I
pledge Germany's unwavering support for her Office
and mandate. I would like to add a few suggestions on
how we can further improve the implementation of the
sexual violence in conflict agenda, especially beyond
New York.

First of all, we need to take a comprehensive
approach to supporting the victims of sexual violence.
Medical and psychological care, opportunities for
economic participation and legal protection are some
key aspects of such an approach. Germany supports, for
instance, protective measures in the field of trafficking
and smuggling. We have also received more than
1,000 women and children who suffered traumatic
experiences in the conflicts in Syria and Iraq, and have
given them access to medical care and trauma therapy.

Secondly, we need to change how women are
perceived in society. Adequate role models and gender
equality are indispensable in preventing and combating
sexual violence against women. We are taking steps
towards that goal, as outlined in our recently adopted
national action plan on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000).

Thirdly and equally important is redoubling our
efforts to shift away from a culture of impunity. At the
international level, the use of sanctions to list individuals
for sexual violence or human rights violations against
women, including through the use of specific listing
criteria, is essential, as are efforts of international
tribunals to open investigations and file charges related
to sexual violence in conflict. Furthermore, in the case
of Syria, we support - both politically and as a lead
financial contributor- the creation of the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011, including crimes of sexual violence.

Fourthly and lastly, the shortcomings in the
implementation of the strategic results framework on
women and peace and security are not due a lack of
words, but a lack of action. Those shortcomings must
be addressed at different levels.

To accelerate the agenda's implementation,
Germany is particularly engaged in supporting regional
efforts. For example, at the end of this month, the
African Union will launch a network of African women
leaders with the backing of UN-Women and Germany.
That network aims to create a platform for politically
active women across the continent to exchange their
experiences and knowledge.

At the capital level, the recent meeting of the
Women, Peace and Security National Focal Points
Network, organized by Spain, has been extremely
valuable in generating further discussion on Member
States' various national action plans. Germany is very
pleased to host next year's meeting of the focal points
in Berlin.

Let me conclude by pledging Germany's continued
commitment to the protection of women and girls from
conflict-related sexual violence. The implementation of
the women, peace and security agenda is more pressing
than ever and will remain one of our top priorities.

