Mr. Gallegos Chiriboga (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I have the honour to speak on behalfofEcuador
in today's timely open debate, which you, Mr. President,
have convened on the issue of participation of women
in peacekeeping.

The Secretary-General, the Council and the
representatives of individual Members themselves
have addressed, on several occasions, the relevance
and importance of women's equal participation
in peacekeeping operations and their invaluable
contribution to the promotion of peace and security.
Ecuador has a sound legal framework that guarantees
the validity, exercise and enforceability of women's
rights, which is based on two fundamental pillars: the
Constitution, which includes explicitreferences to gender
equality, and binding international instruments ratified
by Ecuador. Ecuador actively seeks the participation
of women in the armed forces and police observation
missions and has made a political commitment to
maintaining their presence and increasing their number.
Furthermore, we have included the gender perspective
throughout our development plan, which recognizes the
equal participation of women and men in public and
private spheres.

Ecuador is committed to the political and economic
empowerment of women and their active and significant
participation in the quest for peace. In that regard, we
strive for equality among women and men at all levels of
education at the national level, and we have implemented
an integrated health care model that includes the gender
perspective in developing public policies.

Ecuador is also firmly committed to facilitating
decent work and women's access to decision-making
processes. The Government programmes to reduce
underemployment and unemployment encourage both
women'sparticipationinthelabourmarketandnarrowing
the wage differential. Moreover, the Republic's organic
law on elections and political organizations calls for
equal participation in decision-making processes and
at all levels of power.

The Constitution of the Republic establishes that
Ecuador is a constitutional State of rights that will
adopt affirmative actions to promote genuine equality
for rights holders who face a situation of inequality, and
provides for priority protection in public and private
arenas for victims of sexual violence. It is a Constitution
that recognizes the right of people to live free from all
forms of violence.

In that regard, Ecuador has a national plan for the
eradication of gender violence, which was established
as a public policy in 2007. Ecuador is currently
undertaking a major national crusade to eradicate
discrimination and violence against women. In that
context, we highlight our comprehensive organic law
to prevent and eradicate violence against women,
which entered into force in February 2018. That is an
important development at the national level in that area
and ensures the involvement of women in working for
its implementation.

Furthermore, the Constitution also determines that
the armed forces are an institution for the protection
of the rights, freedoms and guarantees of citizens. The
Ministry of National Defence incorporates the concept
of defence as a public good and, in that context, the
gender approach is included in its defence policy
agenda. Human rights are also considered as an area
of action in spearheading defence policy and include
the promotion of policies for gender equality and
practices for peaceful coexistence and respect for the
cultural identity of its members, as well as the effective
implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1889
(2009). The inclusion of women in the armed forces has
increased since 2009, when female military officers
accounted for 1.1 per cent of the total number of troops.
By 2012, that figure doubled and this year stands
at 3.5 per cent. At the multilateral and peacekeeping
levels, the role of Ecuadorian women has also increased,
as demonstrated by the contribution made by women
officers as observers in the United Nations Mission for
the Referendum in Western Sahara.

In conclusion, we welcome these spaces for
discussing the political and economic empowerment of
women and their meaningful and active participation in
pursuit of peace. We also express our sincere desire to
join efforts towards a productive and successful dialogue
that promotes gender equality and the advancement of
women in all areas. These are essential elements in
honouring the commitment to leave no one behind.

