Ms. Mejia Velez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I express my thanks to the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2014/693). I also thank the
Assistant Secretary-General, the Executive Director of
UN-Women and the High Commissioner for Refugees. I
also thank you, Madam President, for having convened
this open debate on the occasion of the issuing of the
report of the Secretary-General on such a sensitive
matter at such a critical moment for international
affairs. I have first-hand knowledge of your work and
deep commitment to issues relating to women and
peace and security, Madam President, stretching back
many years. The Government of Colombia has always
attached great importance to this topic, and never more
than today as we are engaged in what we hope is an
irreversible peace process resolving more than five
decades of conflict in which women were lamentably
the victims of a great deal of such violence.

Colombia is aware that, as mentioned in the concept
note (S/2014/693, annex), women's socioeconomic,
cultural and political autonomy are fundamental
elements for living free from violence, enjoying
democracy, international stability and lasting peace.
This recognition, in our case, is based on our belief
and the commitments made 15 years ago in resolution
1325 (2000), which are reflected in the public policy
implemented in our country. The Secretary-General's
report of 24 September refers to the specific actions
and steps taken by the State of Colombia. For the
sake of brevity, I will leave it for members to read for
themselves, but there are five mentions in the report to
our satisfaction because they reflect significant steps
and progress that other States could implement. I will
refer to just one of them: women's fully empowered
participation in conflict resolution.

There are two women in the five-person team
participating in today's peace talks in Havana. Women
constitute an impressive group of mediators and
special envoys, as well as members of civil society
and victims, on the Government and insurgent sides
alike. This recognition in the Secretary-General report
is important to the State of Colombia, not least as it
drives us to continue making progress to consolidate
that differential focus based on the knowledge that
peace processes cannot succeed without the active
participation of women. When it comes to refugees and
displacement, it is clear that women constitute one of
the most vulnerable groups in the world. I would like to
refer to four specific measures from the lessons learned
in our country that could be useful to our discussion
today.

The law for victims and comprehensive and
accessible reparations programmes were adopted in
2011. The single victims' register for identifying and
registering their needs has been a very interesting
process: we have already managed to ascertain that
49 per cent of victims of violence in my country are
women. The gender equality policy adopted in 2003
sought to guarantee women lives free of violence and
has allowed us to develop and implement sustainable
actions longer-term over the past decade. Finally, the
law against sexual Violence was enacted to provide
preferential treatment whereby the burden of proof does
not fall on the Victim. All those measures are designed
to have an impact on the whole of Colombian society
and to put us on a path that will enable us to build a
sustainable, consensus-based, lasting peace.

Finally, despite everything, Colombia is aware
that we have a long road ahead of us. We are therefore
continuing to work on the main challenges facing the
Government, and reintegrating with full rights the
victims affected by internal conflict, especially women,
is a priority. That is a difficult goal, but we will work
to achieve it, adopting policies to promote participation
in a post-conflict society and to create situations where
our commitment can continue to translate to promoting
a society living in peace, where women and especially
girls enjoy full rights and guarantees. I would like to
explain my country's position on this and am prepared
to share experiences and to exchange views with other
countries if requested.

