Mr. Lippwe (Federated States of Micronesia): I
have the honour to speak on behalf of the Pacific small
island developing States represented at the United
Nations, namely, Fiji, Palau, Papua New Guinea, the
Republic of the Marshall Islands, Nauru, Samoa,
Solomon Islands, Tuvalu, Tonga, Vanuatu and my own
country, the Federated States of Micronesia. I wish to
start by thanking the Viet Nam presidency of the
Security Council for convening this important event.
We acknowledge and welcome the progress that has
been made in implementing resolution 1325 (2000) as
outlined in the Secretary-General's report on women
and peace and security (S/2009/465). In particular, we
note that there has been progress in developing the
capacity of both Member States and United Nations
bodies to implement the resolution. Awareness of the
issue of women and peace and security and the
capacity to address that issue on the ground are of
course critical to successful implementation, and we
encourage the focus on this matter.

However, as the Secretary-General's report notes
and as the distinguished speakers before me have also
remarked today, much work remains to be done to
achieve implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We
note with concern that significant progress is still
needed to ensure the equal and substantive
participation of women at all levels in peace and
security decision-making, particularly in negotiations
in post-conflict situations. And we are deeply
concerned that peace agreement negotiations and
planning for disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration continue to take place with little
consideration of resolution 1325 (2000).

In overcoming the obstacles to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), the Pacific
small island developing States strongly support the
need identified in the Secretary-General's report to
establish effective monitoring and accountability
mechanisms for implementation at the global, regional
and national levels and for the Security Council to
establish these mechanisms as a matter of urgency.
Without such mechanisms we consider it difficult to
make further substantive progress. This should be part
of an overall strengthened effort, with increased
funding, on the part of the Security Council, as well as
all United Nations bodies and Member States, to
implement resolution 1325 (2000). Also, in order to
provide a more coordinated approach to the work on
women and peace and security, we support the
appointment by the Secretary-General of a special
representative for this area.

In discussing the needs of women and girls in
post-conflict situations under the general topic of
implementing resolution 1325 (2000), it is critical to
consider prevention of conflict situations, particularly
in relation to the security implications of climate
change. Unabated climate change risks increased
violent conflict in many parts of the world, with its
consequent impact on women and girls, potentially
beyond the capacity of the international community to
adequately respond.

The Pacific small island developing States raised
the issue of the link between climate change and
security last year at the open debate on women and
peace and security convened by the Security Council
under the presidency of the People's Republic of
China. Since then, we have seen the unanimous
adoption of General Assembly resolution 63/281
relating to the possible security implications of climate
change. This was the first time that the international
community recognized an explicit connection between
climate change and international peace and security.
Pursuant to paragraph 2 of the resolution, the
Secretary-General will prepare a report on this matter,
and we thank him sincerely for his work on this
important issue. We would also like to take this
opportunity to congratulate the Governments of
Finland and Liberia for organizing the successful High-
Level Event on peace and security through women's
leadership held in New York last month.

Climate change has adverse effects on the
distribution and quality of natural resources such as
fresh water, arable land, coastal territory and marine
resources. Such changes can increase competition for
available resources, weaken Government institutions
and lead to internal and international migration.
Furthermore, such adverse effects can create obstacles
that substantially interfere with the ability of nations to
maintain territorial integrity, sovereignty and
independence. These effects of climate change create a
severe risk of increased violent conflict in many parts
of the world, and along with it the consequent impact
on women and girls, both during and after conflict. We
consider that climate change severely jeopardizes
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

Our understanding of the directions taken by the
Secretary-General in his forthcoming report on the
possible security implications of climate change is that
he emphasizes the need to focus on ways to prevent
such security issues, and we fully support that
approach. By adequately responding to the climate
crisis, the international community could prevent likely
conflict situations triggered by climate change, thus
protecting the rights of women and children. This is an
opportunity that we must seize. In addition, we
reiterate our call for climate change and security to be
an annual item on the United Nations agenda and for a
focal point to be established within the Organization to
monitor and respond to the growing security
implications of climate change. If the United Nations
responds to the threat of climate change, it has the
potential to truly prevent conflict and thereby reduce
violence against women.
The Pacific small island developing States
confirm their commitment to the full implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), and with the support of all
Member States, we are hopeful of further advancement
as we move towards the resolution's tenth anniversary.

