Mr. Christian (Ghana): Ghana is pleased to join
others in congratulating the delegation of Uganda on
assuming the presidency of the Council for the month
of October and for convening this debate on resolution
1325 (2000) on women and peace and security.
We thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report (S/2010/498) and his statement
here this morning. We equally thank the newly
appointed head of UN Women, Ms. Michelle Bachelet,
for her briefing to the Council. My delegation is
confident that, with her appointment, this key position
is in capable hands.

Resolution 1325 (2000) is indeed important and
unique, as it was the first of its kind to link women's
experiences in conflict to the international peace and
security agenda, focusing attention on the impact of
conflict on women and girls and calling for women's
engagement in conflict resolution and peacebuilding.

Ghana welcomes the findings of the Secretary-
General's report, which acknowledges the growing
participation of women in decision-making and in
peacekeeping operations, as well as the key role played
by civil society in keeping critical issues on the
development agenda and supporting women
peacemakers in conflict areas. It also recognizes the
key role played by the United Nations Development
Fund for Women in the implementation of the
resolution and notes that gender has become a more
prominent feature of mission planning. In spite of these
achievements, the report indicates that methods for
monitoring the impact of the resolution are dismal.

Although the 2008-2009 System-wide Action
Plan was credible in terms of strengthening results-
based management, it had design and development
weaknesses that will require extensive consultations
and redesigning. Tools for measuring progress, such as
the comprehensive set of indicators on resolution 1325
(2000), have been designed to ascertain the impact of
international efforts on women's issues in order to
address the substantive gaps that remain between
policies and their implementation. These indicators
should also monitor success in the implementation of
national action plans. However, 10 years on, most
Member States have yet to implement national action
plans, with only 20 countries having adopted them.

We hold the view that the slow progress of
Member States in fully implementing resolution 1325
(2000) is the result of poor monitoring, lack of
awareness at the national, regional and international
levels, lack of capacity to operationalize the resolution,
compartmentalization of issues raised by the
resolution, poor coordination among various security
sectors, and poor funding and stereotyping of the
resolution as a women-only tool.

It is our belief that resolution 1325 (2000) will
further enhance our country's strong traditions on
issues of peace and security, as exemplified through
our support of peace missions and the activities of the
Kofi Annan International Peacekeeping Training
Centre. In this context, Ghana, in partnership with the
Women Peace and Security Network Africa and the
Canadian Government, has taken steps to realize the
final stages of establishing Ghana's national action
plan on resolution 1325 (2000).

Despite the intensified efforts made in the past
decade, there remain major analytical gaps, and
globally women account for only 2 per cent of military
peacekeeping personnel. Another question is on how
processed information can be compared among
different country situations. We should also bear in
mind that the structure and resourcing capabilities of
UN Women will come into effect only on 1 January
2011. Consequently, continued attention and support
are required to ensure the meaningful participation of
women at all stages of the peace process. The Council
could endorse a single comprehensive framework to
guide implementation of the resolution, or it could
endorse the set of indicators while urging Member
States to adopt national action plans for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We further
encourage the Secretary-General to take steps to
reiterate his commitment to the resolution and to
expedite the process towards the full implementation of
all 26 indicators.

This year marks the tenth anniversary of this
landmark resolution. As we review the progress made
so far, let us resolve to work harder to ensure its fuller
implementation. There is therefore a need to share
experiences and good practices across the board. We all
have a duty to exhibit the political will to ensure that
the next decade is one of action. The United Nations
system will need to intensify its efforts to support
Member States in accelerating the full implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000).

