Mr. Kau (Fiji): We would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having organized today's debate on
this issue. We also congratulate the Secretary-General
for his timely report on the follow-up to the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on women
and peace and security (S/2004/814).

While the Secretary-General's report shows that
there have been positive developments in the
implementation of the resolution, further concerted
efforts are needed to ensure that the issue of
implementation is fully addressed. The full
implementation of the resolution will continue to be a
challenge for the Security Council and for the United
Nations.
Fiji attaches great importance to this subject, and
we commend the efforts made thus far by the Security
Council, the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council and its functional commissions and
other United Nations bodies and entities. We
commend, in particular, the efforts made by the United
Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) and
by regional organizations and other bodies, including
the Commonwealth Secretariat, which have been active
partners in following up this issue in Fiji. Our Ministry
for Women, Social Welfare and Poverty Alleviation has
been the focal point of efforts to mainstream gender
perspectives in relation to critical peace and security
components in Government and other areas.

The necessary groundwork for the launching in
Fiji of national policies and strategies pursuant to
resolution 1325 (2000) has been greatly boosted by the
sponsorship and support of UNIFEM. and other actors,
including civil society. Work on mainstreaming gender
perspectives in relation to conflict prevention,
peacekeeping operations, humanitarian assistance and
post-conflict reconstruction and reconciliation is in
progress.

Recent political and internal upheavals in our
country have brought out the best in our women, and
their contribution has been a strong factor for good and
steady progress. They have been effective stabilizers
and mediators in conflict prevention and very active
players in recent efforts in post-conflict peace-building
and reconciliation processes. A week-long peace and
reconciliation process with the objective, inter alia, of
uniting our polarized and divided country, which was
held last month, saw women and children playing key
roles. This was preceded by a national workshop on
conflict prevention and early warning.

In peacekeeping, Fiji, which is a staunch
supporter of and consistent contributor to international
peacekeeping missions, has introduced specific
measures to ensure the expansion of women's role in
peacekeeping. Despite the difficulties in overcoming
cultural and traditional barriers, recent deployments
have seen the successful integration of women into
various specialized duties, including guard duty. The
military and police departments, together with other
relevant bodies, are working on coherent strategies for
gender mainstreaming in peacekeeping. The Fiji
peacekeeping deployment to Iraq will include six
women who have been given specific training in
searching and in counselling. That also illustrates our
view that women can be as good as men in all areas if
given the opportunity.
We fully agree with the Secretary-General that
more effort must be put into capacity-building and
training. Gender mainstreaming in relation to all facets
of peace and security requires knowledge and
information-sharing. Training and capacity-building
must target not only girls and women, but also boys
and men at all levels of government and the
community. It should be all-encompassing and
comprehensive, targeting both the formal and the non-
formal sectors. Its inclusion in the education
curriculum will ensure early intervention and sustained
impact. The Government, through the programmes of
its Ministry for Women and through the UNIFEM-
sponsored Women and Peace and Security Committee,
is addressing the issue with all relevant stakeholders.

In addition, there is a need for more effective
coordination and partnerships. There is certainly no
lack of will and enthusiasm at the national level,
particularly in developing countries, but enhanced
cooperation and partnership are vital to ensure the
inflow of the resources and expertise which are
generally lacking in our countries. We therefore
welcome the call by the Secretary-General for the
development and strengthening of cooperation and
effective partnerships at all levels. We acknowledge the
good work done by UNIFEM. and other United Nations
bodies, together with regional organizations such as the
Pacific Islands Forum and the Commonwealth
Secretariat, in the Pacific region, including in Fiji. We
can only hope for more such cooperation and
partnerships.

We also commend the Secretary-General for his
recognition of the role of indigenous women in conflict
resolution as mediators and peace-builders. Indigenous
and local women have a strong advocacy role, and it
should be utilized in all aspects of security and peace.

There is a need to ensure that national and
international efforts for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) are undertaken in a
comprehensive manner in the context of the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women and the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action. To ensure
complementarity and proper coordination, every effort
must be undertaken in collaboration with, and within,
existing institutional arrangements.

Fiji has a total population of approximately
800,000, with women making up almost half of that
number. Given our small population, it was easy for us
to recognize the great potential that women represent.
In order to make progress, we had to harness all the
resources at our disposal, and women have played the
prominent role we expected - and more - in the
measured forward momentum towards our
developmental goals. Our support for the efforts of the
Security Council and the Secretary-General in the
furtherance of women's participation in peace and
security is therefore absolute.

