Mr. Begec (Turkey): At the outset, I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing today's open
debate. We also thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2018/250) and the Deputy Secretary-General
for her presentation this morning. We would also like
to express our appreciation to Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Patten and Ms. Sultana for
their briefings.

Unfortunately, the Secretary-General's annual
report describes continuing concerns, as well as a
number of new and emerging ones, with regard to the
use of sexual violence as a tactic of war, terrorism,
torture and repression, and as a means of persecution.
Sexual violence significantly aggravates the severe
effects of conflicts. Moreover, the nexus between
conflict-related sexual violence and terrorism, human
trafficking and organized crime further worsens its
impact. Such trends and emerging concerns require
a robust international response. We reiterate that the
prevention of sexual violence should constitute an
integral part of wider efforts to prevent conflict.

Sexual and gender-based violence has been a
devastating feature ofthe conflict in Syria since it began.
Unfortunately, millions of Syrians, particularly women
and girls, continue to live under the threat of sexual
violence from various parties on the ground. The report
of the Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on the Syrian Arab Republic published last month,
entitled "'I lost my dignity': Sexual and gender-based
violence in the Syrian Arab Republic" (A/HRC/37/72/ CRP.3), is a frank illustration of the horrific acts of
sexual violence perpetrated by the Syrian regime and
associated militias, as well as terrorist organizations,
including the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, the
Kurdish Workers Party (PKK), the Democratic Union
Party (PYD) and the Kurdish People's Protection
Units (YPG). We believe that when depicting the
disturbing nature of sexual violence inflicted in Syria,
it is essential to refrain from adopting a selective and
limited approach to sampling the perpetrators. That is
particularly important to avoid creating the impression
that the international community might overlook
particular acts of sexual violence committed there. In
that understanding, I would like to read an excerpt from
paragraph 90 of the report, in connection with acts of
sexual violence committed by the PKK/PYD/YPG
terrorist organization in Syria, which is collectively
identified as "Syrian Democratic Forces" (SDF).

"Torture of male detainees, however, including
the burning of and threats to burn genitals, was
documented in 2017. In one such incident in June
2017, in an SDF detention facility in Al-Tabga
(ar-Raqqa), males were reportedly subjected to
burning of their genitals with cigarette lighters
during interrogation."

That paragraph, along with two others in the report,
speaks clearly to the mindset and tactics used by the
PKK/PYD/YPG terrorist organization, which resorts to
torture and sexual violence in detention centres in areas
under its control, as has been confirmed by independent
organizations and United Nations investigative bodies.

As a neighbouring country that has maintained an
open-door policy for Syrians fleeing war and violence
in their own country, Turkey now hosts more than
3.5 million Syrians, 1.6 million of whom are women.
Empowering and ensuring self-reliance for Syrian
women and young people in particular, with no tolerance
of sexual and gender-based violence, is crucially
important to us. That is why we make every effort to
provide security and safety for them, including through
partnership with the United Nations Population Fund.

The findings of the Secretary-General's report
on the situation of the Rohingya in Myanmar are
also disturbing, and there are other credible reports
that concur with them. First of all, the international
community expects the Government of Myanmar to
create the conditions necessary for peaceful coexistence
in Rakhine state and for the safe return of refugees.
That means ending every kind of violence, including
sexual violence, giving humanitarian agencies
immediate and unhindered access to the populations in
need and implementing international humanitarian law
and international human rights law in Rakhine state.
Bringing the alleged perpetrators of sexual and other
violence to justice will also be critically important to
ending any repetitions of that vicious cycle.

The increasing numbers of protracted conflicts,
forced displacements and humanitarian emergencies
create an environment that is conducive to the trafficking
of women and girls. Trafficking often involves sexual
violence and exploitation. Turkey attaches the utmost
importance to the fight against human trafficking,
which constitutes a violation of human rights and an
offence to the dignity and integrity of human beings. In
that regard, we recall the importance of resolution 2331
(2016), of which Turkey was a sponsor. Among other
things, an effective and resolute response to conflict-
related sexual violence requires empowering women
and girls, promoting gender equality and ensuring
access to justice and accountability for such crimes. It
also needs the political will and concerted action of the
international community as a whole.

Allow me to conclude by underscoring that Turkey
remains determined to continue to contribute to
international efforts aimed at addressing this challenge.

