Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on having
assumed the presidency of the Council and to offer you
the full cooperation of the delegation of Uruguay in
your work.

(spoke in Spanish)

I also thank the delegation of Egypt once again, led
by Ambassador Amr Aboulatta and his team, for their
work last month.

I further wish to thank you, Sir, for convening this
debate and for the concept note before us (S/2016/496, annex). It is very opportune that this meeting should
take place this month, almost a year since 19 June was
designated as the International Day for the Elimination
of Sexual Violence in Conflict.

We thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
briefing, his efforts in this field and his zero-tolerance
policy, which is important to us all, especially those
who have made zero tolerance a key element in our
participation in peacekeeping missions. We recognize
the important and heartfelt briefings made by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura; the
Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially
women and children, Ms. Maria Grazia Giammarino;
and the representative of the NGO Working Group on
Women, Peace and Security, Ms. Lisa Davis.

One of the direct consequences of the proliferation
of armed conflicts of various kinds is the existence
of more than 60 million refugees and internally
displaced persons around the world. Equally alarming
is the growing presence and activities of terrorist
organizations. In that context, we are concerned by the
increase in and growing use ofviolence against civilians
in armed conflict, which are violations of their most
basic human rights. My country condemns all forms
of sexual exploitation and abuse, and believes that
sexual or gender-based violence should be seen not as a
cultural condition or characteristic of any one country,
but rather as a form of repression and objectionable and
unacceptable suppression.

Sexual violence in the form of sexual slavery
and forced prostitution, pregnancies, abortions and
marriages is aimed not only at violating and attacking
its victims, but also - and despite the progress that
has been made in international human rights law i at
stigmatizing human beings, with consequences not only
for individual victims but also for their families, self-
esteem and personal development. Similarly, victims
of sexual violence may frequently be doubly affected
since, being products of such abuse, their sexual and
reproductive health suffers irreperable damage.

In that context, Uruguay wishes to touch on the
link between sexual violence and the maintenance and
financing of terrorist organizations, which use women
and girls as rewards or incentives to attract and recruit
men and boys, thereby influencing their decision to
join such organizations. Uruguay welcomes the report
(S/2016/36l) of the Secretary-General on conflict-
related sexual violence, in which he carries out an
exhaustive analysis of this scourge and gives special
attention to a growing and alarming trend of acts of
sexual violence committed by terrorist groups, such
as Da'esh, Al-Shabaab, Boko Haram and Al-Qaida,
among others.

Very few weapons have the destructive capacity
and such devastating effects on the social fabric as
sexual Violence. Women are repositories of values and
traditions of their communities and they convey ethnic
and cultural identity through their persons. That results
in their being frequent victims and selective targets of
these crimes committed as war tactics. Such crimes are
often committed by terrorist groups in their effort to
perpetuate themselves and to transmit their ideology to
a new generation.

Uruguay reiterates its firm condemnation of
all forms of trafficking in persons and vigorously
rejects this practice, through which women and girls
are trafficked mainly for sexual purposes, while
terrorist organizations obtain significant sources of
income, which allows them to continue to foster hatred
and violence.

Equally alarming is the reference by the Secretary-
General in his recent report to the use by the Islamic
State of medical personnel to administer treatments
that are harmful to women to accelerate their physical
maturation in order to expedite their sale. Given this
reality, we believe that the international community has
the duty and moral obligation to take urgent action to put
an end to these deplorable acts. Uruguay also condemns
the actions carried out by extremist organizations
against people who have suffered physical and sexual
violence, in particular minorities including lesbians,
gays, bisexuals, transgender and intersex people as a
result of their real or alleged sexual orientation.

Uruguay understands that fighting sexual
violence in armed conflict must be a collective effort.
Governments must act on the front line, but the
seriousness of this crime and its serious and persistent
consequences make it necessary to obtain the support
of the international community in order to be able to
address it.

Every day, about 500 women who are pregnant and/
or with small children die. Most of them are in countries
affected by conflict or natural disasters. Similarly, such
situations expose them to a growing number of diseases
owing to a lack of health care. We therefore emphasize
the importance of ensuring the sexual and reproductive
rights of women in conflict situations, bearing in mind
the fact that all women have the right to freely decide
when and how many children they wish to have and the
fact that this decision must be respected in every setting
in which it arises. That is why Uruguay supported,
in the framework of World Humanitarian Summit,
the joint statement on sexual and reproductive health
in emergency situations. Furthermore, we believe it
is necessary to underscore the greater vulnerability
to trafficking and sexual violence of girls born in
such contexts.

In considering the critical situations that victims
find themselves in and the lack of trust in legal systems,
Uruguay stresses the importance of discretion and trust
for the people in charge of protecting them. In that
connection, we must work with actors in the field to
ensure the validation of processes that should be carried
out immediately once the action has taken place. The
creation of a joint work chain of local public institutions,
humanitarian assistance and civil society organizations
and local and international non-governmental
organizations, together with peacekeepers, is the only
way to achieve the physical and emotional recovery of
victims of sexual violence, their reintegration in society
without stigmatization and the orderly and appropriate
compilation of data that could be crucial to identify
the perpetrators. We also think it is crucial that people

who have suffered sexual violence immediately receive
comprehensive treatment.

Sexual violence is a serious threat to international
peace and security. The Security Council must use
the tools at its disposal to tackle this crime. Uruguay
believes peacekeeping operations are an important
tool for the United Nations in preventing and tackling
sexual violence. In that regard, we underscore the
deterrent effect that peacekeeping operations could
have through their visible presence and monitoring,
the consultations they could carry out among different
segments of society, in particular with women, in order
to compile information and encourage reporting, the
establishment of trust at the community level and their
cooperation with the host State in order to strengthen
gender-sensitive security and justice.

For example, Uruguay participates in the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo with approximately
1,000 troops, who fulfil civilian protection tasks and
make use of joint protection teams to monitor and
address human rights violations. Those peacekeepers
collaborate with civil groups that provide support for
different aspects, including the supply of water and
food and medical attention. They also carry out patrols
to prevent and avoid violations of the rights of women
and girls in remote situations and locations.

Greater inclusion of women in peacekeeping
missions is also appropriate, as they possess a greater
sensitivity to these facts and significantly generate trust.
Their important participation in the search for peace
increases the effectiveness of humanitarian assistance,
credibility in peacekeeping, economic recovery
in post-conflict situations and the sustainability
of peace agreements.

However, that acknowledgement of the contribution
that peacekeeping missions can make when it comes
to preventing and responding to situations of sexual
violence also makes us think again about the seriousness
of sexual violence when it is committed by the forces
who make up these missions against those who they are
called upon to protect. The use of sexual and gender-
based violence by personnel deployed in peacekeeping
missions is worrying. Given this situation, Uruguay
reiterates its commitment to the Secretary-General's
zero-tolerance policy and its willingness to continue
ensuring that those who carry out acts of sexual
violence be held accountable for them.

Another measure the Council can take to counter
sexual violence would be to include this issue in the
work carried out by the Security Council sanctions
committees. Uruguay also understands that it is
critical is to guarantee punishment for those who are
responsible for committing this type of crime. There
is a deep-rooted culture of impunity when it comes to
these crimes, which means that only a few cases are
brought to justice. Rape and other forms of sexual
abuse in the context of armed conflict are banned by
international humanitarian law and clearly violate the
Geneva Conventions and their Additional Protocols.
The perpetrators thereof must be brought to justice.
The Rome Statute of 1998 includes sexual violence
against women and children within the category of
crimes against humanity and war crimes, as well as the
possibility that it could constitute a crime of genocide.

Crimes of this magnitude must not go unpunished.
My country urges the Council to refer such cases to the
International Criminal Court, in the framework of the
Relationship Agreement between the United Nations
and the International Criminal Court, which in our
opinion must be strengthened and improved. So long as
there is no mandatory jurisdiction to which perpetrators
are subjected, these acts will continue to go unpunished
and will increase under the protection afforded by
impunity. We underscore the importance of renewing
our commitment to fighting sexual exploitation and
abuse, the trafficking in persons and the establishment
of effective international legal processes. We think it
is crucial to mobilize additional financial resources
leading to the adoption of programmes that can respond
to the needs of victims of sexual exploitation and abuse
and that promote cross-cutting gender equity.

It is increasingly clear that, given the serious
upheaval that these crimes create for international law
and world peace, the international community must
be committed to adopting measures and must identify
actions for victims in favour ofjustice. Otherwise, the
story of the development of conflicts will continue to
be one of the loss of lives, attacks against civilians,
destruction, and social and economic violence. But
sexual violence in times of war tends to be an invisible
crime. The time has come to break the silence and
to bring an end to such objectionable acts, which are
particularly harmful to the freedom and dignity of
women and girls, who find themselves among the most
vulnerable victims of armed conflicts.
