Mrs. Kazragiene (Lithuania): Allow me at the
outset to welcome the Nigerian presidency of the
Security Council this month and to express my
delegation's appreciation for its having convened
today's debate. We align ourselves with the statement
delivered by observer of the European Union.

Lithuania is firmly convinced that national,
regional and international activities related to peace
and security should take gender issues into account by
protecting women and promoting their participation as
beneficiaries, practitioners and decision-makers.
Resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions on
women and peace and security provide us with a useful
framework in this regard. We support the prompt and
full implementation of these resolutions.

Resolution 1325 (2000) is relevant to the
implementation of Lithuania's foreign, security and
development cooperation policy objectives, as well as
our participation in international peacebuilding and
peacekeeping missions. Lithuania was one of
38 Member States that contributed to the Secretary-
General's report on women and peace and security
(S/2011/598*).

The Lithuanian National Programme on Equal
Opportunities for Women and Men 2010-2014 raised,
for the first time, gender issues in the national defence
system and included measures for training gender
experts who will now prepare Lithuanian personnel in
this area for deployment to missions and operations. As
announced by Lithuanian President Dalia Grybauskaite
during the General Assembly general debate in
September (see A/66/PV.16), Lithuania drew up its first
national action plan for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) in 2011. We seek through the
national action plan to facilitate outreach to our society
concerning the aims of the resolution, to promote and
protect women's rights, to encourage them to
participate in international military and civil operations
and missions, to involve more institutions and
non-governmental organizations, and to streamline
activities at all levels.

With respect to national action plans, we note
with interest the references in the Secretary-General's
report to the practices in some countries of providing
for the production of shadow reports of civil society
organizations as part of their monitoring mechanisms.
Following the adoption of its national action plan,
Lithuania intends to apply for membership in the
Group of Friends of resolution 1325 (2000).

Last June, women leaders from all parts of the
world - Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Wallstrom among them - met in Vilnius at a
conference entitled "Women Enhancing Democracy:
Best Practices" under the Lithuanian presidency of the
Community of Democracies, and shared their
experiences and best practices in enhancing the role of
women. The Working Group on Gender Equality and
Women's Rights, co-chaired by the United States of
America and Lithuania, discussed, among other
priority issues, women and peace and security. The
conference showed that, in many parts of the world, the
involvement of women is still low. Indeed, women
could and should play a bigger role in human rights
and security monitoring and establish early warning
systems to generate information about specific threats,
peace talks, donor conferences, elections and decision-
making.

Lithuania attaches particular importance to
conflict prevention. We support the first General
Assembly resolution on strengthening the role of
mediation in the peaceful settlement of disputes
(resolution 65/283), which, inter alia, advocates the
enhanced role of women in peace mediation. We
welcome the joint strategy on gender and mediation
launched by the Department of Political Affairs and
UN-Women, and look forward to its further
implementation.

Successive chairmanships of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), including
that of Lithuania, have sought to include gender issues
within the scope of OSCE activities related to peace
and security. Ministerial Council Decision 14/05 builds
in part on resolution 1325 (2000) and calls for
engaging women in conflict prevention, crisis

management and post-conflict rehabilitation. In
October, the OSCE held a major conference in
Sarajevo entitled "UNSCR 1325: Moving Beyond
Theory to Maximize Security in the OSCE". This year,
the Lithuanian OSCE Chairman-in-Office appointed
his Special Representative on Gender Issues,
Ms. Wendy Patten, to coordinate implementation of the
2004 OSCE Action Plan for the Promotion of Gender
Equality.

The improvement of the status of women, in
particular in countries with identified patterns of
conflict-related sexual violence, starts with addressing
the very basic issues involved in enabling women to
live a more decent life. The experience of Lithuania
and other partner countries in Afghanistan, where
Lithuania is leading a provincial reconstruction team,
shows that women's empowerment and full
participation at all levels of economic, political and
social life are key not only to peace and security but
also to poverty reduction, economic recovery and
sustainable development. To cite but two examples,
one project aims at consulting local medics and
patients on midwifery and other women's health-
related questions at the provincial hospital. Another
important development project for local women and
their organizations was dedicated to strengthening the
capacity of the provincial administration and local
non-governmental organizations to prepare and
implement their own projects.

Finally, Lithuania calls on the Security Council to
use its authority to ensure that all resolutions, including
those on mission mandates and their renewal, integrate
and advance the women and peace and security agenda.

