Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French): The
Security Council adopted resolution 1325 (2000) more
than 13 years ago. Nevertheless, as my colleague
from Liechtenstein has just recalled, sexual violence,
especially rape, in countries in conflict and post-
conflict situations, remains a sad reality. We cannot
turn a blind eye on those human rights violations.

Switzerland therefore thanks your delegation,
Madame President, for convening this debate, and
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2014/181) on
conflict-related sexual violence, which emphasizes the
scope of the problem.

In the majority of the situations that have been
observed, sexual violence is perpetrated as much by
Government forces as by armed opposition groups.
Our response to that must be firm: there shall be no
impunity for the perpetrators of those crimes, and we
will not rest until justice is done. In that regard, we
would like to emphasize the recommendations of the
Secretary-General on the need for countries to foster
national ownership, leadership and responsibility and
to strengthen the capacity of their civilian and military
justice systems.

In that context, we would do well to recall the
complementary role of the International Criminal Court
when States are either unable or unwilling to render
justice to the victims of acts of serious sexual violence
insofar as they constitute crimes against humanity or
war crimes.

We welcome the programmes for training and
consciousness-raising as well as the monitoring
measures such as those being pursued within the
framework of human rights due diligence policy of the
African Union Mission in Somalia. Regular reports on
sexual and gender-based violence along with a zero-
tolerance policy vis-a-vis the perpetrators of such
crimes are indispensable.

Last March, the Human Rights Council in Geneva
hosted a panel on sexual violence in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which again brought to our
attention the massive character of violence against
women in that context. Armed conflicts and the
weakness of State institutions, especially the judiciary
and the security forces, are the primary destabilizing
factors. The high incidence of sexual violence,
especially rape, is a source of grave concern, all the
more so because systematic impunity creates a context
that encourages such violations.

Three months ago, just before the second Geneva
Conference, 50 women from across Syria shared with
us their priorities regarding the issue of sexual violence.
They stressed that rendering justice was essential. Over
a year ago, Switzerland, together with more than 60
other States, called on the Security Council to refer
the situation in Syria to the International Criminal
Court. That demand is more timely now than ever, and
in that regard we support France's initiative to draft a
resolution to that end.

It is also crucial, in the early stages of a peace
process, to adopt gender-sensitive policies and measures
to protect women and girls from sexual exploitation,
early marriage, human trafficking and rape. What other
options do we have for action? While there may be no
ready-made solutions, I would like to explore three
areas that are addressed in the report.

We welcome the Secretary-General's recommendation
to emphasize the decisive role of civil society, in
particular women's organizations and community
leaders, in the many efforts to eliminate sexual violence
against women. We need to ensure that women's
participation in peace negotiations and processes
is conducted on an equal footing with men and that
the resulting agreements take gender problems into
account.

We share the Secretary-General's concerns about
the fate of displaced populations, whose majority
consists of women and girls. Their limited access to
resources makes them that much more vulnerable to
sexual Violence and sexual exploitation. We welcome
the fact that his recommendations insist that prevention
be an integral part of all country-specific resolutions
by the Security Council. It is essential that prevention
and protection measures be tailored to the context of
displacement.

Finally, we share the Secretary-General's concern
about the lack of official data on sexual violence. We
need reliable data to effectively combat violations
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law in situations of armed conflict and
internal disturbances. With the goal of improving
data collection, Switzerland supports the Harvard
University Program on Humanitarian Policy and
Conflict Research, which focuses on the development
of systematic methodological guidance that can be
applied to monitoring, reporting and fact-finding
efforts. We continue to believe that such instruments
are essential for improving the prevention of crimes of
sexual Violence.

Finally, allow me to reiterate the importance of
linking our efforts to protect and strengthen women's
rights with our commitment to promote women's
participation. Men, too, have everything to gain from
such efforts. The development of a truly global society
will be achieved only by insuring the equal participation
of women and men in all aspects of the peacemaking,
peacebuilding and reconstruction processes. Equal
participation is a prerequisite for comprehensively
addressing gender-based violence, as well as its causes
and its consequences. Therefore, Switzerland would
like to stress the importance of the latest resolutions
on the issue, in particular resolution 2122 (2013).
Furthermore, we call upon all actors to continue their
efforts for the complete and cohesive implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).

In conclusion, we commend Special Representative
Zainab Bangura, who has played an outstanding role
in drawing up joint strategies with Governments to
combat sexual violence. Switzerland congratulates
her for the progress made in the implementation of
the frameworks and looks forward to hosting the next
donor conference of the United Nations Action against
Sexual Violence in Conflict.

