Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I would like to
thank South Africa for convening this debate and for
shepherding the tenth resolution on women and peace
and security (resolution 2493 (2019)) safely across the
line. Ireland co-sponsored the resolution. Of course, we
all hoped for more. It may not be perfect - little of the
women and peace and security reality is optimal. We
support you, Madam President, so that we can build a
better future together.

Ireland aligns itself with the statements to be made
on behalf of the European Union and on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Women and Peace and Security,
respectively.

As an active member of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), we sincerely hope to see the Chair
of the PBC brief the Council on this topic in the future.

Many speakers have today referred to the upcoming
twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000). In
my View, that should be a moment for a clear-eyed
assessment of what has been achieved rather than a
cause for celebration. Ireland welcomes the Secretary-
General's sobering report (S/2019/800) outlining
the increasing attacks against women human rights
defenders and peacebuilders and the unacceptable
continued exclusion of women from peace and political
processes. I know that I am not alone in the Chamber in
feeling a growing sense of frustration at the slow pace
of change. Frankly, I also feel shame at the growing
number of threats to the progress already made. The
fact is that those who wage wars - who are not, in
the main, women - continue to set the parameters for
peace without women. Quite apart from the inequality
that that serves to reinforce, let us be clear, it is also
a fundamentally ineffective way to build peace. We
have seen the evidence that peace is more durable when
women have participated in its negotiation. Which part
of that reality do we not yet understand? Put simply,
women and peace and security ought to be part of all of
our peacebuilding work, which, in this Chamber entails
every mandate renewal, every geographic and thematic
discussion, every local consultation and every piece
of analysis completed in the field. We simply cannot
afford for this issue to be confined to one open debate
in October of every year. That formula clearly has not
worked so far.

Ireland sees the sustaining peace agenda and
the women and peace and security agenda not as
separate but as one and the same process. Through the
peacebuilding architecture review next year, we will
work to ensure the full recognition of that synergy.
Gender equality is at the heart of my country's foreign
and development cooperation policy. We launched
our third national action plan on women and peace
and security earlier this year. We match our overseas
engagement with domestic action, which is focused on
migrant women affected by conflict living in Ireland
and those affected by conflict in Northern Ireland.

Ireland believes in women's meaningful
participation in peacebuilding because we have lived
it. It is more than 20 years since the Northern Ireland
Women's Coalition participated in the Good Friday
Agreement. Yet still today that Agreement is one of
the few global examples in which women have directly
participated in a peace process. The elements introduced
by women to the Good Friday Agreement have been
critical to sustaining peace over the two decades that
followed because they went to the root causes of the
conflict and helped to imagine a positive vision of a
Northern Ireland of the future.

With over 60 years of continuing and unbroken
peacekeeping experience, Ireland knows well how
critical it is to integrate a gender perspective in
order to empower women in peacekeeping. Ireland
is a gender champion within the Secretary-General's
Action for Peacekeeping initiative, and we support the
Secretary-General's targets. We are particularly proud
that today the highest-ranking female United Nations
peacekeeper is an Irish woman - Brigadier General
Maureen O'Brien, Acting Force Commander of the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force in the
Golan Heights. We take the same approach in our work
on disarmament and humanitarian action, in which we
View the equal participation of women as fundamental.

The Secretary-General today rightly raised the
issue of funding. As the Council is aware, today's
debate is one of the most oversubscribed every year. We
are all eager to talk, but what if we were as eager to
invest in women? It is essential that States Members of
the United Nations continue to increase their support
for gender equality and women's organizations. Earlier
this year, Ireland completed its two years as Chair of the
Commission on the Status of Women, so we know only
too well the challenges, complexity and urgency of this
debate. As an aspiring member of the Security Council,
Ireland is committed to standing up, raising our voice
and finding the resources to move beyond rhetoric and
towards reality. There is a short three-word sentence in
the Secretary-General's report that really should guide
us for the next 12 months, which is that implementation
remains critical - or as Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka
of UN-Women likes to say, "do, do, do".

