Mr. Habib (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, I wish to thank you for having organized
this debate. I convey our gratitude to His Excellency
the Secretary-General and to the Chairperson of the
Peacebuilding Commission and Permanent
Representative of Germany for their statements, which
were invaluable.

A great many regions throughout the world
continue to be devastated by conflict, which is proof of
the need, on the one hand, to strive to contain tensions
and, on the other, to assist States emerging from
conflict to move to the phase of lasting peace and to
achieve development. Here we wish to express our
gratitude to the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2010/386), and we agree with him that the main
challenge facing the international community is
peacebuilding.

We support the plan of action drawn up by the
Secretary-General to bolster the United Nations
response to post-crisis situations. We welcome the
positive measures adopted and implemented thus far,
and we consider that in future we should focus on a
faster response, more in line with the needs of
peacebuilding. We wish to make some comments in
that context.

First, we welcome the measures adopted to back
the role of the leadership on the ground and to
strengthen cooperation between United Nations
Headquarters and country teams through systematic
communications, offering expertise and strengthening
accountability.

Secondly, we should establish an integrated
strategy for rapid peacebuilding, a strategy that would
incorporate a great many priorities in various fields -
political, security and development. That strategy
should be based on an impartial analysis of the root
causes of conflict and its dynamics. It should also build
bridges between short-term results and preparation for
structural, long-term objectives. The strategy should be
implemented through dialogue and coordination with
stakeholders at the local level. It should be based on an
assessment of existing local capacities and potential in
order to utilize them as successfully as possible.

Thirdly, national ownership is critical to ensuring
the success of peace efforts. Therefore national
authorities should discharge their primary
responsibility, which is to rebuild institutions for
security, governance and economic revival, with the
assistance of the United Nations and international
partners.

Fourthly, the United Nations should bolster
relations with all partners to provide the necessary
financing in a timely way, in accordance with national
priorities for peacebuilding. In that regard, increased
contributions to the Peacebuilding Fund since 2009,
the Fund's undertaking the process of accurately
assessing the results of its actions, and the
confirmation of its impact are positive contributions.
Lebanon believes that a number of local infrastructure
projects are insufficiently financed, despite their
positive impact in changing the course of the conflict.
All of that impedes the peacebuilding process.

Fifthly, we believe that peacebuilding is an effort
that is collective in nature, one in which a great many
United Nations agencies and international partners
participate. To ensure greater effectiveness, it is
imperative that roles be clearly defined and the
division of labour in the area of peacebuilding clearly
mapped out, based on technical expertise and the
direction that the peacebuilding process takes on the
ground.

Sixthly, women and children are the main victims
of conflict. In the post-conflict period, women should
be given the opportunity to participate in
reconstruction and peacebuilding, as well as in peace
negotiations. Those factors serve to promote the
agreements that the parties are working to reach.
Furthermore, including women in positions of power
reduces the likelihood of a resumption of conflict. That
is why we concur with the Secretary-General's
statement that greater efforts should be made to meet
women's needs in post-conflict situations and to
increase their participation in the peacebuilding
process.

Lastly, we welcome the ongoing review of the
Peacebuilding Commission, and we hope it will lead to
increased coordination between the Commission and
the Security Council.

It is often said that the end of a conflict does not
always mean that peace has been achieved. Quite often,
building genuine, lasting peace after a conflict is a
complex and arduous road. It is, however, one that
should be taken, because it is the only one that will
lead to the stability and development of societies.

