Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank the
Chef de Cabinet of the Secretary-General for having
briefed us on the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda (S/2017/861). I also thank the Executive Director
of UN-Women, Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka;
Secretary-General of the International Organization of
La Francophonie, Ms. Michaelle Jean; and our terrific
civil society briefer from Colombia, Ms. Charo Mina-
Rojas, for their important perspectives.

Bhimrao Ambedkar, the esteemed Indianjurist and
social activis,t once said,

"I measure the progress of a community by the
degree of progress which women have achieved."

So as we engage in this debate today, I think we
should keep Mr. Ambedkar's simple but important idea
in mind.

The role of women in maintaining international
peace and security is more critical than ever, but we
must continue to move from rhetoric to reality when it
comes to fully implementing the women and peace and
security agenda. Today's debate should remind us all
of the collective work that is still required to see more
women gain positions of leadership in Government and
civil society and seats at the negotiating table. As the
Secretary-General's report makes clear, we have so
much more to do to achieve inclusivity.

For our part, the United States remains committed
to advancing the full implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). Earlier this month the United States took a
major legislative step to advance the women and peace
and security agenda. On 6 October, the United States
Women, Peace, and Security Act of 2017 was signed
into law. That reflects a growing body of evidence
confirming that the inclusion of women in peace
processes helps reduce conflict and advance stability
over the long term. That Act, for example, requires my
Government to develop a comprehensive strategy to
expand women's participation in security operations.
It also reflects the now indisputable fact that when
women are involved in efforts to bring about peace and
security, the results are more sustainable.

We are taking other important steps to advance
this agenda, particularly through women's economic
empowerment. We know that women's full participation
in the economy not only leads to national growth and
prosperity, it also bolsters stability for all. That is why
the United States has helped spearhead the Women
Entrepreneurs Finance Initiative, which already has
$340 million in donor commitments and will support
women entrepreneurs in developing countries by
increasing their access to finance, markets, technology
and networks - everything they need to start and grow
a business.

I would like to turn now to the Secretary-General's
report. First, we were disheartened to learn that the
number of women participating in United Nations
co-led peace processes has decreased. Research shows
that the participation in a peace negotiation by women
in civil society groups makes the resulting agreement
64 per cent less likely to fail and 35 per cent more likely
to endure at least 15 years. We welcome the Secretary-
General's commitment to addressing this, but I must
underscore that we all need to do more to improve
women's meaningful participation in peace processes.
In that connection, we welcome the development of
the High-level Advisory Board on Mediation, and
we hope it will find effective ways to achieve equal
representation of women in mediation.

We cannot talk about the involvement of women in
peace processes without applauding one recent example:
Colombia. In large part because of the inclusion of
women in Colombia's peace negotiations - women
like Ms. Mina-Rojas - Colombia's peace agreement
includes more than 100 gender-specific provisions.
Therefore, when women effectively influence a
peace process, it is more likely that an agreement
will be reached, implemented and sustained, and we
are confident that Colombia will continue to be an
important example of that.
Secondly, we welcome the Secretary-General's
commitment to improving impact evaluation of gender-
inclusion efforts. Whether on corporate boards, in
Government or in post-conflict zones, we know that
gender parity makes teams more effective and makes
women more empowered. We look forward to results
being included in next year's annual report.

Thirdly, we welcome increased attention on the
nexus between violent extremism and women and
peace and security. In our view, women continue to be
an underutilized and undertapped resource in the fight
against violent extremism. Women are of course local
peacebuilders and grass-roots civil society activists.
They are in touch with their communities and should
therefore be seen also as a first line of defence in
detecting radicalization in their communities. My
country is dedicating increased focus and resources to
understanding the variety of roles that women play in
this space, including how women can play more vital
roles in preventing terrorist ideologies from taking root.

We are grateful that there are women defying
terrorist ideologies across the globe, often putting their
own lives at risk in doing so. For example, when the
Taliban attacked Kunduz in 2015 and again in 2016,
each time they tried to kill Ms. Sediqa Sherzai, a brave
journalist who runs Radio Roshani in Afghanistan.
Ms. Sherzai leads discussion programmes and call-
in shows, and she urges women to assert their rights
to an education and to lead as vital voices in their
communities. Courageous women activists like
Ms. Sherzai are making a difference, and thanks to the
women and peace and security agenda at the United
Nations, we are hopeful that those gains will continue.

The United States remains fully committed to the
robust implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda. We welcome the Secretary-General's
strong commitment to this issue, and we look forward
to continuing to partner with the United Nations and
other Member State to advance those goals.

