Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): My
country's delegation would like to thank Mr. Heiko
Maas, Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany
and President of the Security Council for this month.
We wish him every success in steering this constructive
and important dialogue. We also thank Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres and Ms. Pramila Patten, his
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
for their valuable briefings.

I would also like to thank the Iraqi Nadia Murad
and her colleague Dr. Denis Mukwege, who were jointly
awarded the 2018 Nobel Peace Prize as a result of their
outstanding role in upholding the noble objectives of
humankind and in defending the oppressed throughout
the world. Iraq is proud of Ms. Murad, who as a young
woman suffered, alongside her fellow Yazidis, terribly
at the hands Da'esh. We would also like to thank
Barrister Amal Clooney for the important role she has
played in providing support to Yazidi women survivors.

My delegation would like to convey its sincere
condolences to the people and Government of Sri Lanka
and to the families of the victims of the terrorist attacks
that killed many innocent victims. We categorically
reject all terrorist acts that target civilians, regardless
of their religious, sectarian or ethnic identity.

Iraq has turned the page on a sombre part of its
history after defeating the Da'esh terrorist group, which
targeted the land and people of Iraq. That group carried
out the most heinous crimes, which have no precedent
in human history. After the enormous sacrifices made
by our people from all religious and ethnic backgrounds
in order to recover their land, which was occupied by
Da'esh on 10 June 2014, Iraq decided to take practical
measures to return all displaced persons to their areas
of origin and to provide them with redress following
the suffering endured - especially by Yazidi women
and girls, who are a basic component of the Iraqi
society - as a result of the Da'esh terrorist group.

Allow me to explain some of the measures that
my country has taken in this regard. Together with
the Yazidi victims, including Nadia Murad, President
Barham Salih of Iraq put forward a draft bill for
Yazidi female survivors. That draft bill was submitted
this month to the Iraqi Parliament, to be debated and
adopted. It seeks to help Yazidi female survivors
who had been kidnapped by Da'esh on 10 June 2014
and subsequently liberated. The bill aims to provide
them with financial and moral compensation and to
rehabilitate them in order to ensure that they have a life
of dignity and to undertake all the necessary measures
to reintegrate them into society and rehabilitate the
infrastructure in their regions.

The bill would designate 3 August every year as
a national day of awareness of the heinous crimes
committed by terrorist groups, such as the torture,
kidnapping, massacres and displacement of Yazidi
women and girls. The law would prohibit forever
amnesty for those who are found responsible for crimes
against Yazidi women. There will be no statute of
limitations for those crimes. This is intended to deal,
within the framework of the law, with the perpetrators
of these crimes and with those who are complicit in
committing them.

In the context of our work with the United Nations to
prosecute the perpetrators of such crimes in the context
of fighting impunity, on 25 March Iraq submitted to the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict a list ofpersons
accused of human trafficking who have been arrested by
Iraqi security forces and surrendered to the Prosecutor's
Office so that they can face just punishment. Iraq
aims to ensure the collection of evidence for crimes
perpetrated by Da'esh by working with the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, created under resolution 2379 (2017),
so as to bring justice for the victims and to ensure that
perpetrators are brought before Iraqi justice. Indeed,
the Iraqi judicial authorities are entirely independent
in their rulings and judgments according to the law.
They allow for justice to be carried out for all kinds
of crimes.

On 9 December 2018, Iraq launched its national
strategy to combat violence against women. That
is an important step to ensure the implementation
of women's and girls' rights and to take measures to
prevent violence against them. It was supported by the
Kingdoms of Sweden and Norway and in cooperation
with the United Nations Population Fund, along with
international civil society organizations.

In order to ensure that women's capabilities and
participation can also be strengthened in the drafting of
national policies and in decision-making at all levels,
Iraq is working with its international partners, the
United Nations and civil society organizations to draft
our second national plan to implement resolution 1325
(2000). We presented our first such plan in April 2014.

