The President: I would like to thank everyone
who has contributed to what has been a very good
debate.

There are no speakers remaining on my list.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to the continuing and full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
welcomes the increasing focus on the situation of
women and girls in armed conflict since the
adoption of that resolution in October 2000. The
Council recalls the statement by its President of
31 October 2002 and the meeting held on
29 October 2003 as valuable demonstrations of
that commitment.

"The Security Council also recalls the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action
(A/52/231) and the outcome document of the
twenty-third special session of the United Nations
General Assembly entitled 'Women 2000: gender
equality, development and peace for the twenty-
first century' (A/S-23/10/Rev.1), in particular the
commitments concerning women and armed
conflict.

"The Security Council welcomes the Report
of the Secretary-General on women and peace
and security (S/2004/814) and expresses its
intention to study its recommendations. The
Council welcomes the efforts of the United
Nations system, Member States, civil society and
other relevant actors to promote the equal
participation of women in efforts to build
sustainable peace and security.

"The Security Council strongly condemns
the continued acts of gender-based violence in
situations of armed conflict. The Council also
condemns all violations of the human rights of
women and girls in situations of armed conflict
and the use of sexual exploitation, violence and
abuse. The Council urges the complete cessation
by all parties of such acts with immediate effect.
The Council stresses the need to end impunity for
such acts as part of a comprehensive approach to
seeking peace, justice, truth and national
reconciliation. The Council welcomes the efforts
of the United Nations system to establish and
implement strategies and programmes to prevent
and report on gender-based violence, and urges
the Secretary-General to further his efforts in this
regard. The Council requests the Secretary-
General to ensure that human rights monitors and
members of commissions of inquiry have the
necessary expertise and training in gender-based
crimes and in the conduct of investigations,
including in a culturally sensitive manner
favourable to the needs, dignity and rights of the
victims. The Council urges all international and
national courts specifically established to
prosecute war-related crimes to provide gender
expertise, gender training for all staff and gender-
sensitive programmes for victims and witness
protection. The Council emphasizes the urgent
need for programmes that provide support to
survivors of gender-based violence. The Council
further requests that appropriate attention is given
to the issue of gender-based violence in all future
reports to the Council.

"The Security Council reaffirms the
important role of women in the prevention of
conflict and supports the Secretary-General's
intention to develop a comprehensive system-
wide strategy and action plan for increasing
attention to gender perspectives in conflict
prevention. The Council urges all relevant actors
to work collaboratively, including through
strengthened interaction with women's
organizations, to ensure the full participation of
women and the incorporation of a gender
perspective in all conflict prevention work.

"The Security Council also welcomes the
Secretary-General's intention to develop a
comprehensive strategy and action plan for
mainstreaming a gender perspective into all
peacekeeping activities and operations and to

incorporate gender perspectives in each thematic
and country report to the Council. In support of
this process, the Council reaffirms its
commitment to integrate fully gender
perspectives into the mandates of all
peacekeeping missions. The Council recognizes
the contribution of the gender adviser within the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to
advancing the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), and requests the Secretary-General to
consider an equivalent arrangement within the
Department of Political Affairs to further support
such implementation.

"The Security Council considers that an
increase in the representation of women in all
aspects of conflict prevention, peacekeeping and
peace-building operations and humanitarian
response is urgently needed. To that end, the
Council urges the Secretary-General to strengthen
his efforts to identify suitable female candidates,
including, as appropriate, from troop-contributing
countries, in conformity with Article 101 of the
Charter of the United Nations and taking into
account the principle of equitable geographical
balance. Such efforts should include the
implementation of targeted recruitment strategies
and also seek to identify candidates for senior
level positions, including in the military and
civilian police services.

"The Security Council recognizes the vital
contribution of women in promoting peace and
their role in reconstruction processes. The
Council welcomes the Secretary-General's
intention to develop strategies to encourage
women's full participation in all stages of the
peace process. The Council also requests the
Secretary-General to encourage gender
mainstreaming in disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes by developing
guidelines to increase attention to the needs of
women and girls in such programmes. The
Council further requests the Secretary-General to
mainstream a gender perspective in all aspects of
post-conflict reconstruction programmes,
including through the strengthening of gender
theme groups in countries emerging from
conflict, and to ensure that all policies and
programmes in support of post-conflict
constitutional, judicial and legislative reform,

including truth and reconciliation and electoral
processes, promote the full participation of
women, gender equality and women's human
rights.

"The Security Council recognizes the
important contribution of civil society to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
encourages Member States to continue to
collaborate with civil society, in particular with
local women's networks and organizations, in
order to strengthen implementation. To that end,
the Council welcomes the efforts of Member
States in implementing resolution 1325 (2000) at
the national level, including the development of
national action plans, and encourages Member
States to continue to pursue such implementation.

"The Security Council recognizes that
significant progress has been made in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in
certain areas of the United Nations peace and
security work. The Council expresses its
readiness to further promote the implementation
of this resolution, and in particular through active
cooperation with the Economic and Social
Council and the General Assembly. In order to
further consolidate this progress, the Council
requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
Security Council in October 2005 an action plan,
with time lines, for implementing resolution 1325
(2000) across the United Nations system, with a
view to strengthening commitment and
accountability at the highest levels, as well as to
allow for improved accountability, monitoring
and reporting on progress on implementation
within the United Nations system."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2004/40.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has now concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.50 pm.
