Mr. Blanchard (Canada): First, I would like to
say how happy, delightful and inspiring it was for us
to learn of the appointment of the new President of
Ethiopia this morning. We want to congratulate our
friends from Ethiopia on the appointment of President
Sahle-Work Zewde by the Parliament. It is not only an
exceptional appointment, but also an inspiration for the
entire world. We continue to salute what is being done in
Ethiopia and throughout the world, and specifically in
Africa, for the leadership and empowerment of women.
As I said, it is an inspiration for the entire world.

I am pleased to speak today on behalf of the Group
of Friends of Women, Peace and Security, an informal
network of 54 interested Member States, chaired by
Canada, representing all five regional groups at the
United Nations.
The Group warmly congratulates Nadia Murad and
Denis Mukwege on being awarded the Nobel Peace
Prize for their efforts to end the use sexual violence
as a tactic of war and armed conflict. Let that be an
inspiration to the United Nations and all Member
States that prompts them to redouble their efforts to
end sexual and gender-based violence in armed conflict
by ending impunity, strengthening compliance with
international humanitarian law, bringing perpetrators
to justice, reinforcing preventive measures, including
through Security Council sanctions, and providing
comprehensive assistance to survivors. We must
ensure that the stigma of sexual violence falls upon the
perpetrators of such acts and not on the survivors.

The Group applauds the focus on women's political
and economic empowerment at this year's open debate.
The linkage between women's empowerment and peace
and security is at the core of the women and peace and
security agenda. When societies achieve higher levels
of gender equality, they are less susceptible to armed
conflict. When women are included in peace processes,
peace agreements are more likely to be reached and are
more likely to endure. Women play an indispensable role
in peacekeeping. Their full and meaningful participation
at all levels is key to the operational effectiveness of
missions. Women's economic empowerment is an
integral and often overlooked conflict-prevention and
conflict-recovery strategy. Gender equality and the
empowerment of all women and girls are central to the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals and
to sustaining peace. The Group strongly believes that
efforts to achieve gender equality are not a detraction
from peace and security efforts; they are a foundation
of peace.

In the light of such facts, the persistent absence
of women's meaningful participation in peace and
security efforts should remain a matter of heightened
concern for the Security Council. As was thoroughly
documented in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2018/900), despite women playing instrumental roles
in efforts to prevent and resolve conflict, they remain
consistently underrepresented in efforts to negotiate
peaceful political resolutions and peace agreements. In
the past quarter century, women constituted only 2 per
cent of mediators, 8 per cent of negotiators and 5 per
cent of witnesses and signatories in all major peace
processes. The consequences of the continued absence
of women are compounded over time, as gender-blind
peace agreements can exacerbate gender inequalities in
post-conflict societies.
Women's meaningful economic and political
participation demands the early involvement of
women in key decision-making roles at all levels, the
addressing of the full scope of women's and girls'
human rights and gender equality and the inclusion
of gender expertise and analysis in all stages of the
conflict cycle. As the Independent Progress Study
on Youth, Peace and Security emphasized, we must
also invest in young women's capacities, agency and
leadership and address the structural barriers limiting
youth participation - and particularly the participation
of young women - in peace efforts. We must work
together to recognize and actively address obstacles
to meaningful women's participation, whether they be
cultural, structural or institutional in nature. We must
also strengthen the capacity of women to participate in
peace and security efforts, including through political,
logistical and financial support. Finally, we must
confront the systems of violence and intimidation that
prevent women of all ages from attaining full equality
in their societies.

The Group welcomes recent efforts undertaken by
the Secretary-General to enhance women's participation
at the United Nations. That includes the implementation
of a system-wide gender-parity strategy and, notably,
the realization of gender parity, both in the Senior
Management Group and among resident coordinators.
The Group also welcomes the continued exchange of
best practices through the Women, Peace, and Security
Focal Points Network and the creation of women

mediator networks to enhance women's influence in
peace processes.

While the Security Council itself has yet to
achieve gender balance, the Group welcomes efforts
undertaken by members of the Council to more
systematically include women in its work. That
includes the establishment of the Informal Experts
Group, the encouragement to all briefers to mainstream
gender analysis in their interventions, the integration
and strengthening of women and peace and security
provisions in resolutions, presidential statements and
press statements, meeting with women's groups during
Council field visits and increasing the number ofwomen
civil-society briefers outside the debate on women and
peace and security. We encourage Council members
to continue to build upon such best practices. At the
same time, more needs to be done to fully implement
the existing resolutions, reinforce the follow-up and
monitor the progress made.
Finally, as we approach the twentieth anniversary
of resolution 1325 (2000) in 2020, the Group calls
on all stakeholders to expand their efforts to realize
all four pillars of the women and peace and security
agenda, including prevention, participation, protection
and post-conflict recovery. While much has been
achieved since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
we are far from realizing the transformational potential
of women's equality and meaningful economic and
political participation for peace and development.

I would like to make a few additional remarks in a
national capacity.

Resolution 1325 (2000) was adopted when Canada
was last on the Security Council. Since then, important
progress has been made in implementing the women
and peace and security agenda, including through
the adoption and renewal of an increasing number of
national action plans. However, too many gaps remain.
It is up to the Security Council and individual Member
States to take concrete actions.

There is no quick fix. It will not be enough to
add a woman mediator here or a gender adviser there.
Structural, political, economic and social gender-
discrimination exists in all of our countries. Conflict
only exacerbates those inequalities. Long-term
measures and sustained investments of our time and
resources are required to achieve transformative results.

Canada is taking such measures. We are examining
how our national action plan on women and peace
and security can better address the violence and
discrimination faced by indigenous women and girls
in Canada. Internationally, Canada's feminist foreign
policy demands that our approach to diplomacy, trade,
security and development fully take into account the
needs of women and girls in all their diversity. We are
doing so because we know the impact is greater, the
results more sustained and the benefits more widespread.
It is a conscious decision to be more effective.

We also recognize that being more effective means
working together with others in the pursuit of peace.
Following the launch of our second national action
plan last year, we increased our efforts to advance
the women and peace and security agenda in all
forums - including those where women and peace
and security has not traditionally been at the forefront.
Throughout our Group of Seven (G-7) presidency,
Canada has promoted gender equality. We launched
the G-7 Women, Peace and Security Partnerships
Initiative, which aims to increase women and peace and
security implementation in partnership countries. We
are so pleased to be partnering with Cote d'Ivoire on
that important initiative.

As a long-standing promoter and defender of the
multilateral system, Canada stands ready to improve it.
Recognizing that progress to date has been too slow,
Canada launched the Elsie Initiative for Women in Peace
Operations to increase the meaningful participation of
uniformed women in United Nations peace operations.
To that end, Canada is establishing partnerships with
the Ghana armed forces and the Zambia police service.

Canada believes that we have a lot to learn from
others and from one another. Just last month, Canada,
together with the European Union, hosted a meeting of
women Foreign Ministers in Montreal for a discussion
on current challenges to global peace and security. At
that meeting, Canada's Foreign Minister announced
that our Government will be appointing a women
and peace and security ambassador to strengthen the
implementation of our action plan. The Minister also
announced that Canada will be co-hosting the Women,
Peace and Security Focal Points Network with Uruguay
in 2020 - the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000).

(spoke in French)

We salute women around the world who bravely
share their personal experiences of conflict and who
take action at the local, regional and international levels.
They remind us that the women and peace and security
agenda is not just a normative issue to be discussed in
New York, it has a genuine impact on a global scale.
I would like to recognize the important work being
carried out by Nobel Peace Prize laureate Nadia
Murad in raising awareness about sexual violence in
conflict. When she visited Canada in October 2016, she
challenged Canadian legislators, Government officials
and civil society to do more to advance the women and
peace and security agenda. It is one of the reasons that
her photo is on the cover of our national action plan on
women and peace and security.

In order to do their important work, local women
peacebuilders need resources. Last year, Canada
doubled its support to the Women's Peace and
Humanitarian Fund. We encourage other countries to
support that fund, which seeks to strengthen women's
meaningful participation in peace and security efforts.
Canada supports efforts in the Council to
mainstream the women and peace and security agenda
in all of the Council's work. If elected to the Security
Council for the period 2021-2022, members can rest
assured that Canada will continue to champion the
women and peace and security agenda. We will seek
opportunities to create and support transformative
solutions to gender-based issues in conflict situations.
We will defend women's voices and human rights. We
will challenge narratives that undermine women's
ability to contribute, lead and shape solutions. We will
continue to work together with civil society, Member
States and the United Nations to help reinvigorate the
implementation of this important agenda.

