Mr. Khiari (Tunisia) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the French presidency for
having convened this meeting in order to take stock of
the achievements made and prospects for the holistic
and full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). The
resolution is indubitably a cornerstone in many regards,

by acknowledging the critical role of women in the
promotion of the culture of peace and resilience within
our societies and the critical nature of their participation
in drafting and implementing post-conflict strategies.
Successively adopted resolutions by the Security
Council and the General Assembly contributed to
further fine-tuning the prospects provided by the main
resolution, in terms of women's leadership during
peacebuilding processes and the assured added-value
provided by civil society actors and others on the whole.

There is no need to recall the devastating
repercussions of war and conflict on people, especially
on the most vulnerable. Unfortunately, we see that on
virtually a daily basis. Women and children are the
principal victims. Despite the progress that has been
achieved since 2000, which has been reflected in an
active participation in peace movements and a growing
role in post-conflict rebuilding, women remain
essentially absent in negotiations and institutions
for peacebuilding. That consistently hampers the
process of conflict resolution. In our view, women's
involvement remains critical. Over the long-term,
that will make possible a gender balance in public
institutions and with regard to legal reform. That was
an observation made in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2017/861). Tunisia thanks him for the quality of the
assessment and recommendations contained therein. In
particular, we welcome the initiative to assess how well
women are represented in peace processes, as part of
the reform project. We welcome that initiative because
that approach recognizes the important role played
by women in mediation, conflict prevention, conflict
resolution and peacebuilding efforts. In addition, my
delegation would like to recognize the efforts undertaken
to implement resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security, in connection with the prevention
of violent extremism. Nothing highlights the validity
of the gender approach as much as the development
of measures aimed at combating radicalization, or
rehabilitating or reintegrating women returning from
conflict zones.

My country's delegation also welcomes the
publication of the Secretary-General's strategy on gender
parity at the United Nations. The recommendations
developed are not solely focused on management
issues, but also promote the need to revisit the role of
women in peacekeeping operations. In that regard, we
support the call made by the Secretary-General to the
members of the Security Council to continue to pay
special attention to women's issues in the area of peace
and security when "new crises arise, others worsen or
when the Council focuses on counter-terrorism or the
deployment of contingents".

Turning again to Tunisia, the Code of Personal
Status was adopted in 1956 and was indeed the
foundation of modern Tunisia, perhaps even more so
than the country's first Constitution, which was adopted
in 1959. That illustrates the importance of women's
empowerment in developing a modern citizenship-
based policy for Tunisian society since the establishment
of the first Republic of Tunisia. That reform momentum
was reflected in the new 2014 Constitution, which
guarantees and protects women's rights. It should be
recalled that women were on the front lines during the
fight for democracy. They continue to be change agents
for long-term stability.

In line with resolution 1325 (2000), the Tunisian
Parliament recently unanimously adopted a historic
law to eliminate all violence against women. That text
is the outcome of the joint efforts of the Government
and human rights organizations and associations. It is
important to adhere to international instruments and
standards in the area of violence against women, and,
for the first time, to recognize threats posed to women's
economic rights as gender-based violence against
women. Tunisia has underscored that the adoption of
that law was complemented by the establishment of
a committee made up of renowned intellectuals and
academics, tasked with studying the issue of individual
freedoms and equality in all areas. Those new
approaches only serve to underscore the irreversible
nature of our efforts to eliminate all forms of gender-
based violence.

One of the goals of the annual debate on the women
and peace and security agenda is to assess the progress
made in the various countries in developing national
action plans on resolution 1325 (2000). My delegation
would like point out that a three-year project undertaken
under the auspices of the Ministry of Women's Affairs
and the Ministry of Social Affairs, with the support
of UN-Women and other partners, is under way. That
project, which is participatory in nature and involves
various Tunisian stakeholders, aims to implement
a national action plan for Tunisia on the women and
peace and security agenda.

According to the poet Louis Aragon, the future of
men is women. To that end, a catalyst for resilience and
development is required in the societal model to ensure
that peace is maintained and progress visible and
measurable. It reflects the vital nature of everyone's
commitment to promoting the women and peace and
security agenda.

