Mr. Petersen (Denmark): Ithank you, Mr. President,
and Spain for convening this important meeting and
for ensuring that we all stay engaged in our goal of
achieving the full implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for having facilitated the comprehensive global study
on the implementation of the resolution 1325 (2000). As
others have already underlined, it provides an excellent
overview of gaps and challenges, emerging trends and
proposed priorities.

Denmark remains as committed as ever to
implementing resolution 1325 (2000). Denmark was
among the first countries to formulate a national action
plan for implementing the resolution, and last year we
adopted our third national action plan, for the period
2014-2019. We emphasize using the untapped potential
of women. We seek to involve women actively, on
an equal basis, in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts, in peace negotiations, peacebuilding and
peacekeeping, in humanitarian response and in post-
conflict reconstruction. We commit to concrete actions
in order to achieve those ends.

It is widely acknowledged that the absence of women
from early peace negotiations and reconstruction
measures can have a long-lasting negative impact on
the development of good governance. No society can
afford the luxury of excluding half of their population
from decision-making processes. Therefore, the
Security Council must send a strong message in
support of women's political participation in the peace
and development processes for the benefit of all women
and men. In that regard, we applaud the adoption
yesterday of resolution 2242 (2015). As described in
the global study, progress has been made and should be
recognized. The incorporation of gender perspectives
into peace processes is emerging, although too slowly.
All countries must develop national action plans.

The root causes of war and conflicts must be
addressed. Again, as described in the global study,
while the wars immediately after the Second World
War were nationalist wars or political wars based on
political ideology, many of today's wars are religious or
ethnic in origin. Often the ideologies we see are deeply
conservative and reactionary towards women and their
rights. The global community needs to address these
issues.

Resolution 1325 (2000) is a strong resolution, and
we all have an obligation to implement it effectively at
both the national and international levels. Denmark has
identified a number of 1325 commitments, of which I
will mention only a few.

We will focus on promoting women as
peacebuilders in Danish-funded programmes in fragile
and conflict-affected States. Our military deployments
to peacekeeping missions will all receive mandatory
training on the role of gender in peace-support
operations. We will immediately investigate suspected
criminal misconduct during deployments and, when
relevant, ensure the prosecution of alleged perpetrators.
We will continue to focus on the recruitment of
Danish female officers, including police officers,
to international missions, including for leadership
functions.

The global study on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) contains an excess of excellent
proposals for action. Inspired by these, we must ensure
that the resolution and its follow-up resolutions are
enacted, so let us get to work now.

