Mr. Mohamad (Sudan): Allow me at the outset,
Sir, to join previous speakers in congratulating you on
a very active Security Council presidency under your
delegation's able stewardship, including the holding of
today's debate on women and peace and security,
which coincides with the seventh anniversary of the
adoption of the Security Council resolution 1325
(2000).

The aforementioned resolution laid the basis for
cross-cutting, in-depth reflections on gender issues in
conflict, post-conflict and peacebuilding situations.
The resolution sets out a comprehensive plan of action
on the status of women in the context of the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
in accordance with the obligations set out in the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the
provisions of the resolution adopted at the twenty-third
special session of the General Assembly, on women,
development and peace, in order to

"Ensure and support the full participation of
women at all levels of decision-making and
implementation in development activities and
peace processes, including conflict prevention
and resolution." (General Assembly resolution S-23/3, para. 86 (b))

In this connection, the issue of women and armed
conflict should not overshadow the broader issue of
women, peace and social development, including the
right to development by way of addressing the root
causes.

We note the Security Council's request to the
Secretary-General to submit a system-wide action plan
to implement resolution 1325 (2000) (see 
07-55957
S/PRST/2004/40). The Plan includes major areas of
action in the field of women and peace and security. It
provides a framework for relevant inter-agency
activities aimed at addressing this issue through
strategies to promote a gender perspective, confidence-
building and the development of local and regional
women's organizations to complement the role of the
United Nations at the regional and local levels.

Promoting a gender perspective in areas of
conflict requires that reconstruction and rehabilitation
programmes incorporate the promotion of practical
participation by women in those areas by providing
technical assistance, particularly training programmes
for women in the fields of health and education. In that
respect, we rely on the relevant United Nations
agencies and bodies - including the United Nations
Development Fund for Women, the United Nations
Development Programme, the United Nations
Environment Programme, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
UNICEF - to coordinate their inter-agency
programmes for women and girls. We would like to
underscore the need to abide by the principle of
national ownership of those programmes and activities,
which must respond to national priorities and must
focus on the capacity-building of local institutions in
charge of implementing such programmes.

At the national level, women's empowerment has
been one of the Sudan's top priorities. The
Comprehensive Peace Agreement and the Darfur Peace
Agreement both included provisions safeguarding the
role and the active participation of women in
peacebuilding and in the implementation of the
relevant provisions of the two Agreements. Those
provisions are premised on our traditions and values,
which accord a particularly prominent position to
women.

Moreover, since our national independence more
than five decades ago, Sudanese women have had
pioneering roles in, and have made contributions to, all
aspects of Sudanese political, economic, social and
cultural life. This year, those achievements culminated
in the adoption of our first national strategy for the
empowerment of women, which is fully aligned with
the main pillars of the Beijing Platform for Action. I
would also like to assure the Council that, as our
country is currently preparing for the decisive Darfur
peace talks to be held in Libya less than a week from
now, the participation of women in the peace process
would undoubtedly provide the dynamism and
direction needed for the success of the talks.

We are hopeful that today's Council debate will
have a positive impact on the status and the role of
women in today's world. However, we would also like
to propose that all pertinent proposals and suggestions
presented throughout today's debate be used to enrich
strategies currently employed by various United
Nations stakeholders and bodies. We would also like to
caution against unpleasant trends in this Organization
aimed at politicizing women's issues in order to settle
political scores. In that case, the victims would only be
women, whom we are trying to assist.

