Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement
(NAM).

Let me begin by thanking the presidency of
Uganda for organizing this debate. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his progress report on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2010/386) and his report on women's participation
in peacebuilding (S/2010/466).

We are now passing through a very challenging
period. We are about to celebrate the tenth anniversary
of the landmark resolution 1325 (2000) on women,
peace and security at a time when such initiatives as
review of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC),
women's participation in peacebuilding, review of
civilian capacity and others are being debated and
developed. The Movement deems it a privilege to take
note of the endeavours of different actors in these
processes who have been contributing positively to
restoring sustainable peace by preventing relapse into
conflict and addressing the genuine needs of the people
emerging from conflict. Furthermore, the Movement
feels it necessary that such processes be considered by
the principal bodies of the United Nations, in particular
the General Assembly.

The 2009 report of the Secretary-General on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2009/304) outlined how the United Nations and the
international community could support national efforts
to secure sustainable peace more rapidly and
effectively. Since then, the Movement has continued to
follow up on those actions on different occasions by
sharing inputs and feedback to reflect the views of the
Movement on the process.

The Movement reiterates its principled position
that all peacebuilding initiatives and planning should
be based on the principles of national ownership and
predictable financing and should include as priorities
the goals of gender equality and empowerment of
women. The Movement subscribes to the general
consensus views of the Peacebuilding Commission that
economic reconstruction and rehabilitation should be at
the forefront of all efforts aimed at sustaining peace,
initiating development and promoting post-conflict
recovery. This process, however, entails the concerted
efforts of all relevant actors both at Headquarters and
in the field with adequate mechanisms for ensuring
accountability.

The Movement believes that the PBC provides an
appropriate platform for a coordinated, coherent and
integrated institutional mechanism to address the
special needs of countries emerging from conflict and
to promote their recovery, reintegration and
reconstruction. The PBC should therefore play the
central role in providing the United Nations system
with policy guidance and strategies in the area of post-
conflict peacebuilding activities. The broader
membership of the Organization should play principal
roles within the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council in relevant areas of peacebuilding
activities, without prejudice to the functions and
powers of the other principal organs as stipulated in the
United Nations Charter.

It is the view of the Movement that peacebuilding
activities should not be considered substitutes for
peacekeeping; rather, complementarities between
peacekeeping and peacebuilding must be used
innovatively in order to prevent a relapse into conflict.
Therefore, peacebuilding and peacekeeping planning
and assessment processes should unfold in a more
coordinated and concerted manner among all
stakeholders to ensure the best use of our capacities to
maintain sustainable peace and security and launch a
sustainable development process in post-conflict
countries.

The Movement maintains its position that there
can be no lasting peace without development and job
creation and no sustainable development without
stability. Therefore, the importance of partnership and
early investment in economic recovery cannot be
overemphasized. The international community must
establish and ensure coherent and predictable resource
deployment for capacity-building and development
activities in countries emerging from conflict, based on
the principle of national ownership.

We have noted the efforts of the Secretary-
General to address rapid resource deployment in
certain emergency situations, such as in Haiti, by
forming multidisciplinary teams with expertise in
planning and mission support. The Movement urges the
Secretary-General to explore, through an open,
transparent and all-inclusive process, opportunities for
the wider membership to contribute to the formation of
such multidisciplinary teams, due account being taken
of existing relevant expertise within the police and
troop-contributing countries.

We note with appreciation the efforts made so far
to build national capacities in countries emerging from
conflict. Much more needs to be done to create
sustainable peace. The Movement believes strongly
that these initiatives must be complementary. A roster
for such complementary capacity-building efforts must
represent the broader membership with specific
emphasis on representation of the global South, South-
South cooperation and trilateral cooperation. Civil
society members and women actors with experience in
similar State-building activities should be incorporated,
as they will understand the ground reality from the
perspective of their life experience and lessons learned.

In this regard, the Movement has noted with
appreciation and duly recognized the fact that
peacekeeping missions and United Nations country
teams have worked together in Cote d'Ivoire, Haiti,
Liberia and elsewhere to support early employment
generation. This has provided job opportunities and
thus helped to build confidence in the peace process.
The Movement urges that similar lessons be replicated
appropriately in other peacebuilding activities and
emphasizes the central role of the PBC during the early
stages of peacebuilding.

Now, turning to the report of the Secretary
General on women's participation in peacebuilding
(S/2010/466), the Movement reiterates its view that it
is women and girls who suffer the most as victims of
conflict and benefit the least from the dividends of the
peace process. Therefore, the onus is on us to alleviate
the challenges faced by women and girls in post-
conflict situations and to strengthen their effective
participation in the peacebuilding process.

The Movement appreciates the Secretary-
General's efforts to create specific action plans for
ensuring women's participation in the peacebuilding
process and emphasizes that women are crucial
partners in shoring up the three pillars of lasting peace:
economic recovery, social cohesion and political
legitimacy. Thus, the Movement stresses the necessity
of reviewing and evaluating the recommendations and
proposed action plan in this regard in an open,
transparent and all-inclusive manner in the General
Assembly and in the Economic and Social Council in
accordance with their relevant mandates as enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations, as well as in
relevant United Nations structures including the PBC
and UN Women.

The Movement is well aware that all these
initiatives are taking place concurrently with the
ongoing 2010 review of the Peacebuilding
Commission. The Movement has taken note of the
co-facilitators report (S/2010/393). The
recommendation that issues be discussed in an open,
transparent and inclusive manner in all relevant bodies
including the Security Council, the General Assembly
and the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission is a reflection of the views of the
Movement. The Movement reiterates its commitment
to full cooperation and constructive engagement in
future discussion of this report.

