Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in French): At the outset, I should like to thank
Ms. Margot Wallstrom, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and
Ms. Rachel Mayanja, Assistant Secretary-General and
Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on Gender
Issues and Advancement of Women, for the high
quality of their briefings.

The report of the Secretary-General on women
and peace and security (S/2010/173) gives us some
important indicators to monitor the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). Their application by the
international community should make it possible to
better evaluate the progress achieved as well as to
identify the difficulties that continue to impede the full
participation of women in peace processes. My
delegation welcomes the work under way to develop
indicators on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 1820 (2008), 1882 (2009), 1888 (2009),
1889 (2009) and 1894 (2009).

The report of the Secretary-General gives us
further insight into the overall regime for the
protection of women in conflict situations, which is
based around two aims: promoting the role of women
in peace processes and the prevention of conflict, and
putting an end to the use of sexual violence as a
weapon of war.

My delegation agrees with the Secretary-General
that, 10 years after the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), little progress has been achieved in its
implementation. The lack of specific indicators has
long been an obstacle to the evaluation of progress in
this area. We therefore welcome the indicators set out
in the current report and hope that they will fill this

gap.
To make these indicators operational, there is a
need, especially in this initial phase, to strengthen

cooperation among Member States, United Nations
entities, regional institutions and civil society
organizations. The collection of reliable data, however,
may be difficult for a number of countries, especially
those in crisis situations or armed conflict. Particular
support therefore needs to be given to those countries.

The four thematic areas covered by these
indicators are most relevant and should make it
possible to monitor the progress achieved in the areas
of prevention, participation, protection and relief. The
effective implementation of these indicators should not
be an aim in itself, but rather an additional instrument
to combat the marginalization of women in the various
phases of conflict resolution, from prevention and
mediation to post-conflict peacebuilding activities.

To conclude, I should like once again to
underscore the great importance that my delegation
attaches to the genuine involvement of women in peace
processes. Their participation in peace processes
requires gender equality to become a reality in each
society. In Gabon, for example, the Ministry of
Defence is led by a woman. Likewise, many women
hold positions of responsibility in almost all of the
branches of the military. In that way, these women
contribute to the search for solutions to the security
issues in Gabon.

My country welcomes the appointment of
Ms. Margot Wallstrom as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and
welcomes the five-point plan that she has presented.
We also support the draft presidential statement that
will be adopted at the conclusion of this debate.

