Ms. Grobbelaar (South Africa): It is an honour
for my delegation to participate in today's open debate
on resolution 1325 (2000). We express our appreciation
to you, Sir, for convening today's meeting. My
delegation also supports the recommendations made by
the Secretary-General in his reports to the Council
during the past years, as well as the important
contributions made earlier today by Mr. Guehenno and
Ms. Smythe and initiatives undertaken by United
Nations specialized agencies and Member States in
pursuing this topic.

As we confront the challenges of peace and
security in global terms and in particular in Africa, we
acknowledge the need to remain vigilant concerning
the impact of armed conflict on women and girls.
However, the leadership role women could have in
situations of conflict prevention, resolution and post-
conflict peace-building efforts remains underutilized,
despite commitments made at Beijing and Beijing +5
and in the outcomes of major conferences and summits.

The Millennium Declaration agreed on the third
Millennium Development Goal on the importance of
achieving gender equality and empowerment of women
and that women should engage on an equal basis with
men in the political, economic, social and civic
development of their respective countries and
continents. Women's participation is therefore critical,
especially during periods of transition, in ensuring that
gender mainstreaming takes place in the areas of
democracy, good governance and human rights.

Concerning the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), South Africa has undertaken certain
initiatives at the national level. We have also enhanced
our partnership with United Nations agencies through
the recent visit of the Executive Director of the United
Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM)
when, on 16 May, the South African Parliament hosted
the African launch of the UNIFEM. report on the
independent experts' assessment of women, war and
peace and the impact of armed conflict on women and
their role in peace-building.

The event generated huge interest and was of
importance to South Africa and our partners in Africa.
As a result, the report will be tabled in a number of
Parliamentary committees to ensure that the gender
dimensions of peace and security, including the
implementation of such human rights treaties as the
African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights and the
draft protocol on the rights of women in Africa, are
incorporated into national structures.

At the regional level, the African Union decided
to include women as contributors to peace processes
and to enhance their active participation in this regard.
The African Union also acknowledges that failure to
ensure gender equality and the empowerment of
women seriously undermines a peaceful and violence-
free environment.

The Union's first initiative in this regard was in
1998, when the African Women's Committee for Peace
and Development was established to ensure the
participation of women as decision makers. This
structure was successful in raising the awareness of
women on the issues before us today. The Committee
initiated, for example, the solidarity mission to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in December 2001
to support Congolese women in their preparations for
effective participation in the inter-Congolese dialogue
hosted in South Africa early in 2002.

Networks of women working for peace in the
Great Lakes region have also been established and
Committee members have been on teams to observe
elections in African countries, in line with the African
Union's commitment to implementing gender equality.
Furthermore, the Windhoek Declaration and the
Namibia Plan of Action on Mainstreaming a Gender
Perspective in Multidimensional Peace Support
Operations strengthened these initiatives.

As a country, we have remained principled on the
issue of gender mainstreaming and, as a co-sponsor of
United Nations resolutions on the advancement of
women at all levels, our leadership is keenly aware of
the centrality of women as peacemakers and facilitators
in political processes and peace-building initiatives.

My delegation has consistently stressed the
importance of gender mainstreaming in United Nations
peacekeeping operations and we are encouraged to
learn that the presence of gender expertise in these
missions has contributed to some progress in gender
mainstreaming in the field. In this regard, my
delegation welcomes the appointment of an interim
Gender Adviser in the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and expresses the hope that the permanent
position of Senior Gender Adviser will be filled as a
matter of priority.

The valuable gender mainstreaming work of the
Secretary-General's Office of the Special Adviser on
Gender Issues and Advancement of Women in the
recent peace process in Liberia is testimony to the
urgent need for that unit at United Nations
Headquarters. We trust that the human resources
capacity of the Adviser's Office will be expanded, in
accordance with the objectives of resolution 1325
(2000).

My delegation would also recommend that the
international community consider establishing centres
of excellence to train women for leadership positions in
peacekeeping operations. This could assist the United
Nations system in accelerating progress in the rate of
representation of women at the professional and higher
levels.
The effectiveness of the United Nations capacity
in maintaining peace and security could be
strengthened by improving the number of women in
senior positions and in peacekeeping missions, and we
hope that appropriate and measurable targets to achieve
that objective can be adopted. The most obvious reason
is that it is a fact that, through women's presence and
their effective participation in peacekeeping operations,
the benefits gained by local women and girls, including
other vulnerable groups caught up in armed conflict,
improve drastically.

In conclusion, the women of our continent know
that our destiny is inseparable - that our citizens are
bound together by geography, history, heritage and,
often, conflict. In roles of leadership or as caregivers,
women wish to be partners in the peace process and in
building secure futures for generations to come. They
cannot do it alone, however, without the realization of
the principles contained in the operational paragraphs
of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000).

