Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
presence and his statement. I also thank him for his
report (S/2009/362), submitted pursuant to resolution
1820 (2008). We also welcome the presence of the
Deputy Secretary-General at this meeting.

Ten years ago, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security. In June last year, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1820 (2008) on combating sexual violence.
The two resolutions laid the foundation for the Security
Council's response to questions relating to women in
the field of peace and security. In recent years, with the
joint efforts of the United Nations, Member States,
regional organizations and civil society, concepts such
as gender equality, the empowerment of women and
the prevention of and fight against sexual violence
have steadily gained ground, and work in these areas
has made remarkable progress.

However, the cruel reality is that women remain
the primary victims in many current conflicts, and
sexual violence against women remains a big problem.
The international community still has a lot of work to
do in protecting women and defending their rights and
interests. China condemns all acts of violence against
women in armed conflict, including sexual violence.
We urge parties to conflicts to comply with
international humanitarian and human rights law. We
call on the Governments of countries concerned to
investigate and bring to justice the perpetrators of
crimes against women in armed conflicts. We urge the
parties that have not done so to accede to the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women as soon as possible.

We join the Secretary-General in endorsing a
policy of zero tolerance for acts of sexual exploitation
committed by peacekeeping personnel in the hope that
troop-contributing countries will strengthen the
training and supervision of such personnel and their
accountability in this regard, in order to ensure that the
relevant United Nations code of conduct will be
effectively observed.

I would like to make a few comments on the
work under way to strengthen the protection of women
in armed conflict. First, the Security Council can play a
unique role, and the relevant bodies of the United
Nations should perform their respective functions and
strengthen coordination and cooperation. In his report,
the Secretary-General analyses many characteristics of
the question of sexual violence, the most salient of
which is its close connection to armed conflict. As the
primary organ responsible for maintaining international
peace and security, the Security Council should address
this issue in the context of relevant political situations
and peace processes, focusing on effective conflict
prevention, the maintenance of peace and post-conflict
reconstruction, so as to create a political, security and
legal environment conducive to alleviating and
eliminating sexual violence.

The General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council, the Human Rights Council, the Secretariat
and the relevant treaty bodies should play their due
roles by focusing on aspects within the purview of their
respective functions. The Security Council should
strengthen communication and cooperation with the
aforementioned bodies to create synergy when
addressing this issue. We are not in favour of the
Security Council's all-too-frequent use of sanctions or
the threat of sanctions. The Council should exercise
caution in applying sanctions in the context of fighting
sexual violence.

Secondly, at all stages of peace processes, greater
attention should be paid to the status and role of
women, and efforts made to raise awareness of
women's issues and to nurture a culture of greater
respect for women. It is necessary to place great value
on women's special needs and concerns in the areas of
conflict prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding in
order to enable them to fully enjoy their rights to
participate and make decisions in peace processes and
to create a favourable environment for women's lives
and development. All that will contribute to
fundamentally changing the vulnerable condition of
women and effectively safeguard their rights and
interests.

Thirdly, Governments bear the primary
responsibility for protecting the women of their
respective countries. The international community
should offer constructive assistance. The responsibility
for implementing relevant Security Council resolutions
on the protection of women rests primarily with
Governments. Situations vary from country to country,
and the international community should respect the
Governments of the countries concerned in formulating
and implementing measures in the light of those
countries' specific circumstances so as to ensure full
national ownership.

It should be stressed that whether a country is in
the midst of or emerging from conflict, it is often faced
with a number of challenges. The international
community should support countries' capacity-building
efforts on the basis of the principles of the United
Nations Charter and in respect for their desires.

Fourthly, efforts to encourage and support the
participation of civil society in protecting women
should be pursued. Many male and female staff
members of non-governmental organizations are
working hard, in difficult circumstances on the ground,
to protect the rights and interests of women. Their
work deserves our appreciation. China supports their
ongoing constructive role in protecting women in
armed conflict and encourages them to remain in
contact with relevant United Nations entities and
agencies, especially those directly involved in women's
issues, and to submit appropriate proposals.

We note the Secretary-General's proposal for the
establishment of a commission of inquiry to investigate
sexual violence in the Sudan, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Chad and to make recommendations
to the Security Council on effective ways to fight
impunity. We suggest that the Secretary-General
communicate and coordinate extensively with the
countries concerned with respect to the issues and that
it seek their prior consent. At the same time, in
addressing issues related to sexual violence, we must
distinguish acts committed by Governments from those
committed by rebel groups. We urge all parties
concerned to address every aspect of violence against
women in armed conflict in a comprehensive and
balanced manner.

In addressing the issue of women and peace and
security, the Security Council should not only regard
women as the victims of armed conflict, but also
consider the important role they can play in the peace
process. In October 2008, under China's presidency,
the Security Council held a serious debate on the role
of women in the peace process (see S/PV.6005) and
achieved desirable results. We hope that the Council
will continue to attach importance to this issue in the
future.

The Chinese Government has always attached
great importance to protecting the rights and interests
of women and to advancing their status. We will
continue to work with the international community to
further combat sexual violence, enhance the status of
women in the peace processes of countries concerned,
and meet all our goals in the field of women and peace
and security.

