Mr. McLay (New Zealand): I will give a somewhat
shortened version of the distributed statement. We
thank the delegation of Azerbaijan for organizing
today's very important debate and we welcome the
Security Council's unanimous adoption of resolution
2122 (2013). New Zealand also associates itselfwith the
statement to be delivered shortly by the representative
of the Marshall Islands who will speak on behalf of
Pacific Islands Forum.

In 2013 we have seen a very real focus by the
Security Council on the protection aspect of the women
and peace and security agenda. The Council's high-
profile debate in June (S/PV.6984) and resolution 2106
(2013) demonstrated solid progress in that regard. The
Declaration of Commitment to End Sexual Violence in
Conflict, endorsed by 113 States, including my own,
was a landmark.

Hard tools, such as sanctions regimes that target
perpetrators of sexual violence and appropriately
mandated and trained peacekeeping missions, are
effective instruments for the protection agenda, but
the participation dimension of the women and peace
and security agenda still requires targeted action by
the Council. Indeed, the Council's role in addressing
women's political participation in the peace and security
agenda remains a challenge. That makes today's debate
on the role of women in transitional justice even more
important.

In June, when the Secretary-General's Special
Envoy for the Great Lakes Region, Mary Robinson,
made her first statement to the United Nations family
in her new role, she spoke of women not as Victims but
as stakeholders. She questioned the sustainability of
any peace that half the population has had no role in
building and she called for women to be put at the core
of peacebuilding. New Zealand agrees. If it is going
to deliver lasting and sustainable peace, then, as the
representative of Austria just emphasized, transitional
justice must incorporate the entire population.
Women's perspectives must be included in the design,
implementation and monitoring of transitional justice
processes.

Beyond simply being a just democratic principle,
there are many tangible reasons for that. It builds trust
in post-conflict justice institutions, and UN Women's
research shows that women are more likely to report
sexual and gender-based crimes to transitional justice
institutions that involve women judges and officials.
The Council should also make clear that there must
be prominent roles for women, both as leaders and as
active participants in the consultative processes that
establish transitional arrangements.

New Zealand's experience, in its own region and
beyond is that credible, informal and tradition-based
justice systems have a demonstrated role in establishing
accountability. In post-conflict societies, it is often
informal justice mechanisms that are the most
accessible forjustice, mediation and conflict resolution.
While some informal and traditional systems struggle
to adequately address women's needs due to inherent
gender biases, examples from Africa show the value of
local efforts to transform such institutions in a manner
that allows for the full participation for women.

United Nations field presences must fully engage
with women in civil society and the community. New
Zealand thus encourages a consistent practice of
deploying gender advisers to peacekeeping missions,
with their role continuing through any transitional
arrangements to assist in post-conflict processes.

In addition to the existing Pacific Regional
Action Plan on Women, Peace and Security, which
New Zealand is continuing to implement along with
its regional partners, we are proceeding with the
development of a comprehensive national action plan of
our own. Looking ahead, we welcome the concept of an
independent global study to assist in the preparations of
the high-level review of resolution 1325 (2000) in 2015,
and we believe our Pacific Regional Action Plan could
provide a good example of regional action.

Women and peace and security is the agenda item
that will not go away, and with very good reason. As
long as that remains the reality, New Zealand will
continue to participate actively in the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda.

