Mr. Antonio: Allow me to start by congratulating
you, Mr. President, on having assumed the presidency
of the Security Council, as well as on the priority
your presidency has wisely chosen to give to the issue
of conflict prevention in Africa during this month. I
wish to thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres
for his inspiring remarks this morning. I also thank
the Executive Director of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yuri Fedotov; the United
Kingdom Independent Anti-Slavery Commissioner,
Mr. Kevin Hyland; and Ms. Ilwad Elman, of the
Elman Peace and Human Rights Centre, for their
respective briefings.

Today's open debate is all the more fitting and
timely given that it is taking place this month, during
which we mark the International Day of Remembrance
of the Victims of Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave
Trade. The annual observance of this Day offers an
opportunity not only to honour the memory of the
victims of that dark chapter of our history, but also to
raise awareness about the dangers of what is commonly
referred to as modern slavery. It is indeed extremely
disturbing that two centuries after the abolition of the
transatlantic slave trade, slavery still exists today in
many different forms and continues to claim millions
of victims every day. According to the International
Labour Organization, there are over 21 million children,
women and men living in modern slavery, of whom
approximately 3.7 million are to be found in Africa.
These figures tell a devastating story of modern slavery
that should serve as a wake-up call for the members of
the international community to urgently work together
to prevent and eradicate this scourge. This sense of
urgency has been rightfully captured in the recent
resolution 2331 (2016), which urges decisive action to
end human trafficking, including against terrorist and
all armed groups.

If we are to make a tangible contribution to solving
this complex problem, we must go beyond general
statements on the need to address its various root causes
and take concrete steps in this area. Our efforts should
focus also on eradicating the different enablers of
these horrific crimes, which notably include protracted
armed conflicts as well as the spread of terrorism and
organized crime. Equally important is the need to
acknowledge the fact that the scope and severity of its
causes have been aggravated by the ongoing migration
crisis. Many recently published reports point out that
criminal networks are taking advantage of the current
migration crisis to force more people into bonded labour
and other types of slavery. The devastating effects on
refugees and asylum-seekers, who are among the most
vulnerable people, cannot be overemphasized.

What is needed most is decisive action at the
national, regional and international levels to uphold
human dignity and strengthen the fight against these
shameful practices that are unworthy of humankind.
Against that background, in order to foster the
implementation of the international legal framework
on trafficking in persons, the African Union has
adopted a range of policy instruments to prevent and
combat human trafficking, namely, the Ouagadougou
Action Plan to Combat Trafficking in Human Beings,
Especially Women and Children; the Migration
Policy Framework for Africa; and the African Union
Commission Initiative Against Trafficking. Those
instruments have provided the required push for
action, and the number of countries that have enacted
anti-trafficking legislation has more than doubled in
recent years. Consequently, more and more convictions
of traffickers have been made possible and, hopefully,
an increasing number of victims are being rescued
and protected.

Despite those efforts, human trafficking and
the smuggling of migrants have remained a constant
challenge on the African continent. We have an
estimated 3.7 million African men, women and children
still trapped in forced labour and working under extreme
coercion, largely in the informal economy. The African
continent needs to step up its efforts, in coordination
with the international community, to combat and
eradicate all of those criminal forms of exploitation of
human beings.

