Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom) (spoke in French): At the outset, allow me to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on the start of your presidency for the
month of June.
(spoke in English)

I am very grateful that France scheduled this debate
today. The women and peace and security agenda is a
high priority for the United Kingdom, and I am very
glad that my country is the penholder on this issue in
the Security Council.

Ijoin others in welcoming the briefings we heard
from speakers this morning, which I found humbling
and moving. If I may, I would like to quote the words of
an earlier briefer:

"[t]he Islamic State did notjust come to kill us but
to take us as merchandise to be sold in markets "
(S/PV.7585, p. 6).

"Merchandise to be sold in markets" - those are the
words of Nadia Murad Basee Taha, the Yazidi activist
who addressed the Security Council in December. She
ended her statement saying,

"These crimes against women and their freedom
must be brought to an end today." (ibid, p. 7)

That was six months ago. Sadly, as the briefers and
the Secretary-General's report (S/2016/361) make clear,
we are not there yet. We have not yet brought these
crimes to an end. The crimes continue - in Syria, in
Iraq and in places as far afield as Afghanistan and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In response, we
cannot be deterred. Our efforts must be unrelenting
and, equally, far-reaching. I look forward to working
with Spain on Roman's five operational points. I have
my own four steps to put forward today.

Step one: we must begin by bringing order to the
chaos that groups such as Da'esh and Boko Haram
thrive in. Those groups do not recognize laws. They
do not recognize borders. They operate with impunity,
with no regard for the legitimate authorities or the
human rights of those they enslave and traffic. That
is why the United Kingdom is playing an active role
in the coalition to defeat Da'esh and take back the
land they claim to govern. It is why we are working
tirelessly on Syria, as part ofthe Council and part ofthe
International Syria Support Group, to forge a peaceful
political solution, one that ends the crisis that has driven
the growth of Da'esh. And it is why we are working so
closely with other countries that face the destabilizing
influence of extremists, so that their hatred cannot take
hold. Slowly, our efforts to defeat Da'esh are working.
They have already lost over a third of the territory they
once controlled in Syria and Iraq. But that is just the
first step.

Step two: we also need to ensure that militaries
and security forces can prevent and respond to sexual
violence, and that they are trained and equipped to
do so. For instance, the United Kingdom is training
Peshmerga troops in Iraq so that they can respond
sensitively and appropriately to the needs of survivors
of the sexual violence and trafficking of Da'esh. We
recognize that this is not an issue confined to one
corner of the globe. That is why we are also training
African peacekeepers and soldiers, including the army
in Mali. It is why we are training our own troops,
as well as those from Croatia, Romania, Slovenia,
Morocco and Kyrgyzstan. We all have a role to play.
Our own countries' police and military need to be more
representative of our societies, with greater recruitment
and greater promotion of women. If the United Nations
itself is to play its full role in ending the scourge of
sexual violence, it cannot - it must not - be a part
of the problem. No one wearing a United Nations blue
helmet should ever take part, or even be associated
in any way, with sexual violence, exploitation and
abuse. Anyone who commits such crimes, whether
a peacekeeper or a Da'esh fanatic, must face justice.
Accountability cannot be selective.

That is why, for step three, the United Kingdom
is building the capacity of Governments, judiciaries,
police, military and civil society to strengthen the
prosecution of sexual violence. We have done so in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Colombia, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Iraq, Kosovo, Nepal, Syria and
Uganda. Such efforts must lead to more investigations
and more prosecutions through the International
Criminal Court and through hybrid and domestic
courts. There can be no impunity for the perpetrators
of those crimes.

In step four, we need to challenge the harmful
stigma directed towards survivors of sexual violence
in conflict. Survivors and children born of rape are too
often ostracized by their families and exiled from their
communities. When a survivor escapes the horror of
sexual violence, she should find hope and support, not
rejection and silence. So together, let us all challenge
any culture that accepts, condones or justifies sex.

Let me close with this final thought. If we are to
succeed in ending these crimes, as the Yazidi acitivist
Nadia Murad implored us to do, we will need the widest
possible support from the grass roots all the way up
to global organizations. To do that means working
with non-governmental organizations (NGOs). They
are Vital partners. The United Kingdom works with
such organizations as Tearfund to support survivors
of sexual violence in the most remote parts of eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. They help women
and girls in desperate need in places Governments
struggle to reach.

Yet over the past week, over 250 NGOs have had
their bids to gain accreditation with the United Nations
either delayed or rejected - the majority for spurious
reasons. Many of these NGOs lead the charge on
human rights and on women and gender issues. Those
organizations empower women, and they can empower
our efforts to ensure that women and girls are no longer
treated as merchandize in markets. We need to be letting
them in, not shutting them out. I therefore call on the
Economic and Social Council Committee on NGOS to
stop these arbitrary deferrals and let these NGOs in. I
hope all here willjoin me in that call.

