Mrs. Adhikari (Nepal): My delegation
wishes to express its sincere appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important debate.
My delegation expresses its profound gratitude to
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon; Ms. Zainab Hawa
Bangura, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict; Ms. Angelina
Jolie, Special Envoy of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees; and Ms. Jane Adong
Anywar for their remarks.
Sexual and gender-based violence in situations of
armed conflict not only affects the dignity and honour
of the victims, but also leaves negative impacts on
families, communities and societies. The report of the
Secretary-General to the Security Council (S/2013/149)
depicts the pervasiveness of sexual violence and its
interconnection with the maintenance of international
peace and security.

After the signing of the Comprehensive Peace
Accord in 2006, the Government ofNepal has traversed
a long path towards empowering women. The interim
Constitution of Nepal 2007 has ensured the maximum
participation of women in decision-making positions in
all walks of national life, from grassroots to national
levels. Peace committees at the district level play a
very important role in managing post-conflict issues,
including one-third representation by women. Nepal is
committed to increasing the number of women in the
Nepal army and police and United Nations peacekeeping
operations in order to make them more inclusive.

Protecting and promoting the rights of the people
and ensuring inclusive development is at the core of
our efforts to build a peaceful and prosperous Nepal.
We are fully committed to preventing all forms of
violence against women, including sexual violence.
Nepal is a State party to seven core international
human rights instruments, including the Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women and the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
The independent judicial system and the National
Human Rights Commission * a constitutional human
rights watchdog body - are playing a prominent role in
safeguarding the rights of the people.

Nepal strongly believes that there can be no peace

and security ifviolence against women and girls persists.
The Domestic Violence (Crime and Punishment) Act,
2009; the Human Trafficking and Transportation
(Control) Act, 2007; the Gender-Based Violence Act,
2010; the National Plan of Action against Trafficking in
Women and Children, 2012; the National Commission
on Women Act, 2006; and other national laws provide
the measures necessary to address violence against
women and girls. Moreover, there is a sustained effort
to review laws that discriminate against women.

Nepal is the first South Asian country to develop
a national plan of action on resolutions 1325 (2000)
and 1820 (2008). Increasing the participation of women
in decision-making, protecting women and girls from
sexual and gender-based violence and ending impunity
are the topmost priorities set forth in our plan. We have
a zero-tolerance policy against gender-based violence.

The Government of Nepal has never reneged on
its commitment to prosecute cases involving grave
violations of human rights and to end impunity
through the establishment of transitional justice
mechanisms. We are fully conscious of fulfilling our
international obligations and national commitments,
and we are enacting laws to establish transitional justice
mechanisms. Our 2013 ordinance on the investigation of
disappeared persons and on the truth and reconciliation
commission is currently being examined by the
Supreme Court, and is therefore sub judice.

In conclusion, I want to reiterate that the
international community has to play an important
role in ending all forms of Violence against women,
including sexual violence in conflict and post-conflict
situations. Nepal stands firmly committed to ensuring
the full protection of women's rights and preventing
sexual violence and all other forms of violations of
human rights. We look forward to working more closely
with the international community in the days ahead.

