Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan): I first express our
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for convening
today's open debate on an important subject of interest
to all of us. We are particularly pleased to see you, as
Foreign Minister of a great country, Namibia, preside
over this Security Council meeting only a few weeks
after the Millennium Summit, which owed its success
to your diplomatic skills and true qualities of a freedom
fighter.
We all have a shared concern about the plight of
women in armed conflicts. This is an issue that has not
received adequate attention from the international
community. We therefore view the present initiative as
an important opportunity to reflect on issues
concerning the protection of women in conflict
situations and their role in conflict resolution, conflict
prevention and peace-building.

The issues raised in the background paper
circulated by Ambassador Andjaba and the elements
proposed for incorporation in the draft resolution
which - we are happy about the change in working
methods - will be considered by the Security Council
this afternoon, on the subject of women and peace and
security, are most pertinent. However, their detailed
consideration and implementation cannot be the
exclusive responsibility of the Security Council. The
Council can focus on some aspects that fall within its
domain. In fact, most of the issues covered in the
background paper are currently being discussed in the
Economic and Social Council and other relevant bodies
of the General Assembly. So, instead of duplicating our
efforts, we must focus our attention on strengthening
the existing mechanisms. Each organ of the United
Nations has its own defined sphere of responsibilities
that must be respected.

Mr. Andjaba took the Chair.

We all know that the Beijing Declaration and the
Platform for Action contain comprehensive
recommendations on women and armed conflicts.
Unfortunately, there is less enthusiasm about ensuring
implementation of the relevant provisions of the
Beijing Declaration. There is a need to ensure their
early and effective implementation. It would not be
prudent to start the process anew at a forum that does
not have the mandate to deal with all the relevant
issues in a comprehensive manner.

Having said that, my delegation notes with
concern that during the last decade the number of
conflicts has increased manifold. So has the
devastation that has been inflicted upon civilian
populations around the world, particularly women,
children and the elderly. In recent years a number of
United Nations reports have highlighted the suffering
of women and children in armed conflicts. This
catalogue of Violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law is an affront to
humanity.

Violence against women has taken on myriad
shapes and forms, including sexual slavery, rape,
systematic rape, sexual abuse and forced pregnancies.
Displacement compounded by the loss of home and
property, poverty, family disintegration, separation and
other consequences of armed conflict is severely
affecting target populations, especially women and
children. Girls are also abducted or recruited, in
violation of international law, into situations of armed
conflict, including as combatants, sexual slaves or
providers of domestic services. The recommendations
contained in various reports on Violence against women
and children should be implemented to improve their
plight in conflict situations.

Article 7 of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights affirms that
"All are equal before the law and are
entitled without any discrimination to equal
protection of the law." (General Assembly resolution 217 A (110)

Article 55, subparagraph (c), of the Charter
stresses

"universal respect for, and observance of, human
rights and fundamental freedoms for all without
distinction as to race, sex, language, or religion."

The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination Against Women is a giant step towards
protection of the rights of women against all forms of
violence.

Unfortunately, civilians are subjected to
enormous suffering despite the existence of
comprehensive international legal instruments.
Violations of the rights of women in conflict situations
are indeed Violations of fundamental human rights and
principles of international humanitarian law. Respect
for these legal instruments needs to be ensured by all
the Member States of the United Nations through
intergovernmental processes. It cannot be imposed
from outside, nor can it be subjected to any imaginary
so-called international standards.

It is unfortunate that rape is used as a tactical
weapon of war to humiliate and weaken the morale of
the perceived enemy. This pernicious weapon is used to
terrorize a population or to force civilians to flee, as
has recently been practised in the territory of the
former Yugoslavia - particularly in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and in Croatia - and in the Great Lakes
region of Africa. Even today, rape is being used as a
weapon of war against innocent women and girls in
Jammu and Kashmir, where people are struggling for
their right to self-determination. Amnesty International
catalogued such incidents in Jammu and Kashmir as
early as 1993, highlighting that

"rape and ill-treatment of women are usually
reported to have taken place during counter-
insurgency operations".

In Afghanistan the reluctance on the part of the
international community to engage in the country's
reconstruction and rehabilitation process continues to
compound the suffering of the civilian population,
particularly that of women and girls. Apparently, there
is a cultural bias when it comes to dealing with the
problems and issues relating to the womenfolk in
Afghanistan. Instead of measures to address their
genuine humanitarian needs, sanctions have been
imposed on the people of Afghanistan that have further
compounded their suffering.

We also cannot ignore the plight of Palestinian
women, and their agony, as they see their young sons
killed before their eyes - not for committing any
crimes, but for raising their voices for freedom, justice
and their right to self-determination.

Sanctions imposed on other countries also need to
be revisited to minimize the suffering of civilian
populations, particularly the suffering of women and
children. Notably, the background paper on women and
peace and security and the proposed draft resolution do
not say anything about sanctions and their impact on
women and children. Due consideration must therefore
be given to this important aspect of the debate.

It has also been widely reported that poverty,
hunger and desperation in conflict situations may force
women and girls into prostitution, obliging them to
offer sex for food, shelter or safe conduct through war
zones. This aspect has not been highlighted in the
background paper that is under review in the Council
today.

The focus of the international community should
be devoted equally to poverty eradication,
development, conflict resolution and conflict
prevention so that crimes in any form or manifestation
against any section of a society, be it men or women,
are not allowed to take place in the first instance. The
Charter places a clear obligation on the Security
Council to uphold international peace and security.
There can be no two views on the fact that prevention
is better than cure. The Council therefore needs to act
to treat the disease itself, rather than to react to deal
with the symptoms subsequently - with the attendant
high costs in terms of widespread death and
devastation. In meeting its Charter obligations, the
Security Council must not only ensure prompt and
effective responses to crisis situations irrespective of
their geographical locations, but also avoid selectivity
in the implementation of its resolutions and the
application of different standards to conflicts in
different parts of the world.

In conclusion, may I reaffirm that Pakistan
remains committed to the peace, prosperity, progress
and development of peoples in all parts of the world.
We will continue to extend unflinching support and
cooperation to achieve these goals, particularly the
alleviation of the sufferings of women and children in
armed conflicts around the world.

Lastly, I need not elaborate on the role of women
in my country. We have produced women heads of
Government, women leaders of opposition parties,
women elected leaders, women doctors, professors,
academics, scholars, newspaper editors and diplomats.
In order to see this reality, one need only look right
here.

