Mr. Gad (Egypt): Let me start by thanking
Germany for convening this important open debate in
the Security Council today, and the Secretary-General
and all the briefers for their useful and informative
presentations today.

Moreover, my delegation supports the two
statements that were delivered on behalf of the African
Union and the Non-Aligned Movement today.

At the outset, I would like to highlight the role of
the Cairo Roadmap for Enhancing the Performance
of Peacekeeping Operations from Mandate to Exit on
the international issue of women and peacekeeping,
and especially the fact that the Roadmap is partially
based on the outcome of the Cairo High-level
Regional Conference on Enhancing the Performance
of Peacekeeping Operations: From Mandate to Exit,
organized by the Government of Egypt and the
Cairo International Center for Conflict Resolution,
Peacekeeping and Peacebuilding in November 2018.

That Roadmap also draws upon outcomes of other
key policy documents of the United Nations, most
notably the three strategic reviews of 2015 and Security
Council presidential statement S/PRST/2017/27, of
December 2017. The final version of the Cairo Roadmap
has also benefited from comments received during
extensive consultations with other Member States, the
Secretariat and leading practitioners and subject-matter
experts, including during three events organized in New
York in December 2018 and February and March 2019.

The Roadmap aims to advance ongoing reform
efforts by presenting concrete and actionable
recommendations for the implementation of the Action
for Peacekeeping initiative. They take into consideration
the primary objective of the initiative with a view to
enhancing the performance and, consequently, the
effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping.

Withregardtowomen'sparticipationinpeacekeeping
operations, last month Egypt pledged to reach 10 per
cent of women in each deployed formed police unit in
all United Nations peacekeeping operations. Ten women
have been already included in every deployed formed
police unit. Likewise, the Cairo Roadmap highlights
the need for the international community to guarantee
that the Secretariat will consider commissioning a
study on the trends and factors affecting women's full
and meaningful participation in peacekeeping missions
to enable effective and sustainable reforms.

Furthermore, we believe that it is important, in
that regard, that Member States and the Secretariat
consider targeted training support for women serving
in uniformed components and encourage innovative
partnership arrangements, such as the Elsie Initiative
on Women in Peace Operations, to reach the targets
set by the United Nations for women's participation at
15 per cent in military positions and 20 per cent among
police deployments.

It is necessary that Member States and the
Secretariat adopt concrete strategies beyond targets
and incentives to support the increased deployment of
uniformed women in military and police roles, including
leadership positions, while placing greater emphasis on
women's contributions to capability and operational
effectiveness, thereby ensuring the deployment of
trained and qualified women peacekeepers.

Likewise, Member States and the Secretariat are
invited to advance the implementation of the United
Nations zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation
and abuse, with its victim-centred approach, and jointly
assess the effectiveness of the measures undertaken
thus far in eradicating sexual exploitation and abuse
crimes in peacekeeping operations. Moreover, the
Secretariat is invited to incorporate that assessment
into the upcoming report of the Secretary-General to
the General Assembly, pursuant to its resolution 71/278,
of 10 March 2017.

Once again, we thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this important meeting today, and we look
forward to further discussions on this important matter.

