Ms. Jaquez Huacuja (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
While the General Assembly has exhaustively addressed
human trafficking, we commend the Security Council
for its efforts to delve into the subject. It is one of the
most shocking challenges facing the international
community and one that affects all regions ofthe world,
without exception, since every country is, or could
become, the origin, transit or destination country for
victims of this threat. We must emphatically condemn
the fact that, in armed conflict, refugees, displaced
persons and immigrants - particularly women and
girls - are consistently extremely vulnerable to human
trafficking, in addition to frequently being victims of
abduction, sexual violence and abuse.

The 2016 Global Report on Trafficking in Persons,
issued by the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, reflects the dismal overall picture of human
trafficking, which continues to claim many victims
every day. The findings of that report must form the
basis of our strategies, programmes and plans for
preventing and combating this scourge. The Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, supplementing the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime, enables international legal
cooperation and bolsters common efforts to prevent,
punish and investigate this offence.

Similarly, full compliance with the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development constitutes another essential
tool to attack the structural factors that contribute to
trafficking, such as extreme poverty, social exclusion,
discrimination and the lack of opportunities. Pursuant
to Goal 16 of the 2030 Agenda, we must put a stop to
illicit financial flows and prevent organized crime and
terrorist groups from enriching themselves. We can
no longer allow the trafficking of women and girls to
finance criminal activity.

Finally, we must strengthen the multilateral
framework with national strategies and concrete
measures, with an emphasis on protecting and assisting
victims. For that purpose, my country has taken three
steps. First, we have undertaken legal and institutional
reforms to better address human trafficking in an effort
to identify, investigate and punish its perpetrators and
prevent the commission of this crime. In the past seven
years, 733 people were sentenced in Mexico. Secondly,
we have set up and have put in motion a national
commission on human trafficking to benefit from the
joint efforts of Government authorities, civil society
and the academic sector. Thirdly, we have implemented
a national detection instrument, in collaboration
with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC), in order to be able to benefit from timely
and reliable information on the trend in Mexico. We
currently benefit from the technical assistance of
UNODC in a national campaign to combat this crime
among vulnerable groups.

