Mrs. Zarrouk Boumiza (Tunisia) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to commend the
Security Council presidency for its initiative to hold
this important public debate on women and peace and
security, and to thank the Secretary-General for his
excellent report (S/2012/732).

Tunisia's interest in the issue is based on its renewed
commitment to promoting the rights of women and on
its conviction that peace, development and democracy
will not be achieved without women acting as active
partners in the processes of preventing, mediating and
resolving conflict.

It must be recognized that there is much greater
awareness today of the multifaceted discrimination
faced by women in conflict and that significant
efforts have been made with a view to remedying that
situation. As women are among the primary victims
of armed conflict, together with children and the
elderly, it is important to assign them prominent roles
in peacekeeping and peacebuilding, and even more
importantly in the prevention process, to which it is
never too late to devote particular attention. Significant
headway has already been achieved to that end, such
as the appointment of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and
the deployment of women protection advisers within
peacekeeping operations.

Debates such as today's have also enabled us to
develop a more coherent and coordinated approach
to the protection of women in armed conflict, and
contributed in particular to a more systematic
integration of the gender perspective in peacekeeping
and peacebuilding missions and in the transition
from a reactive to a preventive culture, as manifested
by the inclusion of the protection of civilians in the
mandates of 8 peacekeeping missions. Other steps
have been taken to improve the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) at the regional level, such as
the drafting by the League of Arab States of a regional
strategy on women, peace and security.

For its part, Tunisia has begun to establish an
action plan on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). The plan encourages, inter alia, the training of
women in peacekeeping and peacebuilding with a view
to deploying qualified personnel in United Nations
operations on the ground, and in particular to improving
predeployment training by placing particular emphasis
on special measures with a view to protecting women
from all forms of violence.

We are compelled to acknowledge that, despite the
progress achieved, much remains to be done to achieve
all the goals set out in resolution 1325 (2000). It is
critical that the Council remain seized of the issue and
take further dynamic steps to enhance the protection of
women in armed conflict.

In that respect, we believe that national ownership
of the relevant Security Council resolutions remains
the best way to achieve their effective implementation.
My delegation is also convinced that all national actors,
including civil society, should be able to contribute
actively to promoting the peace process, since a State
can lay the foundations ofa lasting peace only with the
inclusion and support of all of its citizens.

As indicated in the latest report of the Secretary-
General, we also believe that civil society represents a
key partner in post-conflict situations and that women's
organizations in particular can contribute significantly
to enhancing early warning mechanisms allowing us
to preempt the escalation of violence against women
and to support awareness-raising initiatives to that end.
Women's organizations can also play an essential role
in developing women's capacities and enabling them to
participate actively in conflict prevention, mediation
and resolution processes. That is why it is important
to further mobilize technical support for such efforts.

In the same vein, we believe that men also play a
crucial role in the promotion of gender equality. The
initiatives of civil society organizations that are either
led by men or that focus on raising men's awareness on
gender equality deserve particular attention, since the
struggle of women to enjoy all their rights can succeed
only with the full involvement and engagement of men.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that my country
remains at the disposal of the United Nations for any
undertaking geared towards the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and of other international
instruments aimed at strengthening women's full and
broad participation in the decision-making process and
in establishing a culture of respect for women's rights.

