Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I should like to congratulate you,
Madam, on your country's accession to the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. I also welcome
Ms. Zainab Bangura, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and
am gratified by the participation in this meeting of the
Minister of National Defence of Ecuador, Ms. Maria
Fernanda Espinosa.

My country has spared no effort in providing the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General with data, forensic reports and formal letters
documenting the responsibility of the various armed
terrorist groups in my country for the sexual assault,
rape, abduction and killing of women and girls in
Syria. These crimes are part and parecel ofthe Salafist,
Wahabi and takfiri ideology they seek to spread
throughout the region. We have demonstrated our
commitment to supporting international efforts to end
all forms of sexual violence, holding their perpetrators
and instigators accountable, and ending the silence and
unjustified indifference in the relevant reports of many
specialized agencies of the United Nations concerning
all such ethically and socially abnormal behaviour
against Syrian women.

While we appreciate Ms. Bangura's efforts in the
preparation of the report before us (S/2014/181), her
interpretation of events in Syria remains unfortunately
partial and unilaterally sourced. In order to explain why
this is so, I have prepared the following remarks on the
section of the report pertaining to the situation in Syria.

First, those who drafted the report continue to allege
that the information contained therein was not verified
"largely owing to a lack of access" (S/2014/181, para. 55). In the regard, I assert that the Syrian authorities
have received no request from any United Nations office
in Damascus or elsewhere, including that of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, to visit any
location in order to verify information provided by the
Syrian Government. I recall that we have extended a
formal invitation to the Special Representative to visit
Syria on more than one occasion since her appointment,
and before the drafting of her two reports, in order to
help her assess events on the ground rather than relying
on misleading allegations arising from the media. We
have done so because of our interest in objectivity and
balance and in order to prevent politicization. However,
for reasons unknown to us the Special Representative
seems not to have found time to undertake such
an important visit. Clearly, her failure to do so has
prevented her Office from reporting accurately on
sexual violence in Syria.

Secondly, in the report the Special Representative
indicates that her allegations are based on

"[i]nformation gathered from displaced civilians
outside the Syrian Arab Republic and reported
by the independent international commission of
inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic" (ibid),

as well as by former detainees. I insist that the work
undertaken by the commission since its establishment
has been neither professional nor objective. Instead, it
has been political in nature and supremely biased against
the Government of Syria. In that regard, I confirm that
the Government of Syria rejects all accusations against
the Syrian national army, including the allegation
that women have been subject to sexual violence at
checkpoints that are in busy, open locations - a fact
that in itself negates any possible truth or validity of
such accusations.

Thirdly, despite the attempts of the Special
Representative and her team to document crimes of
sexual Violence committed by the armed terrorist
groups in Syria, she remains unable to verify them,
preferring to keep references to them vague and
indirect. Fully aware that the Syrian Government has
provided her with documentation of crimes of sexual
violence committed by members of these groups
against women - including murder, kidnapping, gang
rape, slavery, torture and marriage jihad - the Special
Representative and her team have unfortunately
not bothered to verify any such allegation or to seek
additional information from the Syrian Government or
other entities.

In this connection, if the Special Representative
has been unable to verify what she calls "media
reports" concerning the crime of marriage jihad, we
are prompted to ask whether the statement made by the
Minister of the Interior of Tunisia before the Tunisian
Parliament on 19 September 2013, which falls within
the reporting period covered by the report, to the
effect that 300 Tunisian women had fallen victim to
this sick fatwa from the Gulf, is also to be considered
a media report that cannot be verified. The United
Nations, as represented by the Special Representative,
plays a key role in eliminating this unprecedented
humiliation of women. This phenomenon affects not
only Syrian women, but women and girls worldwide.
One such incident, although surely not the last,
involved four minor girls - two from Austria and two
from France - who fell prey to this heinous fatwa, as
reported by the French and Austrian official media.

Fourthly, it is critical for us to focus on the suffering
ofdisplaced women in camps in neighbouring countries.
We are deeply concerned over the deteriorating security
situation in the camps in neighbouring countries that
host Syrian women and girls, who suffer insecurity,
human trafficking, rape and false marriages. All this
is documented in reports of the United Nations and
the Western media, which highlight the tragedy of
displaced Syrian minors below the age of 14 who have
found themselves shipped to major slave markets in
the Arab world, where petrodollar sheikhs and human-
trafficking mafiosi enslave them in the name ofreligion.
Moreover, two documented reports confirm 18,000
cases of trafficking in the organs of Syrian girls and
children in Turkish hospitals. We have communicated
this information to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflicts.

Here we would ask: If it is claimed that the failure
to document the crimes of sexual violence committed
by the terrorist armed groups is due to the inability to
access locations within Syria, how can it be explained
that none of these violations in the camps - which
their host countries have always declared open to
whoever wishes to visit - is being documented? And
why did the Special Representative not mention the
host countries' violations of their commitments to
those displaced Syrians?

Syria reaffirms that it is serious about dealing
with such grave and heinous violations. Furthermore,
we assert that we continue to desire to cooperate with
the United Nations, and in particular with Ms. Zainab
Bangura, to highlight the reality in Syria without
incitement or politicization. The Syrian authorities
are ready to look into any name or incident that has
been referred to the Special Representative so that it
may be investigated within the framework of ongoing
cooperation and dialogue with her Office.

In conclusion, the International Centre for the
Study of Radicalisation and Political Violence at King's
College London has uncovered that 10 women travelled
from Britain to Syria to fight side by side with the
armed terrorist groups in Syria.

Belgium has called on the nine European States
concerned with the issue of foreign combatants in Syria
to meet in Brussels on 8 May, alongside representatives
of the United States of America, Turkey, Morocco,
Jordan and Tunisia. The Minister of Interior ofBelgium
has said that addressing the issue of the return of
foreign combatants to their countries of origin is one
of her most important concerns. This issue, which we
have warned against that repeatedly over the past three
years, has now become a concern of Europe.

