Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for holding
this open debate on women and peace and security,
marking the twelfth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000). I would also like to thank the
Deputy Secretary-General, Michelle Bachelet, Herve
Ladsous and Bineta Diop for their informative briefings
this morning.

I welcome the statement to be made later by the
observer of the European Union, and the important
contributions the European Union makes to this agenda.

The Chinese have a powerful proverb that says
"women hold up half the sky". Twelve years after
the Council first made landmark commitments in
resolution 1325 (2000), we must all stand united behind
efforts to confront those who seek to exclude, harm or
marginalize half their populations.

As the Secretary-General has set out in his report
(S/2012/732), we in the Council have made a concerted
effort over the course of the past year to support the
rights, protection and empowerment of women in
strengthened peacekeeping mandates, in calls for more
female peacekeepers, greater representation for women

in United Nations leadership roles and a greater number
of gender experts in United Nations field missions. The
Council must respond to the Secretary-General's call to
demonstrate continued and committed leadership.
Women have a unique and powerful role to play
in peacebuilding. But the lack of security for women
and girls continues to be a major factor inhibiting their
participation in decision-making in conflict and post-
conflict settings. Women must participate as voters and
candidates in post-conflict elections. They deserve to
have the security to do so safely. Women must be placed
at the centre of peace negotiations, not marginalized,
threatened and ignored. And women's civil society
organizations, so often at the forefront in responding to
conflict and building peace in their own communities,
must be nurtured, funded and supported.

The United Kingdom itself benefits substantially
from early, regular and close consultation with women's
civil society organizations. The United Kingdom civil
society umbrella group, Gender Action for Peace and
Security, played an integral part in our own recent
national action plan review process.

We must do more to prevent conflict-related
sexual violence and tackle its perpetrators more
aggressively. That remains an urgent priority for the
United Kingdom. Despite our best collective efforts,
the culture of impunity that has grown up around this
horrific crime is tough to crack. It is shocking how few
of those responsible are put on trial for the crimes they
commit. Governments must do more and must do so
urgently.

In September, the United Kingdom Foreign
Secretary launched a new initiative on preventing sexual
violence at an event co-hosted with Michelle Bachelet,
Zeinab Bangura and the International Campaign to
Stop Rape and Gender Violence in Conflict. The
initiative aims to replace the culture of impunity with
one of deterrence, bringing more perpetrators of sexual
violence to justice. We will work closely with the
United Nations, international partners and civil society
to launch a sustained campaign and to build a global
partnership to prevent sexual violence in conflict.

Nationally, we have recruited a specialist team
of experts who are available to work in support of
the United Nations and civil society to investigate
allegations of sexual violence, gather evidence and
help countries build their own capacity to do so. The
United Kingdom has also contributed $1.5 million to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence to support her team's work. We hope
others will also find ways to renew their commitments.

Today we recognize in particular the invaluable
contribution civil society organizations make to
this agenda. Their contribution is vital. In Liberia,
organizations like the Women's Situation Room help
promote women's participation in political life and
prevent electoral violence. In Sierra Leone, the Rainbow
Institution has made great strides in helping survivors
of sexual and gender-based violence with medical
assistance and counseling, sensitizing communities and
empowering women and girls through village savings
and loans associations specifically for them. Such
organizations deserve to be nurtured and supported.

Women often bare a disproportionate burden in all
stages of conflict. We know that they play a critical role
in helping a country to draw back from recent conflict,
to ensure sustainable peace and to heal wounds in
societies torn apart by war. In that role, they surely hold
up more than half the sky.

We must ensure that together we support the
rights, protection and empowerment of women. Like
Mr. Ladsous, the United Kingdom, both in our national
capacity and as the Security Council lead on women
and peace and security, is ready to go the extra mile to
achieve that goal.

