Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): I join other
representatives in condemning the terrorist attacks that
took place yesterday in Russia and in Germany.

Trafficking and forced labour constitute a "heart
of darkness" in our world. It is evident that some
international terrorist groups are resorting to trafficking
in persons to bolster their power, recruitment base and
finances. We are concerned that certain State authorities
also remain complicit with human trafficking networks
to add to the precarious situation of civilians subject to
forced displacement.

The nexus between trafficking in persons and other
types of organized crime is becoming increasingly
manifest. A sustained, coordinated and coherent
response by the international, regional and national
entities concerned is required to effectively pre-empt
and disrupt that nexus, especially when it involves
women and children.

To this effect, we take note of the comprehensive
resolution 2331 (2016) adopted by the Council today.
We would have preferred an inclusive, participatory
approach to the draft, considering its importance to the
wider membership.

From our national perspective, we wish to underline
four points.

First, despite robust counter-trafficking legislations
and action plans, prosecution and conviction in
trafficking-related cases remain low. There is no
alternative to regional and international cooperation
in information-sharing and mutual legal assistance.
We urge all source, transit and destination countries
to accede and adhere to the relevant international
legal instruments.

Secondly, human traffickers tend to benefit from
the divergences between and discrimination in the
systemic and policy responses to immigration and
asylum in different countries. The global compact for
safe, regular and orderly migration should promote a
regular flow ofmigration and a sound, global migration
governance system that is based on a set of legally
binding and non-binding norms and approaches.

Thirdly, the stigma of human trafficking must
be shifted from the victims to the perpetrators.
Accountability and justice for victims should remain
above undue politicization, and the Trust Funds
established by the United Nations to support victims
must see an enhanced flow of resources.

Fourthly, training and sensitization concerning
trafficking in persons in conflict situations would
indeed add value to the relevant United Nations
peacekeeping operations. Any possible linkage with
trafficking in case of allegations of sexual exploitation
and abuse by peacekeepers must be based on credible
information and evidence.

In the aftermath of the Andaman Sea refugee crisis
in early 2015, we saw that sustained surveillance and
awareness-building at the community level are some of
the most effective tools against trafficking in persons.
Bangladesh remains committed to international efforts
to combat that scourge, pursuant to the Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, supplementing the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime, the United Nations Global Plan of
Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons, and the South
Asian Association for Regional Cooperation Convention
on Preventing and Combating the Trafficking in Women
and Children for Prostitution, among others.

