Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to thank the
presidency of Germany for convening this meeting and
welcome the adoption this morning of resolution 2467
(2019), which we co-sponsored.

We cannot tolerate any sexual Violence in conflict.
Japan has consistently supported the work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict. We highly appreciate the
efforts taken by Special Representative Patten to seek
commitments from relevant Governments and parties
through tenacious negotiations to end sexual violence
in conflict, which have led to a number of frameworks
of cooperation and joint communiques with various
Governments and entities.

In order to prevent and respond to sexual violence
in conflict, the international community should
strengthen its efforts in the following three areas.

First, ensuring accountability for perpetrators
and justice for survivors is key to the prevention and
deterrence of future crimes. If perpetrators are not
prosecuted or if they still hold power, sexual violence
cannot be put to rest, which leads to distrust in the
Government. Japan has, since 2014, financially
supported the work ofthe Team ofExperts on the Rule of
Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Central African Republic,
Somalia and Iraq. The Team of Experts works closely
with the Governments of those countries, as well as
United Nations missions and country teams, to support
investigation and prosecution, legislative reform and
capacity-building ofjudicial and security authorities.

Secondly, taking a survivor-centred approach is
important in responding to sexual violence in conflict.
Japan believes that the human security approach, which
is people-centred, comprehensive and context-specific
and focuses on prevention, is valuable in that context. In

that regard, Japan has supported United Nations action
projects, including projects that respond to the needs of
children born as a result of rape and their mothers in
Iraq and that improve access to justice by survivors of
sexual violence in Jordan.

Thirdly, in order to prevent and deter sexual
violence by addressing its root causes, including gender
inequality, we need to boost our efforts to promote
gender equality and the economic empowerment of
women. We must also acknowledge that women are
active peacebuilders and safeguards against violent
extremism - they are notjust victims of conflict.

In that connection, Japan has supported UN-
Women projects in Kenya, Egypt, Iraq and Jordan to
promote women's empowerment at the community
level through training against violent radicalization and
cash-for-work programmes. Those projects encourage
women to be confident, active players in protecting
their communities from violent extremist influences.

Under the leadership of Prime Minister Abe,
Japan hosted the fifth World Assembly for Women
last month to create a society in which women shine.
The participants discussed women's participation in
conflict prevention, peacebuilding and post-conflict
recovery and recognized that all stakeholders, including
Government and civil society, should work together to
promote that agenda. As President of the Group of 20
(G-20) this year, Japan will relay the World Assembly
for Women discussion to G-20 members at the Osaka
summit, at which women's economic empowerment
will be one of the topics of discussion.

Since the delegation of the Republic of Korea
mentioned the issue of comfort women in his statement
earlier, I am obliged to address the issue at this meeting.
The Government of Japan has been sincerely dealing
with that issue for a long period of time. In addition, as a
result of considerable diplomatic efforts, Japan and the
Republic of Korea reached an agreement in December
2015. With that agreement, both countries confirmed
that the issue of comfort women was resolved finally
and irreversibly. It is of great importance that the
agreement be steadily implemented by both sides.

