Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): First, I would like to congratulate
the delegation of South Africa on its presidency of the
Security Council for the month of October and at the
same time take this opportunity to wish every success
to the United Kingdom during its presidency of the
Council for the month of November.

We thank Ms. Amina Mohammed and Ms. Fatima
Kyari Mohammed for their testimonies, assessment and
recommendations regarding the implementation of the
various pillars of the women and peace and security
agenda and its subsequent impact on the development
of each country in the subregion. We strongly welcome
the cooperation between the African Union and the
United Nations in the pursuit of stability, peace and
sustainable development in the region.

Capitalizing on the moment of hope that the
subregion is enjoying following the peace agreement
between Ethiopia and Eritrea, the recent visit of the
Deputy Secretary-General sheds light on the critical
role of women in matters of peace and security and
represents an important moment in the promotion of
the women and peace and security agenda. We note
the significant progress made in Ethiopia, such as
gender parity throughout the Cabinet, including a
female President, and the representation of women in
the Federal Parliament, which stands at almost 40 per
cent. The role of women and their leadership, including
that of young women in peace processes, should be
encouraged and supported so that we may deliver
peace, security and development dividends.

Laying the foundations for inclusive politics and
strengthening respect for the rights and representation
of women in the political system is key. In that regard,
we are concerned that Somalia's draft constitution does
not guarantee due representation to women. However,
we see it as a positive step that the Government has
committed to ensuring the participation of women
in political decision-making by completing its
constitutional review by June 2020. We would be grateful
if the Deputy Secretary-General could elaborate on
whether additional measures were proposed to the draft
constitution during the deliberations, which would
ensure the representation and inclusion of women in
the coming electoral process in Somalia, in accordance
with the principle of one person, one vote.

During the recent open debate on women and
peace and security (see S/PV.8649), Ms. Alaa
Salah - a young woman and symbol of the protests
in the Sudan - addressed the Council and gave us
recommendations to ponder and follow up. We know
how women and young people were at the forefront
of those transformative protests, and Ms. Salah
emphasized that although women were at the forefront
of the revolution, they are currently being relegated.
We would like the Deputy Secretary-General to inform
us as to whether her recent discussions addressed the
measures being taken by the Government of the Sudan
to implement its national action plan on women and
peace and security and to address the concerns raised
by Ms. Salah. We understand that the renewal of the
mandate of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur will allow us to rethink an exit
strategy focused on preserving the mission's capacity
to protect civilians, particularly women and children,
and monitor human rights abuses.

We call for such missions to continue to be
carried out in order to strengthen cooperation between
the African Union and the United Nations, thereby
allowing for a better and greater implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda in the region,
at a juncture at which we face so many significant
challenges, such as climate change - the adverse
effects of which have a particular impact on women and
represent a multiplying factor of threats to peace and
stability. We underscore the role of women, including
young women, in achieving these goals.
Given that this is his last week in the Council, I take
this opportunity to wish every success to Ambassador
Jonathan Cohen in his new role. It truly has been an
honour to serve on the Council alongside him.

