Mr. Antonio: I would first like to thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his statement, and Ms. Zainab
Hawa Bangura for hers and for her very important role,
and Ms. Rhoda Misak for the very insightful statement
she made.

I am pleased to deliver this statement on behalf of
the Special Envoy of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission on Women, Peace and Security,
Ms. Bineta Diop. Due to unforeseen commitments,
Ms, Diop could not come in person, and I therefore
wish to convey her apologies and best wishes for the
success of this debate. Ms. Diop wishes to thank the
Federal Republic of Nigeria in its capacity as President
of the Security Council for the month of April and for
her invitation to this important debate. Ms. Diop is
currently in South Sudan as a member of the African
Union commission of inquiry on that country. She
and her colleagues are there to investigate human-
rights violations and other abuses committed in the
context of South Sudan's current crisis, and to make
recommendations on fighting impunity and ensuring
accountability, national reconciliation and healing. She
has therefore asked me to make the following statement.

"I would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2014/181) and leadership, and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab
Hawa Bangura, for her commitment to preventing
conflict-related sexual violence and protecting
women, men and children around the world from
that scourge. I also thank the Executive Director
of UN-Women for her full support for the women,
peace and security agenda in Africa.

"The Chairperson of the African Union
Commission has made the protection of women's
right across the continent a priority, and she is
committed to promoting and working to achieve
gender equality. She is also making sure that the
Commission has a 50/50 workforce parity, in line
with the gender policy adopted by the African
Union (AU) in 2009.

"In January I assumed my mandate as
Special Envoy of the African Union Commission
Chairperson on Women, Peace and Security. With
that appointment, I recommitted to continuing
to work closely with the women of the African
continent. I resolved to amplify their voices and
concerns within the African Union and other
decision-making bodies, and to ensure that women
assume their rightful role in ensuring peace and
security in Africa.

"The number of victims of sexual Violence
during armed conflict in Africa is staggering, and
tackling the issue of conf lict-related sexual violence
is one of the critical areas of concern in my new
mandate, requiring urgent and effective action at
the community, national, regional and international
levels. Additional areas of my mandate relate to
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
women's participation in peace processes.

"I am therefore pleased to report that in
January of this year the AU Commission signed
a cooperation framework, with the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, on preventing and
responding to sexual violence in conflict and post-
conflict situations. That agreement complements
ongoing efforts by the African Union Peace and
Security Department, which is working to put in
place a code of conduct and zero-tolerance policy
that clearly outlines the AU's strong position
against sexual violence, exploitation and abuse by
AU troops.

"The code of conduct and the zero-tolerance
policy will be shared with all troop-contributing
countries and integrated into all related training.
We are already seeing progress in that area with
the African Union Mission in Somalia, which
already has a policy on sexual exploitation and
abuse. Furthermore, the agreement strengthens
the collaboration and common commitment of the
African Union and the United Nations to combat
impunity, promote accountability, implement
capacity-building and training programmes, foster
improved coordination and national leadership and
ownership, facilitate the provision of multisectoral
services to survivors and alleviate their stigma and
trauma.

"Article 11 ofthe Protocol to the African Charter
on Human and People's Rights on the Rights of
Women in Africa - the Maputo Protocol - calls
on State parties to

'protect asylum-seeking women, refugees,
returnees and internally displaced persons
against all forms of violence, rape and other
forms of sexual exploitation, and to ensure that
such acts are considered war crimes, genocide
and/or crimes against humanity and that their
perpetrators are brought to justice before a
competent criminal jurisdiction'.

"Implementation of the Protocol and all existing
AU instruments that address the issue of conflict-
related sexual violence must be accelerated. There
is still a long way to go and a lot ofwork to be done.
We must start by doing away with the tradition of
inequality between women and men, which is one
of the overarching reasons why violence against
women is widespread and so easily carried out. Our
young boys and men must be educated and engaged
in the fight against the culture of sexual violence.

"In discharging my mandate, I am committed
to looking beyond the view of women as only
victims and men as only Victimizers. Instead, I
will recognize them as active agents in the fight to
prevent conflict-related sexual violence. Conflict-
prevention and early warning mechanisms must
fully involve both women and men and must
be approached through community efforts with
monitoring and financial support made available to
ensure their successful implementation.

"We must undertake progressive, aggressive
prevention measures and challenge societal norms
that portray girls as less valuable than boys,
causing them to develop low self-esteem and self-
worth, thus further contributing to the cycle. We
also need to prosecute perpetrators and hold them
accountable for their actions in conflict-related
sexual violence.

"In recognition of the critical need to
investigate sexual-violence atrocities committed
in conflict situations, one of the objectives of the
AU Commission of Inquiry on South Sudan is to
document atrocities of sexual violence with a view
to ensuring the accountability of those responsible
and fighting impunity.

"We must ensure that the cries of the people
of South Sudan do not go unheard. We cannot say
that we do not know; and once we know, we have
no excuse - we have to act. The responsibility lies
with all of us.

"Moreover, we need to raise the profile of
women's networks and civil society organizations,
which in many instances serve as first responders
to address the scourge of conflict-related sexual
violence and are the first to stand in solidarity

with survivors. Sustained progress and action on
those issues requires the strengthening of local
initiatives and mechanisms to combat conflict-
related sexual violence, including those targeted
at protecting judicial independence, promoting
gender-sensitive school curricula, training civilian
police, sensitizing youth and combating stigma and
ethnic discrimination.

"The African Union has had a gender-
parity principle in force since 2002. The Solemn
Declaration on Gender Equality in Africa, adopted
in 2004, applies to all AU member States, and we
hope to see its full implementation reflected in
the approach to Security Council resolution 1325
(2000).

"If it is agreed that women's rights are
human rights and that women are essential to the
establishment of peaceful societies, we need, in
our approach to tackling conflict-related sexual
violence, to enable the full participation of women
during peace processes. The African Union and the
United Nations should continue to build a critical
mass of women mediators and appoint more women
as lead mediators.

"As the Special Envoy, I am working very
closely with the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women,
regional bodies, national and international partners
and Africans from all walks of life to ensure
that women contribute meaningfully in peace
negotiations. Conflict-related sexual violence is
a global scourge and the approach to combating
it should, accordingly, be both local and global.
We count on the joint effort of the United Nations
and the AU. I count on the support of the Security
Council in implementing the women, peace and
security agenda across the continent.

"As we approach 2015, the Common African
Position on the Post-2015 Development Agenda
commits us to the eradication ofall forms ofviolence
against women and children. The African Union's
Agenda 2063, which represents a commitment
to build a prosperous and peaceful Africa, puts
particular emphasis on the engagement of women
and youth in the continent's development.

"In conclusion, I humbly appeal to all here
present to continue your support of our efforts in
the fight against sexual violence, and I leave you
with the words of former President Nelson Mandela.

'"As long as we take the view that these are
problems for women alone to solve, we cannot
expect to reverse the high incidence of rape
and child abuse. Domestic violence will not
be eradicated. We will not defeat this scourge
that affects each and every one of us, until we
succeed in mobilizing the whole of our society
to fight it."

