Mr. Saikal (Afghanistan): Let me thank the Mission
of France for convening this meeting on women and
peace and security.

We also thank all speakers who have made strong,
positive references to Afghanistan's progress with
women in general. However, there is no place for
complacency. We remain steadfast in our resolve to
improve the lives of half of our population.

The role of women is inextricable from the promotion
of peace and security worldwide. Experience has also
shown that the full involvement and participation of
women are not only desirable but absolutely necessary
to the advancement of society, as well to preventing and
resolving conflicts. Today's meeting is of particular
importance to my country, Afghanistan, which has seen
decades of imposed conflict, including terrorism and
violence extreme, all of which has left our institutions
and social fabric in a shambles.

Afghan women have borne the disproportionate
burden of violence and suffering for a long period of
time. Their basic rights and fundamental freedoms
were completely denied under Taliban rule, as they had
no access to education, health care or employment.

Needless to say, the plight of Afghan women
has seen profound improvements since the fall of
the Taliban regime, which marked the start of a new
era in our modern history. Since 2001, we have seen
tremendous progress across all spectrums of society.
Today, the National Unity Government is consolidating
the gains of recent years. Women's equality in all
spheres remains an important national priority, as we
are committed to furthering women's participation and
role in all stages of decision-making, particularly in
relation to peace and security issues.

Our commitment to women's empowerment is
embedded in our firm resolve to meet our pledges
within the framework of our national and international
obligations, including the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and the international treaties to
which we are party. To that end, the Government of
Afghanistan is sparing no effort to meet the goals of
resolution 1325 (2000). The Afghanistan national action
plan on women and peace and security remains the
overarching framework for implementing that hallmark
resolution. A key component of our strategy relates
to ensuring women's participation in the prevention,
management and resolution of conflicts, as well as
other matters related to peace and security.

Ending the cycle of terror, violence and conflict in
Afghanistan is the surest way to protect and promote
the rights of all our citizens, particularly women. In
this respect, women are front and centre in our national
peace process as members of the High Peace Council
and civil society, as human rights advocates, and as
members of Parliament and Government. Accordingly,
the participation of women in peacebuilding efforts is
recognized as a prerequisite for peace and reconstruction
across the country. In the broader context, there is a
common acknowledgement that durable peace and
stability in Afghanistan require the participation of
women in every aspect of society, be it social, political
or economic.

The national action plan for the women of
Afghanistan, spanning the years 2008 to 2018, commits
the Afghan Government to increasing women's
representation in the civil service to 30 per cent. The
Ministries of the Interior and National Defence have
committed to increasing women's representation in
those institutions by 20 per cent over the next 10 years.
Furthermore, my delegation is pleased to report that at
present more than 3,000 female armed-service members
and police officers are proudly serving in our national
security forces in order to protect our citizens, combat
international terrorism and preserve law and order.
In the economic domain, the launch of our national
programme for women's economic empowerment
has marked another important step forward in the
advancement of women. It has supported 67,000 women
in agricultural activities and empowered 35,000 in the
livestock sector, and it is also recruiting 3,000 female
teachers and 900 community midwives and nurses.

Physical protection from any form of violence
constitutes an integral component of our national efforts
to empower women. A number of national structures
have been established to enforce constitutional and
legislative provisions to protect women. They include
the Ministry of Women's Affairs, the Afghanistan
Independent Human Rights Commission, commissions
in Kabul and the provinces for the elimination of
violence against women, the creation of the post
of Deputy Attorney-General for the Elimination of
Violence against Women and a commission on the
elimination of sexual abuse of women and children.
Those structures are integral to the Government's
promotion and protection of women's rights and to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

Amid all our gains, we realize how vital it is to
continue sustaining and enhancing progress on women's
empowerment on all fronts. We can say with confidence
that Afghanistan has entered a new phase in its journey
to transform the role of women into a powerful force
of change, while contributing to the vision of a self-
reliant nation that stands in lasting peace, tranquillity
and stability. We are confident in our success, but
the support of the international community continues
to be crucially important to realizing that vision. We
would like to take this opportunity to express our
consciousness of the deep debt of gratitude we owe to
all the friends and partners that continue to make an
important contribution to our efforts. We look forward
to continuing our collaboration in order to elevate our
progress in the protection and empowerment of Afghan
women to new heights.

