Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
commend you, Mr. President, for having convened this
open meeting on women and peace and security for
having scheduled the debate for the fourth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). My country
was honoured to have participated in the drafting and
adoption of that resolution as a member of the Council
at that time.

I would like to thank Mr. Guehenno for his
briefing on progress achieved in implementing
resolution 1325 (2000), as well as Ms. Rwankuba,
Ms. Obaid and Ms. Arbour for their briefings on
strategies to prevent and respond to situations of
gender-based violence in conflict situations - violence
that is, unfortunately, continuing.

The Argentine delegation has maintained, and
will continue to uphold, the vital need for full respect
for international humanitarian norms and human rights.
War crimes committed against women and girls,
recognized as such by the International Criminal Court,
pursuant to the Rome Statute, must not and cannot go
unpunished. We would like to take this opportunity to
urge parties to armed conflicts to take special measures
to protect women and girls from gender-based
violence, in particular rape and other forms of sexual
abuse that are so humiliating.

The Government of Argentina would like to
express its support for the implementation of some
kind of system designed to prevent sexual violence,
exploitation and trafficking in women and girls, both
within the civilian population and within the military,
including appropriate reporting mechanisms that would
protect the identity of the complainant and monitoring
mechanisms covering personnel of peacekeeping
operations.

The existence of a gender-component in all field
operations seems to us to be a requirement that is
increasingly dictated by the reality in the field.

When any given conflict strikes women, it
gravely threatens the future of new generations,
undermines the foundation on which the security of
families and the systems of social protection should be
based, and sets up the worst possible scenario for the
psychological, political and socio-economic survival of
a particular community. We therefore strongly
condemn the manipulation of any conflict by the
victors to deny women and girls enjoyment of their
fundamental human rights. For that reason we support,
and will continue to support, any initiative taken by the
Council designed to address the particular needs of
women affected by armed conflict.

The international community must understand
that there is an important role that women can and
should play in preventing and resolving conflicts and
in peace-building. Armed conflicts affect women in
particular, and disproportionately so, and we may
safely conclude that women have their own voice that
should be heard in forums in which there is discussion
of the best ways to avoid or resolve conflicts or to
organize the future of the communities affected by
those conflicts.

As we have been doing in other forums of this
Organization, Argentina urges the Secretary-General to
appoint more women as special representatives, special
envoys and as spokespersons in missions of good
offices relating to peace and preventive diplomacy.

We also call on Member States to take the gender
perspective duly into account, when making national,
regional and international level appointments. We
support the participation of women at the negotiating
tables of peace agreements, in all mechanisms for the
implementation of those agreements, and in post-
conflict rebuilding processes. In that regard, we urge
everyone to set aside archaic, ancient and stereotypical
views about the role of women.

Today, four years after the adoption of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000), Argentina recognizes
the significant efforts that have been made by Member
States and the United Nations system in general, and
by civil society to incorporate a gender perspective in
their policies and programmes, to create specific
capabilities and to promote full participation for
women on an equal basis in maintaining and promoting
peace. That work has been important, and we would
like to acknowledge it at this stage.

However, situations of violence affecting women
on the ground, make it plain that - notwithstanding
the progress achieved - much still remains to be done.
Argentina, two months before it enters the Security
Council once again, calls attention to the full validity
of the statements made in the year 2000 and asserts
that only a clear-cut commitment, a resolute and
sustained political will and genuine conviction on the
part of Member States that the participation of women
is a key element for achieving lasting peace and
concerted multilateral action will be able to guarantee
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

My country also supports the recommendations
made by the Secretary-General in his report, in
particular, his intention to develop a strategy and
comprehensive plan of action to implement Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000) throughout the United
Nations system by establishing a systematic evaluation
mechanism and reporting procedure.

We are also convinced that those
recommendations, the ideas expressed by Member
States in the discussion and the important contributions
of civil society will be very useful when we come to
design the plan of action.

We would also like to highlight the activities of
the United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM), the International Research and Training
Institute for the Advancement of Women (INSTRAW),
the Inter-Agency Task Force on Women, Peace and
Security and the Department of Public Information,
which have contributed to the dissemination and
exchange of information.

We are ready to unite our efforts to ensure that all
the women of the world may enjoy their rights and
freedoms on an equal footing with men, and thus to put
an end to impunity in cases of gender-based violence.
If we protect women, we believe that we are protecting
the future. If we respect women and take them into
account, we will be building peace.

Before I close, I would like to express my
personal wish, and that of my delegation, that at the
next anniversary of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000) there will be even more women representing
various cultures and participating in this debate.

