Mr. Oshima (Japan): First, I thank Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno and Ambassador Zeid for
their detailed briefings.

My delegation acknowledges with appreciation
the fact that, since the serious problem of sexual
exploitation and abuse by peacekeepers came to light,
considerable efforts have been made over the past
months by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO), the missions deployed in the field and troop-
contributing Governments to address the issue and take
the necessary preventive and remedial measures. We
strongly support the zero-tolerance policy of the
Secretary-General in striving to stamp out that
inexcusable misconduct in United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

We particularly appreciated the highly valuable
report submitted, along with recommendations, last
March by the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General,
Prince Zeid, on this issue. I wish to take this
opportunity to pay a high tribute to the great efforts
and contributions that the Ambassador of Jordan
continues to make on that matter. Subsequent to that
report, Member States and the Secretariat worked
together in the General Assembly's Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations and adopted a
comprehensive report providing for preventive
measures to be implemented in all peacekeeping
missions, including appropriate punishment for all
violators of the rules.

Those are commendable efforts, but what is
clearly most important is the implementation of the
measures by all parties concerned, including DPKO
and troop-contributing countries. The briefings
provided this morning have made it clear that, while
much improvement has been recorded in the field and
at the Headquarters level to implement some of those
recommendations - and we must acknowledge and
appreciate the accomplishments that have been
made - the full truth is that much remains to be done.
There is no room for any complacency in that regard.

As part of the follow-up to implementation, the
Security Council's Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations, which I have the honour to chair, last year
took up the issue of sexual abuse and exploitation, with
special attention devoted to the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC). The Working Group held a joint
meeting with major troop-contributing countries, to
which the Chairman of the General Assembly's Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, Ambassador
Wali of Nigeria, was also invited. That invitation to the
Chairman of the Committee of 34, which he accepted,
was intended to develop better coordination and a
complementary working relationship between the
subsidiary body of the Security Council and the
General Assembly in the handling of DPKO issues.

That meeting included an update by DPKO and
troop-contributing countries regarding how the
measures to prevent cases of sexual abuse and
exploitation in MONUC were being implemented.
There was an active exchange of views at the meeting
about how those measures should be improved further.
I felt that it was a useful exercise. The Council's
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operation stands
ready to be proactive in providing impetus, as
necessary, to the implementation of preventive and
remedial measures.

The international community expects high
standards of responsibility and discipline on the part of
troops and staff deployed to United Nations
peacekeeping operations. Every peacekeeper deployed
and every troop-, police- and civilian-contributing
country is expected to maintain high moral, ethical and
professional standards while serving under the flag of
the United Nations. In most situations they have lived
up to those high expectations, and they deserve praise
for their dedication and hard work - which they
frequently carry out in difficult circumstances, in the
course of which the ultimate sacrifice has sometimes
been required.

Unfortunately, however, the reputation of United
Nations peacekeeping operations has been tarnished by
serious allegations of sexual abuse and exploitation due
to the misbehaviour of some. Again, the issue of
improper procurement practices and allegations of
fraud and mismanagement in procurement services
related to peacekeeping operations have come to
undermine the credibility of peacekeeping operations. I
do not envy Jean-Marie Guehenno his position in the
last few days. However, we must spare no effort in
correcting the wrongs and overcoming the weaknesses
in the system, thereby restoring the good name of
United Nations peacekeeping operations by taking all
the necessary measures with the same rigour and in a
spirit of zero-tolerance. Nothing less will be acceptable
to Member States.

I would like to conclude by stating that DPKO
has the full support of my delegation in its further
efforts.

