Mr. Stewart (United Kingdom): Allow me to begin
by putting on record our deep condolences to the family
of the Russian Ambassador for the terrible tragedy
in Turkey.

The testimony that we heard from Ms. Nadia
Murad Basee Taha has really brought home to us,
through the specificity of her experience, the horror
of what she experienced: her six brothers killed, the
stories of what happened to Catherine or indeed to her
nephew, Malik. The story that she has shared with us
is not simply a story of violence, but in everything that
she said she underscored the way in which these are
forms of violence, of coercion, of slavery and, in their
systematic and deliberate nature, forms of war.

I would also like to pay tribute to the Spanish
delegation for bringing resolution 2331 (2016) forward,
and to the analytical clarity with which Ms. Zainab
Bangura in particular, and the Spanish Government in
drafting the resolution, has brought to our analysis this
problem, by which I mean specifically the ways in which,
in paragraphs 8 and 9, we focused on the mechanics of
human trafficking in conflict - on the ways in which
it is used for recruitment, for financing, for destroying
communities, for displacing communities, for gathering
intelligence, for advancing ideology; the ways in
which this violence can be perpetrated through rape,
through sexual slavery, through forced prostitution
and pregnancy. This detailed, rigorous and analytical
description does not minimize or distract from, in fact
it amplifies, the horror of what we are witnessing.

Personally, having been in Iraq in 2014 immediately
after the situation in Sinjar and having seen directly
Yazidi families struggling in those immediate first few
days with the death of family members who had been
kidnapped and removed from them, I could not believe,
as someone who had been working in Iraq since 2013,
the depth of that horror. Indeed, on my trip to Iraq just
two and a half weeks ago I saw how permanent the
scars of what the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
has done within refugee camps - the damage it has
done to communities, to countries and, above all, to
a civilization.

However, today we are really at this meeting
to focus on practical action, so I just want to take
a little time to make three brief observations on
practical action: the first is about our approach, the
second is about implementation and the third is about
bureaucracy. Humility needs to be fundamental to our
approach. We must take into account how difficult it
is to operate in a conflict environment; how difficult
it is to access; to provide protection; how difficult it is
to protect and to prosecute; how honest we have to be
about the gaps in our knowledge; how much we need
to learn from what the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) does in other areas - in counter
narcotics, illegal wildlife trade and terrorism. However,
we must also consider the ways in which this can be
quite specific, both in the nature of the violence but
also in the context in which it operates, whether it is in
Mosul, in Nigeria or with Boko Haram or with Da'esh.

On implementation, I would like to pay tribute to
the Spanish Government, particularly for two elements,
the focus in paragraph 2 (d) on victim identification
and the focus in paragraphs 19 and 20 on training,
in particular that of peacekeepers and humanitarian
workers. At the heart of our response there needs to be
not just an understanding of what we ought to do, but
what we can do, in particular an understanding of our
own bureaucracies and the impediments and problems
in those bureaucracies. Therefore, we have been very
clear on the challenges around predeployment training,
readiness standards, needs assessments and technical
capacity. But the next stage needs to be to really
understand our agencies - to really understand what
reform will mean within UNODC, the International
Labour Organization, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the International
Organization for Migration - and the ways in which
that connects to what civil society is doing and to what
officials in the countries concerned are doing. It is
very easy to sit around a table like this and talk in the
abstract about coordination, but this is fundamentally
about resources, institutional culture and about training
in the broader sense.

Within the United Kingdom, we are focusing on two
things. We are focusing, as Nadia said, on the issue of
accountability in Iraq and with the Iraqi Government.
Our Prime Minister has set up a task force on modern-
day slavery, whose focus is above all on practical
learning, on coordination and on implementation.

In conclusion, this meeting today is in many ways
and optimistic moment. It is exactly the kind of thing
that the Council should be focused on - because of its
transnational nature and the non-State actors involved.
We owe huge thanks both to the Spanish leadership
and the multilateral Organization we exist within and
for the way that is being connected with the analytical
rigor, which is being provided by the officials and by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
and also the way in which that connects to the human
testimony from Ms. Ameena Saeed Hasan and Nadia,
which connects the rhetoric of this Chamber to the
reality on the ground. However, we are not just at
this meeting to describe the world, we are here to
change it. That is going to involve some very difficult
conversations within our own bureaucracies and
agencies on reform - reform that is needed because
this relates to our deepest moral intuitions and our
deepest moral obligations.

