Mr. Rybakov (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): We
would like to thank Great Britain for organizing today's
open debate on the problem of combating human
trafficking. This issue has recently become firmly
established on the Security Council's agenda. However,
we would like to emphasize that by its nature, the
problem of human trafficking should not be dealt with
through the Security Council, whose mandate is not
appropriate to the topic. It will lead to duplication of the
functions of the main organs of the United Nations and
an expanded interpretation of the Council's mandate.
Crimes such as human trafficking are transnational in
nature, and all States should take part in tackling it.
We believe firmly that the most appropriate forum for
coordinating efforts on the issue should continue to be
the General Assembly, since it represents all States,
without exception.

The President of the General Assembly recently
appointed the Permanent Representatives of Greece
and Qatar as coordinators of the negotiation process
to prepare for a high-level meeting of the Assembly
to review the implementation of the Global Plan of
Action to Combating Trafficking in Persons. The first
consultations have already been held, and it is now up to
us to see this effort through. In that connection, we urge
all States to take a serious and constructive approach to
preparing and conducting the review of the Global Plan
of Action in order to evaluate the existing problems and
develop further action to combat human trafficking.

Unfortunately, the main problem in combating
the evil of human trafficking consists in what it looks
like and what to call it. In the year since the adoption
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the
United Nations has been concerned with the issue of
what to call human trafficking in the modern world.
Today, however, it is clear that in our quest for the
correct name, we have missed the most important
thing, without which it will essentially be impossible
to overcome human trafficking, which is that we have
not been able to unite our efforts - the efforts of the
countries of destination, transit and supply of this
living commodity. Every State has a different potential
and different capacities in the fight against human
trafficking; some have the resources for it, some have
less and some none at all. It is evident to us today that
we have to establish a dialogue of engagement between
developed and developing States, and that the place
for that dialogue should definitely not be the Security
Council, which States hardly associate with a place for
dialogue.

If we continue to ignore each other, to launch
competing initiatives on trafficking and to exploit
positions of privilege, including membership of the
Security Council, human trafficking will continue to
flourish. In that regard, we urge all interested States to
coordinate their efforts in an open and predictable forum
in which all States, without exception, can participate.

