Ms. Safou (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): At the outset, Mr. President, I
would like to welcome the accession of your country,
France, to the presidency of the Security Council and
to congratulate you for the great skill with which you
have led the work of the Council during this month of
October. I would also like to thank you for convening
today's open debate on women and peace and security,
a theme that reflects the tragedy that many women
around the world endure, particularly certain women in
the eastern and the central parts of my country.

I pay well-earned tribute to His Excellency
Mr. Antonio Guterres, Secretary-General, for his
assiduous efforts aimed at seeking peace in my country.
I also thank Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka for the
support UN-Women has given to the women of the
Democratic Republic of Congo. I also welcome the
presence of Ms. Michaelle Jean, Secretary General of
the International Organization of La Francophonie.

My country, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which has been affected by many years of armed
conflict, with nefarious repercussions, particularly for
women and children, has made a firm commitment
to the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on
women and peace and security. This debate affords us
an opportunity to briefly outline the efforts undertaken
by my Government to address this situation - and to
implement resolution 1325 (2000) - which we have
done by adopting a plan of action plan with 10 priority
thrusts in 2013.

The plan of action is currently under participatory
and inclusive review with significant collaboration
from civil society at both the national and international
levels, in particular with the participation of the Cordaid
Foundation, Diakonia Sweden and UN-Women. The
Government has undertaken an assessment of the
current plan of action so as to identify its strengths
and weaknesses and to collect statistical data from
10 provinces, while awaiting data from the remaining
provinces, with a View to reaching more women at the
local level.

It is worth noting that the implementation of
the national action plan for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) has led in gender-mainstreaming
in conflict prevention and peacebuilding, as well as
capacity-building for women leaders in negotiation
and mediation in terms of influencing decision-making
in times of crisis and post-conflict periods in the
Democratic Republic of Congo. More than 500 women
leaders and prominent local individuals have seen
their capacities strengthened in the areas of conflict
resolution and notions of gender. That has enabled them
to contribute to the peaceful resolution of conflicts in
provinces mired in ethnic conflict.

It should be noted that the Democratic Republic
of Congo has undertaken a review of our national
strategy to combat sexual and gender-based violence,
adopted an armed forces action plan and signed the
joint compact between the Government and the United
Nations on the fight against sexual violence in conflict.
Through the compact, our Government has reaffirmed
its commitment to shoring up a zero-tolerance policy
for crimes of sexual violence and to adopting measures
to fight impunity by initiating proceedings against
perpetrators. Along those lines, from July to December
2014, 135 judicial sentences were handed down,
punishing high-level military and police officers, and in
2016 the military justice system rendered 111 decisions
against perpetrators of sexual violence.

At the security level, I would like to commend the
determination of the Head of State, Mr. Joseph Kabila
Kabange, to implement the relevant provisions of
resolution 1325 (2000), in particular by the promotion to
rank and raising to high-level positions of nine women
army brigadier generals and a number of female senior
officers. It is worth mentioning the appointment of 20
women to active duty in the battalion of the Forces
armees de la Republique democratique du Congo, which
operated in the Central African Republic in connection
with the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic.

1 cannot conclude without noting that my country
rightly appreciates the support given to it by the United
Nations and the international community.

