Ms. Wallstrom: There is no question that the
Security Council has adopted historic resolutions to
combat the scourge of conflict-related sexual violence.
But the question could be asked: What do those
resolutions mean for women right now in Libya? If a
Libyan woman had been in this Chamber last
December when resolution 1960 (2010) was adopted
(see S/PV.6453), what would it have led her to expect?

In a word, the promise of resolution 1960 (2010)
is prevention. Resolution 1960 (2010) is rightly
oriented towards deterrence. In that respect, it marks a
political commitment to bringing all of the Council's
tools to bear in preventing and addressing the atrocity
of wartime rape. It sets out the elements of an
accountability regime aimed at influencing the conduct
of perpetrators and would-be perpetrators.

Yet resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011) on
Libya make no mention of the risk of sexual violence, a
risk that is all too real in contexts of escalating unrest
and mass displacement. In its preambular part,
resolution 1970 (2011) lists a range of human rights
concerns - arbitrary detention, enforced disappearance,
torture, summary execution, forced refugee flight and
repression of peaceful demonstrations. Experience
attests to the fact that such conditions often signal
spikes in sexual violence. However, when it is not
explicitly included in mandates and the related political
discussions, the question is unlikely to be asked.

Leveraging the credible threat of consequences
for rape can make a difference. Resolution 1970 (2011)
was thus an opportunity for the Council to raise a red
flag, to give effect to the intention expressed so
powerfully last December.
Sexual violence has emerged despite the robust
action of the international community to protect
civilians in Libya. Although reports of rape remain
unconfirmed - and are even brutally silenced - they
have arrested the attention of the world. The name of
Eman al-Obeidi is known to all. Reports from transit
camps on the Libya-Tunisia border and from surgeons,
doctors and international media representatives suggest
that it is not plausible to consider her case an isolated
incident.

As a political or security situation deteriorates,
events unfold rapidly, and sexual violence often
becomes part of the repertoire of repression. Its
inclusion in peacekeeping and other Chapter VII
resolutions sends a strong signal that sexual violence,
like other grave violations, will be subject to scrutiny.
It tells the women of Libya, cote d'Ivoire or the
Democratic Republic of the Congo that the promise of
resolution 1960 (2010) will be translated into practice,
that thematic resolutions are in fact a prelude to
country-level action.

Given the way sexual violence spans the history
of war, it should be automatically and systematically
included in protection measures. The Council has
recognized that sexual violence is used by political and
military leaders to advance political, military and
economic ends. As a consequence, it warrants
continuous consideration. Otherwise, interventions on
the front lines may relegate women's security to the
sidelines. If we allow the lack of hard data to justify
inaction, it will always be too late.

But I am optimistic that resolution 1960 (2010)
will shift the terms of the debate from reacting to sexual
violence like any other tragedy to preventing sexual
violence like any other threat. Indeed, when resolution
1975 (2011), imposing targeted sanctions in response to
the surging violence in care d'Ivoire, was adopted on
30 March, sexual violence was duly mentioned (see S/PV.6508). That was an encouraging sign that such
violence is taken seriously and is increasingly being
integrated into the Council's core business.

Shocking reports of sexual violence have
emerged as part of the post-electoral crisis in cote
d'Ivoire. Preliminary information suggests that sexual
assaults may have been politically targeted, as
previously witnessed in Kenya and Guinea. These
incidents demand a swift and thorough investigation.
They should also be taken into account when the
11-29982
Council considers the mandate of the United Nations
Operation in cote d'Ivoire in the coming weeks.

Council members will recall that resolution 1820
(2008) demands, in paragraph 2, "the immediate and
complete cessation by all parties to armed conflict of
all acts of sexual violence against civilians" and
stresses the exclusion of such crimes from amnesty
provisions. Accordingly, I urge the Council to use its
influence to ensure that any ceasefire agreement
reached in relation to Libya or cote d'Ivoire also
entails the cessation of sexual violence as a tactic of
war. Moreover, commissions of inquiry must include
dedicated expertise on this issue.

Almost daily, cases of sexual violence against
vulnerable communities in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo continue to be reported. On 31 December
2010 and 1 January 2011, 47 women were raped in the
villages of Bushani and Kalambahiro in Masisi territory
in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
perpetrators were alleged to be Forces armees de la
Republique democratique du Congo (FARDC)
(ex-Congres national pour la defense du people) soldiers
participating in a joint operation of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and the FARDC.

Yet the past several months have also shown that
where there is political will, there is a way. The
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
ensured a swift and open investigation into the rapes
that occurred in Fizi territory in December 2010, which
led to the trial and conviction by the Military Court in
Baraka of Lieutenant Colonel Mutware Kibibi and 10
other FARDC officers. Those perpetrators will serve
sentences of between 10 and 20 years. Further, in
February, Callixte Mbarushimana, affiliated with the
Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Rwanda, was
transferred from France to the International Criminal
Court in The Hague.

While these are exemplary actions, it is essential
that all perpetrators be consistently and relentlessly
pursued. That will raise the cost of committing,
commanding or condoning sexual violence and thereby
serve as a deterrent to others.

In February, I visited the Democratic Republic of
the Congo for the third time and was able to discuss the
issue of impunity with President Kabila and senior
members of the Government. The President
acknowledged the importance of ensuring the rigorous
11-29982

investigation and prosecution of perpetrators as a key
element of prevention. There seems to be a new
awareness among the political leadership in this regard.
There is also a new trend of convictions of senior
FARDC officers - including commanders - for
crimes of sexual violence. In March, we witnessed the
prosecution of General Jerome Kakwavu, the highest-
ranking national army officer ever to be tried for
crimes of sexual violence. He was, as members know,
one of the five officers blacklisted by this Council.

These are positive signs that I hope can be
sustained and reinforced. Since the mass rapes in
Walikale, there has also been a marked evolution in
MONUSCO's protection response, including the
initiation of community alert networks for early
warning.

In February, I also visited Kamako in Western
Kasai province on the border of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Angola to look into reports
of sexual violence against Congolese women and girls
in the context of ongoing expulsions from Angola.
Local administrators and United Nations agencies
recorded 185 such rapes in January. I met with nearly
70 of these women and girls in Kamako. One woman
described having been abducted while at market and
raped repeatedly by multiple assailants over the course
of several days before being expelled from Angolan
territory. I saw the rope burns on the arms of a woman
who said that she had been gang-raped and tied to a
tree. Many of the women said that they were desperate
to find their children, who had remained in Angola
after their expulsions. Angolan security forces were
implicated in many of these cases.

I then visited Angola from 10 to 14 March to take
this issue up with the authorities. I travelled to Lunda
Norte province on the Angola-Democratic Republic of
the Congo border, where I visited the Chissanda border
crossing and the Cajamba refugee settlement. Serious
and legitimate concerns exist regarding sexual violence
against Congolese women and girls in the context of
illegal diamond-mining activities and expulsions.
Women are acutely vulnerable in this context. They are
in the minority of illegal migrants and at risk of rape
and sexual intimidation by armed and uniformed men.
There are also concerns of the trafficking of women
and girls from the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to diamond-mining areas for prostitution and forced
labour.
3
The visit resulted in a joint communique of the
Government of Angola and the United Nations,
outlining a proactive approach to putting in place
prevention measures. The Angolan authorities make
specific commitments, which include reiterating
through the police and army chains of command the
orders prohibiting sexual abuse; reinforcing the
commitment to zero tolerance of such violations in
army and police codes of conduct; undertaking
investigations of alleged violations on the basis of
credible information, and ensuring punishment of
perpetrators; and facilitating the assessment missions
of the United Nations and the International
Organization for Migration to areas of concern, and
granting United Nations protection actors regular
access to detention centres or similar locations.

In practical terms, it is essential that the
previously established Angola-Democratic Republic of
the Congo Mixed Commission be invigorated as the
formal framework under which cross-border concerns
related to illegal migration are addressed. The Mixed
Commission should function at both the national and the
provincial levels, and focus particular attention on the
vulnerability of women and girls. Regular information
exchange and coordination between the United Nations
presence in Angola and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is imperative. Once again, this reflects the
prevention approach envisioned by resolution 1960
(2010), and affirms that practical solutions are possible.

Cross-border and regional-level cooperation is
critical to addressing a problem that often carries
regional implications. It is in this context that I have
prioritized strategic engagement with the African
Union (AU). On 28 March, I addressed the African
Union Peace and Security Council on the occasion of
its open session on women and children in armed
conflict. The AU Peace and Security Council adopted a
communique that emphasizes a joint African Union-
United Nations response to conflict-related sexual
violence, and stresses in particular the need to
investigate crimes committed against women and
children, launch preventive campaigns aimed at the
armed forces and the police, and ensure that
perpetrators are brought to justice. The African Union
Peace and Security Council also expressed support for
the decision of the Chairperson of the AU Commission
to appoint an African Union special representative on
women, peace and security.
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union can be enhanced in a number of areas,
such as the training of peacekeepers and ensuring that
sexual violence concerns are consistently reflected in
United Nations and AU-led mediation and conflict-
resolution processes. The Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council should
consider the inclusion of sexual violence as an agenda
item in future meetings.

My Office is looking at the issue of sexual
violence with a wide range of partners and from all
angles, including from the ground up. Last week, I
attended a workshop in India at which we discussed the
practical challenges facing peacekeepers on the
frontlines. For these peacekeepers, sexual violence
mandates are operational, not just aspirational. We
must give them the financial and political support and
all the tools they need to succeed. In this respect, my
Office has collaborated with the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and UN Women to develop
innovative, scenario-based training resources, which
have also been piloted in Bangladesh. My interactions
with troop-contributing countries affirm that
addressing sexual violence is recognized as a core
protection of civilians challenge.

My Office is also developing a number of tools to
accelerate the implementation of resolution 1960
(2010). These include establishing monitoring, analysis
and reporting arrangements for improved information-
flow; compiling a matrix of early warning signs to help
field personnel predict spikes in sexual violence; and
building an accountability regime with real-world
impact on the fight against impunity.

Better data is not an end in itself, but serves to
inform better responses. We anticipate that guidance to
the field on the implementation of resolution 1960
(2010) will be disseminated by the end of May. This
will include an operational concept and terms of
reference for women protection advisers. It is
envisioned that women protection advisers will advise
senior United Nations leadership on the
implementation of key aspects of the women, peace
and security resolutions. As part of our efforts to
enhance accountability, at the end of May I hope to
brief the Democratic Republic of the Congo Sanctions
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004). My Office also remains at the disposal of the
Council as it prepares the terms of reference for its
next visit to Africa.

The Team of Experts on the Rule of Law is up
and running and due to be deployed to Liberia later this
month to support Criminal Court "E", which was
specifically established to hear cases of sexual
violence. The Team will then visit the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in May to reinforce the capacity
of investigators and prosecutors through prosecution
support cells in North and South Kivu, and to mentor
women magistrates who have been trained to handle
cases of sexual violence. It will also deploy to
Southern Sudan in May in order to contribute to the
development of new legal frameworks.

War is a context of lethal violence. In such an
environment, it is tempting to see sexual violence as a
lesser evil. That is not how women see it. That is not
the experience of a rape camp survivor from Bosnia
who told me: "They have taken my life without killing
me", or of the woman from Liberia who described rape
as "a kind of slow murder". Sexual violence maims the
survivor not only physically but psychologically and
socially as well, turning victims into outcasts. And yet
this war tactic requires no weapon greater than an
individual's cruel intent. As one Indian peacekeeper so
11-29982
aptly stated last week: "A rape is an irreversible
violation". We cannot reverse the irreversible, but we
can reinforce efforts to prevent and prosecute.

In that respect, resolution 1960 (2010) is seen by
many women as a message of hope. One woman I met
in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo in March
grabbed my hand as I was leaving the meeting and
said, "The fact that you have come all the way from
New York means we are not alone after all". So even in
the tyranny of emergency, before hard evidence
emerges, and though it may not be obvious what
gender has to do with arms embargoes or no-fly zones,
we must remember women. Our endeavours to uphold
international security will not be comprehensive unless
they include efforts to end sexual violence before it has
begun.

