Ms. Flores Herrera (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to express our appreciation to the Republic
of Uruguay for taking the initiative to propose today's
timely debate.

We would like to emphasize the normative value of
the Security Council's unanimous adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), the first instrument to establish the
causal relationship between the experiences of women
in conflict and the international peace and security
agenda and to draw attention to the disproportionate
impact of conflicts on women. Today, more than ever,
that resolution and those that have followed it are
particularly relevant.

Violence against women is increasing and
worsening, in particular when carried out by violent
extremist groups as a tactic of war and terrorism
to attack their fundamental rights, human dignity,
personal integrity and their supreme right to life.

Increasing the role of women in conflict prevention,
in the resolution of conflicts and in United Nations
peace operations, in accordance with the provisions
of resolution 2242 (2015), is an encouraging new sign
when it comes to increasing the leadership role and
the rights of women. However, it is urgent that we
implement effective strategies and fully integrate the
gender perspective in our agenda.

We welcome the appeal made by Secretary-General
and the efforts of the Organization to implement the
zero-tolerance policy with regard to sexual exploitation
and abuse carried out by United Nations peacekeepers.
In that regard, we need to improve the mechanisms
for prevention, reduce the time of investigations and,
ultimately, eradicate this unacceptable behaviour.

Panama is firmly committed to promoting and
protecting the human rights of women. We attach
particular importance to initiatives undertaken by
UN-Women, such as Justice Rapid Response and
the Women's Alliance in Accountability for Sexual
Violence and Gender-Based Violence.

We welcome the efforts of the informal group
of experts on resolution 2242 (2015), on women and
peace and security, and of the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict. We also underscore the adoption,
as part of Council sanctions regimes, of criteria for
identifying individuals or entities for their role in the
promotion or carrying out of sexual violence.

The manifold armed conflicts that we are facing,
unfortunately, show that women continue to be a group
especially affected by sexual violence. In recent years
we have seen how sexual violence has become part and
parcel of the ideology, operations, strategic objectives
and financing of non-State armed groups, terrorist
groups and violent extremists.

The review of the women and peace and security
agenda carried out in 2015 served to underscore the need
to include the significant role of women in combating
terrorism and radicalization. That gives new meaning
to achieving gender equality in this struggle.

Violent extremism has increased and has
degenerated into the worst forms of violence against
women, using sexual violence as a tactic of war and
terrorism, as a form of religious and ethnic persecution
and as a means of interrogation, funding and
recruitment. There is therefore an obligation on the part
of States to bolster collective efforts and preventive and
corrective measures at the national and international
levels. In addition, that requires a focus on all stages of
the peace process and the post-conflict reconstruction.

We must establish socioeconomic reintegration
plans in communities of survivors of sexual violence,
including children born as a result of this violence, so
that women and children do not become double victims.
We must also consider establishing effective judicial
mechanisms to punish the perpetrators of these crimes
and to support victims in a way that recognizes their
rights to truth, justice and reparation.

Iwould like to underscore the significant importance
of historic rulings of the International Criminal Court,
such as the 210 Bemba case and 2017 Ntaganda case,
which consolidate the status of sexual violence as a war
crime and crime against humanity. However, due to the
complementary jurisdiction of the Court, we must also

promote the effective national-level implementation of
existing instruments on this issue, including adopting
strong internal measures to prevent and combat sexual
violence in the context of armed conflicts.

In conclusion, Panama believes that the role that
women can and must play in preventing and resolving
conflicts and in the building and decision-making in
sustainable peace processes is fundamental. Thus,
the equality and the empowerment agendas take on
greater meaning and constitute a global commitment.
Our strategic considerations to combat sexual violence
against women in situations of conflicts must be based
on international law and be inspired by the best interests
and well-being of all humankind.

