Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): My delegation welcomes
today's open debate. Sexual violence is among
the most egregious crimes in armed conflict and
disproportionately affects women and girls. For far too
long, sexual violence has been seen as an unfortunate
and inevitable reality of conflict. For much too long,
humankind has stood on the sidelines, seeking
justification for its collective inaction in an evasive sense
of fatalism. But as conflict situations across the world
have so tellingly shown, the exploitation of women and
girls is not an incidental byproduct of conflict but an
instrument widely employed to humiliate and terrorize
civilians. For its survivors, the scars of sexual abuse are
often indelible and enduring, extending well beyond
the limits of their physical and physiological suffering.
Social stigma and marginalization further complicate
any attempts to seek closure.

Within the ambit of its agenda on women and
peace and security, the Security Council has led
global efforts to end this dehumanizing practice. Its
landmark resolution 1325 (2000) both ushered in and
institutionalized a new focus on gender in conflict,
moving women's participation and rights to the forefront
of the political debate. Subsequent Council resolutions
have built on this momentum by recognizing sexual
violence as a tactic of war and a threat to international
peace and security, and developing measures to respond
to and prevent such occurrences.

The progress achieved thus far, however, has been
both uneven and varied. As the recent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/249) shows, women and girls
continue to serve as a form of currency in the political
economy of war. The world has watched in horror as
several State and non-State actors have employed rape
and sexual abuse as a deliberate policy to subdue and
suppress entire populations. We see this in Pakistan's
neighbourhood as well. Unfortunately, those who
commit and condone sexual violence are often not fully
held to account.

The critical challenge for the international
community now is to convert political will into practical
action and drive real change on the ground. The
effectiveness of our collective action will depend on an
inclusive, broad-based and comprehensive approach.
The top priority should be to combat impunity for
these crimes. We must redirect the stigma and the
consequences of sexual violence from the survivors to
the perpetrators of such acts. As prosecution is critical
to prevention, emphasis should in particular be placed
on strengthening and enhancing the capacity of national
institutions and criminal justice systems in countries
facing armed conflict.

Secondly, attention must also be placed on
providing support to the victims of sexual violence.
Justice means not only punishment for the perpetrators
but also redress for the survivors. Survivors need not
only financial compensation but also access to health
care, social services and legal support. They must also
be given assistance to reintegrate into society.

Thirdly, the plight of migrant women and girls
requires special attention. We must ensure that in
their quest for protection and safety, these victims
of conflict do not fall prey to human trafficking and
abuse. We therefore support the Secretary-General's
recommendation that conflict-related sexual violence
be considered grounds for asylum.

Fourthly, the gender perspective should be fully
integrated into the peacebuilding paradigm to reinforce
the protection environment. This would entail not only
the greater participation of women in peacekeeping
mandates, but also an enhanced role for women in peace
accords, stabilization and the reconstruction phases of
post-conflict rehabilitation.

Finally, the best way to eliminate conflict-related
sexual violence is to prevent and resolve conflicts in
the first place. We believe that the Secretary-General's
emphasis on conflict prevention as the core of the
global peace and security paradigm neatly dovetails
with that approach.

Multidimensional peacekeeping missions with
protection mandates play a key role in combating
violence against women in conflict and post-conflict
situations. As a leading troop-contributing country,
Pakistan remains committed to this cause. For my
country, the protection of the vulnerable, including
women and children, is not only a global peace and
security concern but an obligation of humanity.

