Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan): We
are grateful to the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative Zeinab Bangura and Ms. Rhoda Misaka
for their important comments and insights this morning,
and for the outstanding work undertaken by Special
Representative Bangura and her dedicated staff.

The Secretary-General's report (S/20l4/181) makes
for grim reading, and very clearly there is much we,
the Member States concerned, need to do. And in
that context, when it comes to the presence of Syrian
refugees in Jordan and their vulnerabilities, as alluded
to in the report, even though we note that the principal
refugee camp for Syrians falls under the supervision of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, the Jordanian Government accepts full
responsibility for whatever may happen on its territory
and is committed to ensuring the security ofall refugees,
especially women and children. Naturally, we condemn
any attempt by any individual or individuals to exploit
them. We also need help - much more help - and
perhaps we will soon reach a stage at which other
countries with real capacities may consider sharing
the burden and accepting greater numbers of Syrian
refugees than is presently the case.

Turning to the Secretary-General's recommendations,
I join others in stating that it is pointless discussing
accountability for sexual crimes perpetrated against
women, girls and boys unless we do two things. The
first is our need to properly understand the extent to
which functioning courts are second only in importance
to the provision of security and on an equal footing
with humanitarian considerations when it comes to the
United Nations involvement in conflict or post-conflict
environments. Without a properly resourced single
vehicle for the delivery of legal and judicial support, the
United Nations will continue to fall short in delivering
what it should to distressed communities. Secondly, the
International Criminal Court needs to be supported by
the Council to the hilt, and no serious discussion on
combating the worst forms of sexual violence can be
obtained from a Council unwilling to do that.

Finally, I ask once again the painful question of
whether we as a collective membership, bound together
in this Organization by its Charter, actually have the
credibility to offer strong opinions on this subject matter?
Do we have the credibility when all of us have refused
to undertake the complete range of actions necessary to
ensure that sexual exploitation and abuse by our own
peacekeepers - United Nations peacekeepers - is
reduced to zero? Can we not be accused by others of
hypocrisy when in this Chamber we rightly condemn
all expressions of conflict-related sexual violence
committed against women, girls and boys, and speak
of them as criminal and intolerable - as we have done
for 14 years now - while down the hall, only a few
metres from here in the Sixth Committee, we do next
to nothing, year in year out, on the draft convention
on criminal accountability of United Nations officials
and experts on mission - a draft that has been on the
agenda of the Sixth Committee since 2007.

Let us be clear about what it is we are saying by
our inaction. We are saying that it is okay by us when
a United Nations civilian staff member commits rape
in a United Nations peacekeeping mission, where the
host country has no functioning judiciary and when
the country of nationality cannot exercise its criminal
jurisdiction extraterritorially over the accused because
it has no law allowing it to do so. Is that our view? Rapes
perpetrated by United Nations civilian staffmembers in
that context can go unpunished? That is precisely what
it is we are saying, year after year. Please do not think
those crimes have not happened, because they have.

Do we have any credibility when we also insist that
the United Nations has no business in relation to the
conduct ofinvestigations for alleged crimes committed
by our own United Nations uniformed peacekeepers,
knowing that in the past we, the Member States, were
not reliable enough in guaranteeing that justice be
done in respect of the victims? Are we credible when
in the last reporting period of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services (OIOS) we still had 42 cases of
sexual exploitation and abuse involving United Nations
peacekeepers being investigated by that Office? By
now, some nine years after we identified both the
challenge and the plan needed to eliminate this odious
phenomenon, there should be practically no cases at all.

I do not wish to be misunderstood: if we had done
everything we should have done over the past nine
years to ensure the total elimination of this abominable
practice by our own peacekeepers, and they still
occurred, then we could accept that there was little
more we can do. But we, as Member States, have not
done everything, and so we cannot make that claim.

The United Nations is required to set an example
before our publics as an Organization that will without
question pay special attention to the most vulnerable
and defenceless of protected persons in war, with first
a guaranteed protection provided by ourselves, from
ourselves, and then from others.

What must we therefore do? We must adopt
the convention on criminal accountability as soon
as possible. We must make the United Nations a
co-examiner of the facts, even when the allegations
involve United Nations military personnel. We must be
more transparent with regard to the severity and nature
of the crimes being committed by United Nations
peacekeepers. We believe that the OIOS takes too long
in establishing the facts, which then must be prepared
by the criminal jurisdiction concerned in order for them
to become admissible in courts of law. Perhaps, as it
was originally suggested, another slim but effective
investigative capacity needs to be considered.

We must do better on matters relating to paternity.
In situ courts martial for military offenders must be the
rule, and not the exception, for sexual offenses. And we
must consider again the proposal that all United Nations
personnel destined for field service submit a sample of
their DNA to the United Nations before they deploy,
both to serve as a deterrent to the commission of crimes
and for the sake of possible subsequent investigations,
including establishing paternity.

Finally, we, the Member States, need to report to the
United Nations clearly and at the earliest possible time
what judicial steps were undertaken by our authorities
with respect to alleged crimes.

If we are serious about confronting the odious
phenomenon of conflict-related sexual violence
generally, and we are not to be hypocrites, we must
think about these issues more seriously.

