Mr. Errazuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation welcomes the holding of this debate on the
Secretary-General's progress report on peacebuilding
in the immediate aftermath of conflict (S/2010/386)
and his report on women's participation in
peacebuilding (S/2010/466). We also thank the
Secretary-General for his statement this morning and
the valuable statement deliver by the Chairperson of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), Ambassador
Wittig.
This debate is especially timely, in part because
of the review of the Peacebuilding Commission, which
is expected to conclude shortly after the excellent work
by the facilitators appointed by this Council and by the
President of the General Assembly. In addition, this is
the tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), which lays the basis for the Secretary-
General's report on women's participation in
peacebuilding.

I would like to highlight the Secretary-General's
report on women's participation in peacebuilding and
his seven-point plan, which places women on truly
equal footing with men and emphasizes their full
participation in the peacebuilding process from the
outset. As stated in the report, women's participation is
crucial in shoring up the three pillars of lasting peace:
economic recovery, social cohesion and political
legitimacy. Coordinated work between the PBC and
UN Women seems to us to be essential.

As the Secretary-General has said, the
peacebuilding process is an opportunity to better
rebuild a country in all its aspects, with one of the most
important aspects being the status of women, their
legal position, and access to jobs and to justice, among
others. This last aspect - access to justice - is of
crucial importance, since women are among the main
victims of conflicts. Their access to justice is crucial,
since it will enhance their confidence in the State and
in the country's political processes.

Chile supports the fact that the proposed seven-
point peacebuilding plan embodies a gender approach.
In order for it to succeed, there must be proper
coordination among the various United Nations
agencies and coordination between them and other
external partners, in particular international financial
institutions, that participate in the peacebuilding
process. Particular attention should be paid to ensuring
the presence of women in leadership positions either
by direct appointment or by popular election.

Lastly, we welcome the Secretary-General's
proposal of specific measures to ensure that the
recommendations contained in the report are
implemented on the ground through the inclusion of
women in development, infrastructure, employment,
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes.

With respect to the progress report on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict,
Chile welcomes the progress made since the
submission of the 2009 report (S/2009/304). Chile
agrees with the Secretary-General that, although the
peacebuilding process is a national challenge and
responsibility, the international community and the
United Nations have a major role to play in supporting
the national agenda. This is proof not only of solidarity
but also of the need for mutual support created by the
global village.

The progress noted by the Secretary-General in
his report in the areas of effective leadership,
coordination and accountability is important, as is the
United Nations experience in Haiti through its
Stabilization Mission, in which Chile participates.

Chile welcomes the establishment of the
comprehensive Integration Steering Group to support
field missions with a holistic approach. It also
underscores the importance of coordination with
regional organizations, which we view as fundamental
and which allows for greater efficiency in the use of
international resources. I also underscore the emphasis
placed on national capacity-building in post-conflict
States. This is crucial to establishing national
leadership and strengthening democratic institutions
and socio-economic development.

With regard to the international review of civilian
capacity currently under way, based on the potential
deployment of teams of international experts, Chile
looks forward to the publication of the report and
emphasizes that it has been an important aspect of its
participation as a member of the Peacebuilding
Commission. We trust that there Member States will
participate broadly in these teams.

Here, I should like to emphasize the importance
of regional and South-South cooperation. However, we
often encounter difficulties in financing such
cooperation in its entirety. To that end, the participation
of developed countries is essential, and Chile is
therefore in favour of triangular cooperation.

Lastly, Chile shares the concerns of the
Secretary-General with regard to adequate financing
for the Peacebuilding Fund, especially in times that are
difficult for us all. In this connection, Chile reaffirms
its commitment to peacebuilding.

