Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): I would first like to
congratulate you, Madam President, on organizing this
open debate of the Security Council, and to commend
your commitment to promoting gender equality and the
empowerment of women. I thank the Secretary-
General, the Executive Director of UN-Women, the
President of the Economic and Social Council and the
representative of the Working Group on Women and
Peace and Security for the comprehensive scope of
their briefings. And I join previous speakers in
recognizing the pivotal role of UN-Women in
advancing the women and peace and security agenda.

Italy aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the European Union, and wishes to make
some additional remarks in its national capacity.

Women's participation in conflict prevention and
preventive diplomacy is crucial to achieving peace, as
the Security Council highlights in its decision to mark
the eleventh anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) on
women and peace and security. We welcome the
presidential statement the Council adopted today
(S/PRST/2011/20).
Italy believes that if we want to see tangible
progress in this area, more needs to be done at the
national, regional and international levels.

First, women and women's rights must be
consistently included in peace talks. Women are
formidable negotiators, mediators and peacebuilders,
but all too often they are denied access to negotiations
at the highest levels because of a lack of political will
and commitment. A transparent and inclusive peace
process involving representatives of every segment of
society, including women, is the most likely to
succeed.

Secondly, women's rights must be an integral part
of peace agreements. One measure of the success of a
peace settlement is the extent to which obligations
under the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women and other
international human rights conventions are fulfilled.

Thirdly, it is not enough to simply advocate the
participation of women in peace processes. We need to
provide concrete support so that women can build the
skills needed for meaningful involvement. And
education is crucial. At the same time, social barriers
blocking women's access to peace processes must be
addressed. Since men are also a part of the equation,
civic education and human rights programmes for both
men and women at the community level can help lift
such barriers and hammer home the importance of
gender inclusiveness. We must also support civil
society organizations, particularly women's groups,
which are vital to creating better links among women
and between State and community.

Lastly, it is high time that we fully mainstreamed
resolution 1325 (2000) into the work of the Security
Council. The Council should ensure that its resolutions,
including mission mandates and renewals, consistently
integrate and substantively advance the women and
peace and security agenda. The Council should also
benefit from more regular and frequent briefings by the
Executive Director of UN-Women and by the relevant
special representatives of the Secretary-General.

Regarding efforts to achieve more consistent and
serious progress in the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) at the global level, Italy welcomes the
strategic framework and its concrete targets for guiding
United Nations implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) developed by the Secretary-General, as well as
the use of a set of indicators to monitor progress in
implementing the framework. The framework will
ensure a more comprehensive approach and more
results-oriented action on the part of the United
Nations system. Regional organizations should also
consider adopting similar tools. At the national level,
action plans remain a key instrument for ensuring
implementation of the resolution.

In December 2010, Italy adopted a three-year
action plan for resolution 1325 (2000). It provides a
strategic framework for improving implementation of
the provisions of the resolution, under which a national
focal point at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs monitors
all relevant activities. The plan focuses on such key
goals as increasing the number of women in the
national police and armed forces, strengthening the
inclusion of women in peace operations and their
decision-making bodies, protecting the human rights of
women and children during and after conflicts,
strengthening women's participation in peace
processes, and engaging with civil society
organizations in order to promote implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).

Since then, Italy has had regular contacts with
civil society organizations to benefit from their
experience in the field. The national focal point is
promoting awareness activities by disseminating the
plan throughout all sectors of government and society.
At the international level, Italy has introduced the issue
of women and peace and security as a priority to be
raised during the Universal Periodic Review of the
Human Rights Council, when the human rights
situations of Member States under consideration are
being addressed, in addition to bringing up the issue in
bilateral contacts with the countries concerned.

Eleven years after the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), we are all being called on to renew our
commitment to ensuring that women can assert their
right to determine the peaceful futures of their
communities. Let us not miss the opportunity.

