Ms. Beckles (Trinidad and Tobago): Trinidad and
Tobago is pleased to uphold its tradition of participating
in this annual open debate on the important topic of
women and peace and security. Trinidad and Tobago
recognizes the competence of the Security Council
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations
in matters related to the maintenance of international
peace and security, and wishes to express its satisfaction
regarding the fact that the issue of women and peace
and security remains prominent on the agenda of
the Council.

My delegation also welcomes the comprehensive
report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/861)
on the subject. We concur with the Secretary-
General in his report that the achievement of the
Sustainable Development Goals requires the full
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda. For my country, the achievement of gender
equality and the empowerment of women remain
pivotal to the achievement of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.

Seventeen years ago, resolution 1325 (2000)
was adopted by the Security Council. Trinidad and
Tobago remains steadfast in its view that the seminal
character of that resolution cannot be overemphasized,
as it was the first resolution to recognize the need for
the involvement of both women and men in efforts
to attain sustainable peace and security. Similarly,
we recognize the distinctive nature of subsequent
resolutions on sustaining peace and the importance
of women's leadership and meaningful participation
in the prevention and resolution of conflict and in
peacebuilding, as embodied in subsequent resolutions
on sustaining peace. Our support for those resolutions
is not only based on our legal obligations under the
Charter, but also on our own national laws, which have
entrenched the inalienable rights of women into our
domestic legal framework.

Trinidad and Tobago subscribes to the rule of law
as a fundamental safeguard in the advancement and
protection of the rights of women. Therefore, we view
as essential our continued adherence to obligations
from a number of international instruments that seek
to protect the rights of women and girls, including
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women and the Convention on
the Rights of the Child.

The vulnerability of women and girls in situations
of armed conflict and, in my country's specific
circumstances, armed violence, continue to engage
our attention. Trinidad and Tobago remains a strong
proponent of the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT). We submit
that the ATT represents a significant achievement in the
global fight to eliminate the diversion of conventional
arms to the illicit market. It could contribute to
the reduction of, if not an end to, untold suffering,
particularly to women and girls.

In the spirit of advancing the dual agenda of the
attainment of international peace and security and the
empowerment of women, in 2010, Trinidad and Tobago
introduced General Assembly resolution 65/69, which
was the first General Assembly resolution on women,
disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control. It is
our view that that resolution complements resolution
1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions on the matter
by focusing on the participation of women in processes
geared towards the advancement of disarmament and
international peace and security.

As a current member of the Executive Board of
UN-Women, Trinidad and Tobago pledges to continue
to work with Member States towards the universal
achievement of gender equality. We recognize UN-
Women's strategic plan for the period 2018-2021 as
an important instrument that could help to achieve
that objective.

In conclusion, Trinidad and Tobago would like to
take this opportunity to reaffirm its commitment to the
advancement and empowerment of women. We remain
committed to working with other Member States and
our partners at the regional, hemispheric and global
levels to promote the involvement of women as equal
partners in matters related to peace and security,
including at all levels of the decision-making process.

