Mr. Estreme (Argentina) (spoke in French): I wish
to thank France for having organized this open debate
of the Security Council on such an important topic for
the international community. I also wish to thank the
Secretary-General, Ms. Bangura, Ms. Giammarinaro
and Ms. Davis, who provided briefings this morning.

(spoke in Spanish)

For Argentina, it is an honour to attend this
open debate within the framework of the first formal
commemoration on 19 June as the International Day for
the Elimination of Sexual Violence in Conflict, which
the General Assembly approved in resolution 69/293
of 19 June 2015. Allow me to recall that the adoption
of that resolution was an initiative of my country,
with 114 Member States sponsors, which represents
a clear demonstration of the gravity and importance
the international community assigns to this issue. At
the same time, the Security Council, especially on the
basis of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 2122 (2013), has
reaffirmed its increasing commitment to the prevention
and eradication of sexual and gender violence in
conflict and post-conflict situations, as well as to the
search for justice and reparation for the victims.

Argentina firmly supports the efforts of the
Secretary-General and the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and endorses the recommendations
in the Secretary-General's latest report (S/2016/361)
relating to the combat and elimination of all forms
of sexual violence against women and children in the
context of armed conflicts and post-conflict situations
and the actions of violent extremist groups.

The increasing crimes of sexual violence perpetrated
by violent extremist groups as a strategy to terrorize,
intimidate and stigmatize specific groups - such as
women, girls and boys, religious minorities, lesbian,
gay, bisexual or transgender people, displaced persons
and others - are international crimes of the greatest
gravity. At appropriate times international tribunals,
such as those for Rwanda and for the former Yugoslavia
and the Special Tribunal for Sierra Leone, have
achieved decisive progress by defining sexual violence
as an act of torture, a war crime and a crime against
humanity. Crimes of sexual violence in conflicts must
be prevented and punished within the strict framework
of legality, making use of the available tools and
mechanisms, including sanctions and referring cases
to the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court.

We reiterate that it is necessary to continue joining
the efforts of all actors involved to prevent, combat
and eradicate crimes of sexual violence in situations
of conflict and human trafficking; to bring to justice
the perpetrators of such war crimes and crimes against
humanity; and to protect, assist and reintegrate the
victims of such violations and restore their dignity and
human rights. That must continue to be our priority,
and it must be taken into account when defining the
mandates of peacekeeping operations and special
political missions, as well as in the peacebuilding efforts
of this Council and the Peacebuilding Commission,
integrating specialists into the different missions set up
by the Council.

When we speak of sexual violence in conflict
situations, we scannot fail to refer to the cases of sexual
abuse and exploitation that, unfortunately, continue to
occur in United Nations peacekeeping missions. This
is a grave situation, and it constitutes the greatest
challenge, in our opinion, for the future of those
missions and for the image of the United Nations as
a whole. In that regard, Argentina continues to firmly
support the Secretary-General's zero-tolerance policy,
as well as the distinct measures he proposes in his
various reports and those contained in resolution 2272
(2016) - zero tolerance, of course, but also maximum
prevention and support for victims. In that regard, we
welcome the appointment of Ms. Jane Holl Lute as the
new Special Coordinator on Improving United Nations
Response to Sexual Exploitation and Abuse, as well
as the creation of a fund to support victims of sexual
exploitation and abuse.

Sexual violence in armed conflicts is one ofthe most
elementary and terrible violations of human dignity,
which constitutes an unmistakable and inescapable
threat to international peace and security. That is
why we must continue to combine efforts to ensure
the protection and full enjoyment of all human rights
of men and women, girls and boys, in the conditions
of equality.

