Mr. Bosah (Nigeria): The Nigerian delegation
thanks the delegation of the United Kingdom for
organizing this open debate on "Trafficking in persons
in conflict situations: forced labour, slavery and other
similar practices". We commend you, Mr. President,
for the comprehensive concept note (S/2017/ 198, annex)
provided to guide our discussions. My delegation also
thanks the Secretary-General and other briefers for
sharing their perspectives on this important subject.

Nigeria also associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement.

Trafficking in persons has remained a global
phenomenon affecting the most vulnerable people
caught in the web of conflicts, including internally
displaced persons and refugees. Terrorist groups, such
as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, Boko Haram,
Al-Shabaab and others, have used human trafficking,
forced labour and other similar practices as weapons of
terror and important sources of revenue.

The sexual exploitation of women and girls,
including sexual enslavement, forced marriage and
forced prostitution are among the grave factors
underpinning human trafficking during and in the wake
of conflicts. Such exploitation is used by extremist
groups, such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
(ISIS), Boko Haram and their affiliates to generate
revenue, as well as reward and retain terrorist fighters.

Today, it is estimated that more than 60 million
women, children and men are fleeing conflicts,
escaping wars or seeking a better life. Yet, as they make
their journey, many are caught in the web of human
trafficking and being coerced into slavery and other
forms of exploitation. Having realized the deleterious
effects of this phenomenon, it is gratifying to note
that we are all united in our conviction to overcome
the evil of trafficking in persons, through effective
international cooperation.

Nigeria recognizes the urgent need for the
international community to fight trafficking and to take
the necessary steps to block financial flows between
and among terrorist organizations. It is pertinent
that Member States of the United Nations undertake
investigations and prosecute cases of human trafficking
perpetuated by their nationals. Nigeria considers it
imperative that all perpetrators should be brought
to justice through concerted international response
necessary for resolving the challenge of human
trafficking. Having established that most victims of
trafficking are women and girls, it is only appropriate
for our responses to include special attention to their
rights. Furthermore, Member States must also adopt
gender-sensitive and rights-based migration policies in
this regard.

The fight against human trafficking has remained
an issue of national priority for the Government of
Nigeria. The National Agency for the Prohibition of
Trafficking in Persons, which is the principal institution
charged with the responsibility of leading this fight,
has provided an effective and comprehensive legal and
institutional framework for the prohibition, prevention,
detection, persecution and punishment of crimes
of human trafficking. The Agency, with the active
collaboration of international partners, has made very
significant contributions to the fight against trafficking
in persons.

We appreciate the efforts of humanitarian actors that
are undertaking advocacy campaigns to publicize the
risks of trafficking and the tactics employed to coerce
and traffic victims and what such victims could do to
protect themselves. In addition to taking preventive
measures, States must engage in the protection of
victims. The Palermo Protocol specifically requires
States to protect the human rights of victims and to
provide measures for the physical, psychological and
social recovery of victims of trafficking.

Nigeria recognizes the various efforts made at
the international level to combat human trafficking.
The unanimous adoption of resolution 2331 (2016)
condemned the sale of, or trade in, persons seized by
terrorist organizations and other groups for purposes
of sexual slavery and exploitation and forced labour.
As encapsulated in the concept note, human trafficking
and modern slavery are global crimes, with a large
number of displaced persons as victims. Considering
the multidimensional nature of these phenomena,
we believe that these crimes must be addressed both
collectively and comprehensively, including by taking
a close look at their root causes and drivers. We must
also adopt a coherent, comprehensive and coordinated
approach, while recognizing the role and responsibilities
of countries of origin, transit and destination in
promoting and effectively protecting the human rights
and fundamental freedoms of all individuals subjected
to these crimes.

We must aim to enhance coherence and build
alliances to confront these issues head-on. Equally
critical is the need for greater responsibility sharing
to provide protection to those in need. To achieve this
objective, we must implement the strategy laid out in the
Global Plan of Action to Combat Human Trafficking.
With solid partnerships and a clear approach, we can
ensure the criminals are brought to justice.

