Mr. Suan (Myanmar): The Government of
Myanmar, in building a people-centred democratic
nation, places the promotion and protection of human
rights as a high priority on its political agenda. The
Government upholds its policy of zero tolerance for any
form of sexual Violence, including conflict-related ones.
The root causes of conflict-related sexual violence lie in
the lack of peace and stability. We are therefore putting
our utmost efforts into the cessation of conflicts and
building sustainable peace and national reconciliation.
Allow me to briefly share the efforts made in recent
months by the Myanmar Government in the prevention
of conflict-related sexual violence.

Based on the Government's firm commitment to
addressing this issue and in the spirit ofcooperation with
the United Nations, in December last year we signed a
joint communique with the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
to prevent and address conflict-related sexual violence.
Soon after signing the joint communique, the
Government of Myanmar facilitated the visit of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Patten,
and her team to Myanmar in February. In March, a
ministerial-level national committee on the prevention
of and response to conflict-related sexual violence was
formed to implement the joint communique, and the
first national committee meeting was held subsequently.
The national action plan will be drafted with technical
assistance from the United Nations.

To transform the zero-tolerance policy against
sexual violence into action, domestic legal reform
is essential for the effective implementation of the
protection of the rights of women and girls. In this
regard, a law on the prevention of violence against
and the protection of women has been drafted and will
soon be enacted by Parliament. The new law stipulates
the need to protect women from all forms of Violence,
including domestic abuse, marital rape, sexual Violence,
harassment by stalking, harassment in the workplace
and public places, and Violence through traditional and
customary practices.

The Government has regularly submitted reports
relating to actions taken on the protection of the rights
of women and the prevention of sexual violence against
women and girls to the United Nations Committee on
the Elimination of Discrimination against Women and
has also them included in the universal periodic review
process of the Human Rights Committee. We are
also working closely with UN-Women in formulating
and implementing our national strategic plan on the
advancement of women for the period 2013-2022 for
gender equality and women's empowerment.

With regard to the alleged sexual violence
committed against women, an independent commission
of enquiry was established to investigate all allegations
of human rights violations following the Arakan
Rohingya Salvation Army terrorist attacks in August
2017 in northern Rakhine. The mandate of the
commission is to seek accountability and reconciliation.
The commission is carrying out its mandate with
independence, impartiality and objectivity.

The commission has publicly invited submissions
on the allegation of human rights. The commission
will soon be visiting Cox's Bazar, in Bangladesh,
to meet with alleged victims of sexual abuse. The
commission's work will be evidence-based. Therefore,
the international community should support the work
of the commission, which will submit its final report to
the Office of the President towards the end of the year.
The Government of Myanmar is capable and willing
to address accountability in cases of sexual violence.
Action will be taken in accordance with the law where
there is sufficient evidence.

Much as we all condemn conflict-related sexual
violence, we must respond in accordance with the
principles enshrined in the Charter ofthe United Nations,
particularly with regard to the peaceful resolution of
conflicts through dialogue and negotiation, respect for
the sovereignty of countries and recognition of their
primary responsibility to maintain peace and security
and uphold the rule of law.

In tackling the issue of sexual violence in conflict,
the international community should be guided by
the universally accepted norms of impartiality,
non-selectivity and non-politicization of the issue. A
constructive approach through dialogue and providing
assistance to the country concerned would bring about
positive results in efforts to resolve the problem.
Exerting unfair pressure upon a country, solely based
on unrealistic lofty human rights standards without
giving any due regard to the condition of the country
concerned, would surely fail and be met with total
rejection from the people of that country.

The first obligation of international actors, whether
they are a United Nations agency, an international
non-governmental organization, a civil society
organization or a media outlet, is to do no harm. Often
and regrettably, so much damage has been done due to
the predetermined political agendas of some countries
and organizations that apply double standards by
abusing United Nations systems with a biased attitude.

Let me just give one example of how much damage
can be done to a country by the international community
and the international media in a crisis situation. I am
quoting from an article by Jacob Goldberg entitled
"When the story comes before the survivor", which
appeared in the 21 February issue of the Columbia
Journalism Review. It says:

"In October 2017, a refugee woman named
Rajuma Begum, 20, told The New York Times's
Jeffrey Gettleman that Myanmar soldiers beat and
gang-raped her and shot her mother and brother."

She told him: "They threw my baby into a fire". These
words have been passionately and repeatedly quoted
by the media, human rights activists, many diplomats
and even some United Nations officials in an attempt to
justify the accusation of alleged atrocities committed
by the Myanmar security forces.

But, before Rajuma told Gettleman that her baby
was thrown into a fire, she had already told a different
version of her story. She told Al Jazeera in September
2017: "They ripped my son from my arms and threw
him [on the ground] and cut his throat". Later, she told
others that her baby had been killed with a machete,
making no mention of the fire. In any case, the damage
had been done. This is just one example among endless
fake and manufactured accounts with the malicious
intent to tarnish the image of the Government and the
people of Myanmar. If we are to succeed in our effort to
end sexual violence in conflict, we must rise above the
politicization and dramatization of the violence.

As for Myanmar, we shall continue to engage and
work constructively with the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to achieve our
objective of ending sexual violence.

