Mr. Clay (New Zealand): I join those who have
congratulated you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of this Council. I note that New Zealand
seeks the protection of women and their equal
participation in peace processes. We thank you for
having arranged this debate and we appreciate the
opportunity to contribute.

This is the third consecutive month the Security
Council has debated the issues of women, peace and
security. We welcome that increased focus, in
particular the attention given to the scourge of sexual
violence. We commend the Council's readiness to
address those issues more systematically. Only last
week, New Zealand joined in co-sponsoring resolution
1888 (2009) in this Council. Along with resolutions
1325 (2000), 1820 (2008), 1882 (2009), 1888 (2009)
and the resolution that was adopted today, 1889 (2009),
we have come a long way in developing a
comprehensive set of norms to protect and enhance the
participation of women and girls in peace processes.

Today, we lend a strong voice to calls urging
States, regional groups and the United Nations system
to translate those words into action. To do this, we
recognize the need for stronger leadership and
coordination across the United Nations system. We
welcome two recent initiatives that should contribute to
this goal. First is the future appointment of a Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on sexual
violence in armed conflict. And the second is the
General Assembly's recent action to reform the United
Nations gender architecture. We now urge the
Secretary-General to appoint strong and dynamic
advocates of the resolution 1325 (2000) agenda to the
role of the new Special Representative and as head of
the new composite gender entity.

As we focus more on sexual violence, we must
also redouble our efforts to implement the other crucial
aspects of resolution 1325 (2000) - increased
participation of women both in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding missions and in mediation and
negotiation processes. To make a lasting impact on the
lives of women in conflict and post-conflict situations,
5
we must adopt an integrated approach to each of the
pillars of resolution 1325 (2000). To this end, the
appointment of a Special Representative should
provide much needed visibility, leadership and
coherence. For this reason we believe the mandate of
the Special Representative should cover all aspects of
the women, peace and security agenda, not just the
issue of sexual violence.

New Zealand acknowledges that States must also
take responsibility for making progress towards the
goals of resolution 1325 (2000), including enabling the
full participation of women and girls in the peace
process. Among other things, women need access to
shelter, health care, a livelihood, education and justice.
They should be part of any decision-making processes.
And, above all, they must be free from violence.

New Zealand is committed to addressing these
needs as part of its own peacekeeping efforts. There are
several concrete examples of how we do this through
our provincial reconstruction team in Bamiyan
Province in Afghanistan. To facilitate the participation
of women in Afghanistan's national police force, New
Zealand police have helped ensure that on-site
childcare services are available for women students,
that women instructors are available for training, and
that mentoring is provided to instructors and senior
male staff in the Afghan National Police to support the
training of women. Through the Afghan Independent
Human Rights Commission, New Zealand supports the
Women's Protection Network in Bamiyan. We have
contributed funding to establish a Women's Referral
Centre in Bamiyan to provide secure accommodation
and paralegal advice for women seeking access to
justice. New Zealand's provincial reconstruction team
also supports the local Ministry of Women's Affairs in
developing a gender network to look at ways to
empower local women and build capacity for women's
affairs in the region. Finally, our networking activities
include disseminating information to women to help
them solve their own problems, holding training
workshops around the province and promoting
discussion groups on issues such as the role of mothers
in the home.

Nine years on from the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), much remains to be done. This Council
has my assurance that New Zealand, through its
development cooperation programmes, its
peacekeeping efforts and its domestic policies, will
continue to seek ways to enhance and ensure the
6
protection and equal participation, of women in peace
processes. Resolution 1325 (2000) has our ongoing,
full and determined support.

