Mr. Kavanagh (Ireland): I am grateful to the
Council for the opportunity to address it on the subject
of women and peace and security. My Government
commends the United States presidency of the Security
Council, under your able leadership, Mr. President, for
the work that it has invested in this important issue.

Ireland aligns itself with the statement made
earlier today by the Permanent Representative of
Slovenia on behalf of the European Union.

Eight years on from the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), it is indeed time to assess progress
towards achieving its major goals. The resolution has
helped to promote the equal participation and full
involvement of women in efforts to advance peace and
security. It has also sought to protect women and girls
from, and indeed to prevent, gender-based violence.

However, it remains a challenge to ensure that the
United Nations, both institutionally and through its
individual Member States, fully implements resolution
1325 (2000). Last October the Council regretted that
"gender-based violence, particularly rape, and
other forms of sexual abuse remain pervasive,
and in some situations have become systematic,
and have reached appalling levels of atrocity."
(S/PRST/2007/40)

Such a grave situation requires an urgent and effective
response from the international community, in the first
place from the Security Council.

The Irish Government, for its part, is actively
engaged in promoting the role of women in conflict
resolution and post-conflict recovery. The recent
establishment of a major conflict-resolution dimension
within our Foreign Ministry has opened further
avenues for Ireland to support implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) in conflict and post-conflict
settings. Resolution 1325 (2000) is to be one of the
three cross-cutting themes which guide the work of a
new designated Conflict Resolution Unit in the
Ministry. Women's participation in the Northern
Ireland peace process, together with the presence of a
strong research and activist base, will permit tangible
lessons to be drawn and shared internationally in
helping advance and implement the resolution 1325
(2000) agenda.

As Chair of the 12-member Human Security
Network for the period through May next year, Ireland
will focus its work on the theme of gender-based
violence. In line with the Beijing Platform for Action,
the promotion of gender equality and the elimination of
gender-based violence is a prominent feature of
Ireland's aid policy and activities overseas, and of our
National Women's Strategy at home.

In 2004, in response to reports particularly of
rape and sexual violence in the conflict in Darfur,
Ireland established a national Joint Consortium on
Gender-Based Violence. Mary Robinson, former
President of Ireland and former United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, has lent her valuable
support as a patron. This unique body marks the first
time in my country that human rights, development and
humanitarian agencies have cooperated with
Government agencies, including those in uniform, to
confront collectively the issue of gender-based
Violence. Training on gender equality and protection
from such Violence is provided to Irish peacekeepers at
the United Nations Training School Ireland, in our
Defence Forces Training Centre.
We support the leading role of the United Nations
in ending violence against women, including through
the new multi-year programme launched recently by
the Secretary-General. We strongly support, in
practical ways, the gender equality work of the United
Nations Development Programme, including the Eight-
Point Agenda for Women's Empowerment and Gender
Equality in Crisis Prevention and Recovery.

I turn now to the very useful concept paper drawn
up by the United States presidency of the Council in
preparation for today's debate. It correctly identifies
three priority areas for consideration: understanding
the problem; prevention and protection; and
consequences for accused perpetrators.

As far as understanding the problem is concerned,
Ireland encourages the Security Council to recognize
that sexual and other forms of gender-based violence in
conflict situations have direct and significant relevance
to the maintenance of international peace and security.
Accordingly, in our view the Council should ensure
systematic monitoring and analysis of such violence,
and, where appropriate, take steps, measures and action
to address it.

We also encourage the Council to request the
Secretary-General systematically to include in all
reports on conflict situations comprehensive
information about acts of gender-based violence,
including sexual violence, against women and girls.
Moreover, Ireland encourages the Council to request
the Secretary-General to reflect on ways to improve the
level and quality of such reporting, using benchmarks,
indicators and monitoring mechanisms.

On prevention and protection, Ireland would
encourage the Council to request the Secretary-General
to report to it on a heightened engagement of the
United Nations in stopping gender-based violence in
conflict situations. Such a report or study could draw
on United Nations action already under way and on
activities of non-governmental organizations and
women's groups at the local, national and international
levels. Ireland supports the call for the appointment of
an independent expert to lead such a study.

We would also encourage the Council to ensure
that women at the local level can actively participate in
the design, implementation and evaluation of strategies
and programmes to meet their security needs, interests
and concerns.

08-3908]
Ireland believes that there ought to be
consequences for perpetrators. Accountability by State
and non-State actors should be ensured, including
through effective prosecution and punishment.

Security sector reform and capacity-building for
police and the judicial sector are also called for in this
connection.

The inclusion of sexual violence offences in the
Statutes of the ad hoc international criminal tribunals,
and the considered jurisprudence of those tribunals,
has, over a short space of time, progressively
developed the law in this area in many important
respects. Rape, sexual slavery, enforced prostitution,
forced pregnancy, enforced sterilization and other
forms of sexual violence are now included within the
definitions of war crimes and crimes against humanity
found within the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court. The Council can, of course, refer a
situation for investigation by the Prosecutor of the
Court - an institution which Ireland fully supports.

There should be wider application of best
practices for effective prevention and prosecution of
sexual crimes committed in situations of armed
conflict. Council mandates for conflict situations
should provide that local commanders and their
superiors in the military chain of command of armed
parties to conflict can be held accountable. All too
often, military commanders and other superiors fail to
take necessary and reasonable steps within their control
either to prevent sexual violence against civilians or to
punish the perpetrators of such crimes. Military
commanders and other superiors should be held
accountable for such serious acts of omission on their
part. Impunity can be reduced by ensuring that women
are involved to the greatest extent possible in peace
negotiations and in any associated amnesty provisions.

In conclusion, Ireland welcomes the intended
adoption later today of a draft resolution, which we are
pleased to co-sponsor, on this important issue. We
believe that it should help to empower women to fully
participate in the prevention, management and
resolution of conflict. It must be effectively
implemented to ensure that countless women and girls
in conflict situations receive more adequate and
effective protection from sexual violence.

Adoption of today's draft resolution will
recognize that the use of sexual violence as a weapon
of war is a threat to sustainable international peace and
security. And, under the law, principal responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security
rests here, in this Chamber.

Ireland hopes, therefore, that the Security Council
will act on its own analysis and promote with all
necessary vigour wider respect for, and implementation
of, its resolutions so as to halt and eliminate sexual
violence against women and girls in situations of
conflict.

