Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): The upcoming
commemoration of the International Day for the
Elimination of Sexual Violence in Conflict give us a
good opportunity to ask ourselves where we stand in
our fight to eliminate such violence what tools are at
our disposal. What we heard this morning from the
briefers certainly makes it clear that we have a very
long way to go.

Accountability is a key tool of our joint effort.
International criminal justice mechanisms have
significantly advanced the fight against impunity for
sexual violence. In 1998, the International Criminal
Tribunal (ICC) for Rwanda broke new ground when
it found in the Akayesu case that sexual assault
constituted an act of genocide. In March this year, the
International Criminal Court found Jean-Pierre Bemba
criminally responsible for rape committed by his
subordinates both as a war crime and as a crime against
humanity, in accordance with the principle of command
responsibility. These verdicts were significant steps
forward in the criminalization of sexual violence.
They send a clear message that there is no impunity
for sexual violence as a tool of war. We commend the
Prosecutor of the ICC for including charges related to
sexual and gender-based crimes in many of her ongoing
cases and for prioritizing these crimes, as reflected in
her policy paper.

Mr. President, you have asked today to also
focus on the issue of human trafficking. Presidential
statement S/PRST/2015/25, adopted in December last
year, underscores the importance of international
law enforcement cooperation, including with respect
to investigation and prosecution. The questions you
have raised in your concept note (S/2016/496, annex)
are a logical continuation of the first-ever presidential
statement the Council has adopted on this issue. We
appreciate in particular the suggestions for concrete
action by the Council in the context of its country-
specific work. Sanctions against individuals and
entities involved in trafficking are an important policy
option that should be examined carefully.

Likewise, we see much potential in monitoring
financial flows generated by human trafficking,
which is not only one of the most serious crimes under
international law, but also one of the most lucrative
organized crime models. We are working with United
Nations University and other partners on these two
questions, and hope that the findings of an event that
we will be organizing in late June can be incorporated
into the Secretary-General's report for the follow-up
discussion in the Council in December. We should
enable the Council to take concrete next steps in the
fight against trafficking and modern slavery.

Tens of millions of people around the globe live in
conditions that qualify as modern slavery. This crime
takes on various forms, including sexual enslavement,
almost invariably involving women and girls. But in
spite ofthejus cogens prohibition against slavery - one
of the most norms under international law - there
is very widespread impunity for this crime, which is
committed as a part of the conduct of war, as well as of
organized crime. Tackling this culture of impunity is but
one element of the effort to eliminate modern slavery,
but an element that is urgently needed. Investigations
and prosecutions can be complex, as the relevant acts
are often committed in several jurisdictions. And
where national jurisdictions fail to play their role,
international criminal justice has to step in.

Under the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), enslavement can constitute
a crime against humanity and sexual slavery a war
crime. The ICC could therefore play a catalytic role in
prosecuting these crimes, while illustrating the truly
global nature of its work. This great potential will be
further explored at a side event on the topic of modern
slavery and the role of international criminal justice,
which we will host on 10 June in the presence of the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court. I hope
to see many participants in this meeting at that event.

In conclusion, the Council's effort to tackle human
trafficking and modern slavery in situations of armed
conflict must be closely connected to our broader
efforts in this regard, as these crimes are committed
on a very large scale as part of transnational organized
crime and, in most cases, not related to armed conflict.
Various factors such as poverty, displacement, and
discrimination on ethnic and other grounds make a
large number of individuals vulnerable to a crime that
was among the first to be outlawed under international
law. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(ge resolution 70/1) gives the necessary prominence to
this topic and therefore offers an opportunity to finally
eliminate this atrocity, in times of armed conflict
and otherwise.

