Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, I would like to thank you for taking the
initiative of organizing this discussion on women and
peace and security shortly before the fourth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).

The adoption of that resolution was a particularly
welcome recognition of the special situation of women
in armed conflicts, in which they are targeted for the
most abominable kinds of Violence, and in which rape
and other sexual violence are often used as a weapon to
punish, intimidate, degrade and demoralize the
opposing camp. Women are reduced to sexual slavery
or fall victim to the human trafficking organized with
impunity by organized crime networks taking
advantage of the chaos of war. Women suffer from all
kinds of discrimination in times of peace, but their
situation worsens and they become even more
vulnerable in times of conflict and in post-conflict
periods.

The resolution pays tribute to the role women
play in conflict prevention, peace-building and national
reconstruction. In adopting the resolution, the Council
paid tribute to their courage and to their commitment to
peace. Women have a remarkable capacity to move
beyond cultural, religious and other kinds of divisions
for the sake of peace-building and national
reconciliation. They have made themselves
indispensable as partners for peace in Africa and
elsewhere. We have seen this in the work of the Mano
River Union Women's Peace Network and in the role
played by women of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in connection with the success of the inter-
Congolese dialogue at Sun City.

The most important achievement of resolution
1325 (2000) is undoubtedly that women and girls and
their needs are now the main focus of United Nations
activities in peacekeeping operations. The resolution
now offers a framework for structuring the efforts of
the entire United Nations system and other actors in
that respect. Integrating the gender perspective is now
an important element in new United Nations
peacekeeping missions. Commendable efforts have
been agreed upon to ensure better a representation of
women at all decision-making and operational levels in
carrying out peace missions. Gender advisers make a
real contribution to women's equality, and this
contribution is recognized and welcomed. These efforts
are still insufficient, however, and results fall far short
of what was hoped for in resolution 1325 (2000). The
Secretary-General plans to analyse the situation and
develop strategies to remedy the situation, and we
welcome this.

We must recognize that strengthening resolution
1325 (2000) and the means for its implementation,
inter alia by establishing a monitoring system under the
authority of the Council, underlies the Council's desire
to act as a catalyst for action by the entire international
community. In pursuing that aim, however, we run the
risk of exceeding the scope of resolution 1325 (2000).
The question therefore arises of whether the Security
Council is the best place for carrying out such a
multidimensional activity, because of the possible
implications and since such an endeavour would
involve many governmental and non-governmental
actors. Being proactive on such an important issue as
protecting women against violence is certainly
commendable, but success in such an ambitious
endeavour requires political will and significant
resources. The temptation for the Security Council to
become the architect and supervisor of United Nations
strategy in this area could come up against objective
difficulties and jeopardize the credibility of the
Council.

Implementing resolution 1325 (2000) also
requires collective and united action by the
international community. Such unity, however, has
often been absent in the economic and social
dimension of conflict prevention and the establishment
of lasting peace and stability. Promoting the role of
women and protecting them is inconceivable without
the resources to combat extreme poverty and disease.
Unless the international community is sufficiently
supportive, the majority of countries emerging from
conflict fall back into war and violence, as we all
know.

Finally, we have to consider the implications of
the Council being forced to exceed its own area of
competency because of the multidimensional and
multisectoral nature of this issue. This would threaten
to weaken the authority of organs and mechanisms that
deal with the status of women and human rights in
general. I am thinking here of encroachment on the
powers of the Economic and Social Council, the
Commission on the Status of Women and human rights
treaty bodies. We have to make sure that the Council's
actions are in accordance with its mandate and that
they complement the work of other players. There
needs to be a coherent strategy and coordinated
implementation. In out view, the General Assembly is
the forum that should be responsible for designing such
apolicy.

