Mr. Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate the French Republic
on presiding over the Council this month. We thank
France for its transparent and tremendous efforts
in steering the work of the Council. I also thank the
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia for its work
during its presidency last month.

Iraq seeks to increase the participation of women
in public life. We are raising awareness among women
of their social, economic and political rights. We apply
the principle of gender equality via equal opportunity
policies. This principle also applies to appointments
to senior posts and representation in Parliament and
municipal councils, in addition to decision-making and
capacity-building.

Iraq's Constitution of 2005 protects and upholds the
rights of women and provides for their care. It provides
women with social and health insurance and a means
of living in freedom and dignity. The Constitution
considers all Iraqis equal before the law without
discrimination based on gender, race, nationality or
religion. We have increased the percentage of women
in positions of leadership in Iraq since 2003. The new
Iraqi Constitution establishes a quota of no less than
25 per cent for women holding seats in the Council
of Representatives. We now have 83 female members
of Parliament and ministers; 3 female ambassadors
and 86 female judges. Iraqi women today have been
able to become presidents of universities and deans
of 75 colleges, in addition to mayor of the capital.
The capital of Iraq has 7 million residents and has a
woman mayor.

The advancement of women is an important step
towards achieving peace and security. Therefore, Iraq
continues to work with international organizations
focused on the advancement of women and the
empowerment of women in society. The Government
is working with the gender unit of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) to
achieve an agreement on a partnership between
the national reconciliation committee and UNAMI
aimed at enhancing the role of women in national
reconciliation and awareness of the importance of
resolution 1325 (2000).
The provision of equal opportunities to women and
girls in all areas is the cornerstone of peace, prosperity
and sustainability in the world. However, Iraq has
suffered a vicious wave of terrorist attacks perpetrated,
inter alia, by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL). These attacks have threatened international
peace and security. Iraqi Civilians, in particular
women and girls, have suffered the most heinous forms
of terrorist practices. We must draw attention to the
crimes of that terrorist organization against thousands
of Yazidi women and girls and other women in Iraq
of various ages. They were sold as slaves in the areas
along Iraq's border with Syria and were subjected to the
worst forms of sexual enslavement. The international
community must therefore redouble its efforts to
assist Iraq in freeing, rehabilitating and reintegrating
these women into society so that they can return to a
normal life.

My Government has taken constructive steps to
that end, including the signing of the joint communique
between the United Nations and the Government of Iraq
on the prevention of and response to conflict-related
sexual violence, on 23 September 2016. We continue to
work with UNAMI in Baghdad and the technical team
in New York of the Office of the Special Representative
ofthe Secretary- General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
to implement the provisions of this statement through
a national plan set out for that purpose. In addition,
we established 19 June as the National Day for the
Elimination of Sexual Violence in Conflict.

Iraq sent a letter to the President of the Security
Council on 9 August (S/2017/710, annex), conveying
our hope and intention to see the Security Council adopt
a resolution to ensure that members of ISIL would be
held accountable for crimes they have committed in
Iraq, including all acts that constitute crimes against
humanity. We have sought the help of the international
community in the condemnation of ISIL for murder,
kidnapping, hostage-taking, sexual slavery and other
forms of sexual violence, rape, sale into or otherwise
forced marriage, in addition to the recruitment and use
of children, attacks on infrastructure, the destruction
of cultural heritage and trafficking in cultural property.
On 21 September, the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2379 (2017), on collecting evidence of
crimes committed by ISIL, in order to hold perpetrators
accountable for their crimes and bring them to justice.

