Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I wish to thank you, Sir, for having organized
this public meeting on the eve of the fifth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) on women,
peace and security.

I also thank Mr. J ean-Marie Guehenno,
Ms. Rachel Mayanja and Ms. Noeleen Heyzer for their
excellent introductory briefings.

We also listened with great interest to the
statements made by Ms. Sweeta Noori and Ms. Helene
Dandi and wish, through them, to pay an enthusiastic
tribute to the dynamic role played by non-
governmental organizations in the field under
discussion today.

Along with children, women are the primary
casualties of conflict, and yet they have no means of
preventing them and are often excluded from peace
processes and decision-making posts. The adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) was thus a qualitative leap in
every respect in our efforts better to protect women in
situations of armed conflict and to promote their
driving role and key place in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts, peacebuilding and post-conflict
reconstruction. The need to integrate gender equality
into conflict prevention, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding has thereby been most solemnly
affirmed, which we warmly welcome.

The briefings we have heard at this important
debate give us a comprehensive view of actions
undertaken by the Secretariat, peacekeeping missions,
the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on
Gender Issues and Advancement of Women, and the
United Nations Development Fund for Women in
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

It is truly satisfying to note that the specific
situation of women and girls and their needs as
vulnerable persons are now a focal point of United
Nations action in the field of peacekeeping. Moreover,
laudable efforts have been made to ensure better
representation of women at all levels of decision-
making and in the management of peace missions.

Furthermore, pursuant to General Assembly
resolution 59/300 on a comprehensive review of a
strategy to eliminate future sexual exploitation and
abuse in United Nations peacekeeping operations,
radical efforts are expected from peacekeeping
missions and troop-contributing countries to put an end
to the serious offence and shameful practice of sexual
abuse uncovered in certain United Nations missions
mandated to protect civilian populations, particularly
women and children, in situations of armed conflict.

At the same time, much remains to be done and
we must now honour the commitment undertaken at the
September summit to the effective and comprehensive
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). Indeed, that
was the common understanding that emerged from the
Arria formula debate organized by the mission of
Denmark.

The issue of women, peace and security is indeed
multidimensional and multisectoral, transcending the
mandate of the Security Council. That is especially true
given that the Council does not address the issues of
extreme poverty, official development assistance,
special economic assistance, the debt burden, the
deterioration in the terms of trade, and so on, the
consequences of which are especially tragic for
women. Moreover, we must not impinge on the
prerogatives of the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council or the Commission on the Status of
Women, which are the appropriate bodies for the
development of policies and norms with respect to the
status of women and gender equity. It is therefore
important to ensure that the Council act hand in hand
with the other participants in the system.

Pursuant to the presidential statement contained
in document S/PRST/2004/40, the Secretary-General
has just submitted an action plan for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) across the
United Nations system. As his report reveals, this is the
first time that the system has undertaken such a broad
and complex planning task encompassing virtually
every major field of activity related to women, peace
and security.

We will follow with great interest the
implementation of that ambitious yet realistic action
plan, and of course we endorse the Secretary-General's
recommendation that a biennial report on the
implementation of the plan be submitted to the
Council; we feel that it might be submitted to the
General Assembly as well.

Lastly, my delegation would like to thank the
delegation of Romania for the preparation of the draft
presidential statement, and to assure it of our full
support.

