Mr. Amorin (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to welcome you, Madam President,
and to commend the South African presidency for
organizing this open debate on a key issue for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

Uruguay aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Canada on behalf
of a large group of countries concerned with the issue
of women and peace and security and wishes to share
some considerations in our national capacity.

My country welcomes the Secretary-General's
useful and detailed report (S/2019/800) and the
data provided in the independent assessment of the
implementation of the gender recommendations
contained in the three 2015 peace and security reviews.
The information shows that, while tangible progress
has been made on the women and peace and security
agenda, there is still a long way to go before it is
effectively and fully implemented. Resolution 2493
(2019), which the Council adopted this morning and
which Uruguay co-sponsored, is an important step
forward on that long road.

I shall now cite the measures Uruguay is taking
at the national and multilateral levels to promote the
implementation of the agenda.

Regarding domestic measures, I am pleased to
inform the Council that my Government is ready to
finalize its national action plan for the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) and other relevant
resolutions. There is concrete evidence that national
plans remain one of the main tools for accelerating
the implementation of the agenda. Our national action
plan includes legislation that our country has adopted
on human trafficking, sexual Violence and other
human rights violations. The plan focuses on both the
prevention and combating of such serious crimes and
on the care, protection and reparation of victims. It also
incorporates existing peacekeeping and peacebuilding
efforts as a basis for achieving new goals. We believe
that the results obtained through the national action
plan must be concrete and measurable, which is why
it includes both quantitative and qualitative indicators.

As a troop-contributing country, Uruguay has in
recent years taken clear steps at the domestic level to
achieve greater inclusion of women in the national
armed forces, and particularly in peacekeeping
operations. Thanks to those efforts, the participation
of Uruguayan women is higher than the average
participation of women peacekeepers deployed under
the United Nations flag. Uruguay plays a very active role
in the implementation of the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative, of which the women and peace and security
agenda is a central component. Likewise, our country
is part of the contact group for the Elsie Initiative for
Women in Peace Operations and is involved in projects
to identify barriers to deployment and provide capacity-
building with the aim of increasing the participation
of women.

Among other actions taken at the multilateral level,
Uruguay will co-chair the Women, Peace and Security
Focal Points Network next year, which coincides with
the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000). The Network has the potential to generate
the necessary political momentum to accelerate
progress on issues related to women, peace and security.
We see it as an instrument to promote cooperation on
those issues and the exchange of experiences and good
practices among all the States that have joined it. In
preparation for our tenure as Chair, a regional workshop
will be held in Montevideo in December to address
issues related to the women and peace and security
agenda in the Americas. Furthermore, Uruguay is
supporting an initiative proposed by Spain and Finland
that is aimed at ensuring the effective participation of
women in peace processes by 2025.

My country also pays particular attention to
interconnections with the commitments made under
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women. The protection of
human rights is inextricably linked to international
peace and security. Violations of women's rights are
not spontaneous but are an extension of other Violence
that is covertly exercised within societies and is rooted
in inequality and widespread discrimination against
women in disregard of their fundamental rights. In
that connection, Uruguay will be submitting its tenth
periodic report to the Committee on the Elimination
of Discrimination against Women and is renewing
its commitment to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, which prioritizes gender equality. The
2030 Agenda - in particular Goal 5, on gender equality,
and Goal 16, on peaceful and inclusive societies - has
the potential to create the social, economic and political
conditions to advance the women and peace and
security agenda.
To conclude, 2020 will be a historic milestone
for the women and peace and security agenda, with
the celebration not only of the twentieth anniversary
of resolution 1325 (2000), but also of the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action, the fifth anniversary of the adoption of
the 2030 Agenda and the seventy-fifth anniversary
of the establishment of the United Nations. Next year
will therefore have historical significance and impose
on us the responsibility to step up efforts towards the
effective implementation of commitments.

