Mrs. King-Akerele (Liberia): I bring you warm
greetings and felicitations from Her Excellency
Mrs. Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf, President of the Republic
of Liberia, the Government and the people of Liberia,
who are exerting all of their collective energies, pride
and national resources towards consolidating, nurturing
and sustaining our hard-earned peace.

We would be remiss if we did not take this
opportunity to express once again our deepest
appreciation to the United Nations, our multilateral and
bilateral partners, the Economic Community of West
African States and the African Union for standing
steadfastly with us through our darkest hour. Indeed, as
we move ahead, those same partners are with us even
now and continue to stand with us in partnership as we
slowly but surely persist in building a society of
sustained peace, stability, freedom, justice, economic
recovery and prosperity.

We are here today to address the very serious
issue of sexual violence in situations of armed conflict,
5
a matter that this body first addressed some eight years
ago through the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).
What progress have we made since then? We are here
to add the voice of my country in expressing the
seriousness of this matter and to appeal to the
collective conscience of the United Nations to move
expeditiously in addressing this matter, which has a
serious negative impact on our common humanity. Let
us reflect for a moment on this.

In adopting that resolution, the Security Council
recognized that protecting women and securing their
engagement in peace processes dramatically increases
the likelihood of success in peacemaking and peace
consolidation.

Much remains to be done to implement the vision
of resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security so as to ensure that women are protected from
the worst abuses in times of conflict and to empower
them. The resolution requires accountability - a
measurement mechanism; it needs benchmarks and
targets for implementation, with institutional structures
and focal points identified within the United Nations
system dedicated specifically to resolution 1325
(2000), along the lines, perhaps, of Security Council
resolution 1612 (2005) on children and armed conflict.

Women continue to be raped and trafficked with
impunity. Female genital mutilation is widespread.
Injuries and the medical and psychological
consequences of such violence, including depression,
post-traumatic stress syndrome, fistulas, HIV/AIDS
infections and unwanted pregnancies, are often
ignored.

In my own country, Liberia, widespread violence
against women and girls continues to be a major
concern. Rape remains at the top of the list of crimes
reported to the Liberian National Police. The majority
of rape cases reported involve children under the age of
18. Assessments carried out on the issue of rape and
other forms of sexual violence have indicated that
these are indeed embedded in cultural beliefs, practices
and behaviours that will have to go.

The maternal mortality rate in Liberia is a source
of great concern, as the latest data from the 2007
Liberian demographic survey reveals a significant
increase in maternal mortality: from 528 per 100,000
live births in 2000 to 994 per 100,000 live births in
2007. That alarming increase is the result of a lack of
access to quality reproductive health services and

information, as well as the scarcity of skilled birth
attendants. Recent interviews conducted with 150
women and girls who sought treatment for fistulas at
the fistula unit at John F. Kennedy Hospital in
Monrovia, established with the support of the United
Nations, revealed that 24 per cent of those women and
girls had developed fistulas between the ages of 11 and
16 and 54 per cent between the ages of 17 and 20, and
that 74 per cent of those who were married had been
rejected by their community.

In response, the Government of Liberia
established a special unit in the Ministry of Gender to
address the increasing incidence of gender-based
violence. Also, at the Ministry of Justice, in her annual
message earlier this year to the National Legislature,
President Johnson-Sirleaf sounded the alarm, noting
that the number of incidents of rape involving young
children continues to increase at an alarming rate. In
her own words, "We must prosecute all such criminals
without mercy. We must name and shame them. We
must help parents to expose them." The Association of
Female Lawyers is working with us in Liberia in that
regard.

With the assistance of the United Nations family,
we recently signed - last week, on 12 June - a
two-year United Nations joint programme to address
gender-based violence in the country using
multidimensional and holistic approaches. We will
need funding for this programme. We also introduced a
rape law, enacted in early 2006. Adopted in November,
the national plan of action on gender-based violence is
also in the preparation stage.

With the support of the United Nations system,
the Government will soon have a special court in the
Temple of Justice that meets international standards
and that is dedicated to the prosecution of sexual
offences, including rape. This special court will
undoubtedly contribute to responding to the backlog of
sexual offences with which we are faced. It is time to
tackle this item very seriously, as we are doing in
Liberia. Together, with our partners, we are working
assiduously in that regard. The issue of geographical
accessibility and the other problems that confront us
are being addressed.

Yet the challenges are enormous: restoring the
rule of law, protecting human rights and ending
impunity for crimes committed against the people of
Liberia.
08-39069

We are convinced that the situation of gender-

based violence in Liberia is a microcosm of current

conflict-ridden environments, as well as post-conflict
environments.

At this point, we are indeed calling for
fundamental changes if resolution 1325 (2000) is to be
translated into effective action worldwide. We must
review the progress made under that resolution,
including field-based research on what has and has not
worked in key situations. We must identify constraints,
form partnerships, establish systematic funding and
bring together advocates of the forceful implementation
of the resolution.

We would like also to convey our special
appreciation to the Secretary-General for having
appointed a woman Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Liberia in response to the
resolution. We are working extremely well with her
and with the United Nations system at large.
Mr. Secretary-General, you mentioned the Indian
special peacekeeping force. Indeed, it is having a
significant effect in Liberia. We will be using that force
as a model to encourage Liberians, and Liberian
women in particular, to serve as peacekeepers
worldwide. We are, at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
for example, within the context of the Foreign Service
Institute, looking into how we can link up experiences
with peacekeeping. We want to thank the system at
large, as well as the Office of the Assistant Secretary-
General and Special Adviser on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women, and the Assistant Secretary-
General herself, for their support. Indeed, we have no
alternative; we are morally obliged to support this draft
resolution. We want to commend most highly the
President of the Security Council for this initiative.

