Ms. Bird (Australia): Thank you, Madam
President, for convening this important debate. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2015/203). It is appalling to note that the year under
review was marked by an increased incidence and
severity of conflict-related sexual violence. In this
regard, we commend the unwavering commitment of
Special Representative Bangura to expose and end
conflict-related sexual Violence.

Sexual violence is not merely a consequence
of conflict. It is used as an instrument of war and,
increasingly, as a tactic of terror. Its use by extremist
groups and non-State actors is particularly alarming,
not only in its increasing frequency but in its calculated
and vicious intent.

Extremist groups and non-State actors terrorize
communities into compliance, displacing populations
and generating revenue through trafficking, slave trade
and ransoms. The rise of extremist groups such as
Boko Haram and Daesh, with their widespread reach
across cultures and geographies, is aided by existing
vulnerabilities within communities and systemic
gender-based discrimination.

The United Nations and the international community
more broadly must continue the work to integrate
the women and peace and security agenda into
counterterrorism and counter-insurgency efforts. That
will require a better understanding of the possible
options available to us and potentially different ways
of operating.

Addressing sexual violence in conflict must remain
a priority as long as women, men and children continue
to be victims of sexual violence in conflict-related
settings, and it needs to feature in every aspect of the
Council's work.

Conflicts are more severe in situations where
women are excluded and marginalized, and we have
seen the tangible benefits of women protection advisers
and women peacekeepers in the field. These must
continue to be supported. The Council should continue
to give its full support to the Special Representative,
particularly on engagement with national authorities,
armed forces and others. The signing by the Forces
armees de la Republique democratique du Congo of
the declaration to combat rape in war is one concrete
example of the important progress that can be made
when there is sufficient political will. We commend the
Special Representative for achieving this outcome.

Efforts to prevent sexual violence in conflict
should also be considered in relation to all aspects
of United Nations conflict-prevention, stabilization
and peacebuilding work. This includes implementing
the International Protocol on the Documentation and
Investigation of Sexual Violence in Conflict and the
comprehensive implementation of the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court into domestic
legislation.

More needs to be done to ensure that no individual
can escape prosecution and act with impunity as well
as to support human rights defenders and build the
capacity of local civil society, including women's
organizations.

The fifteenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000)
provides an important opportunity to expand the scope
of the women and peace and security agenda beyond
participation and protection to focus on prevention,
including preventing sexual violence.

Australia strongly supports the Preventing Sexual
Violence in Conflict Initiative, of which Australia's
Foreign Minister, Julie Bishop, is an active champion.
We are working to implement the commitment made
in London under the Declaration of Commitment to
End Sexual Violence in Conflict and will continue to
work with partners in our region and beyond to promote
universal application of the Declaration.

In conclusion, it is important to recall that men and
boys also suffer from sexual violence; so, too, people
with disabilities. These survivors often have different
needs and require specific medical, psychosocial, legal
and economic support services.

Ultimately, the international community must
respond before conflict erupts to reduce exposure to
conflict-related hardships and abuses, including sexual
and gender-based Violence in all its forms.

