Mr. Saleh Azzam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic):
I would like at the outset to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council this month. I wish you and the
delegation of Germany every success. My country's
delegation also thanks you for having chosen such an
important topic for this open debate, namely, women in
peacekeeping operations. I would like as well to thank
the briefers for their informative briefings.

Several days ago, we had a ministerial meeting in
the General Assembly Hall on peacekeeping operations,
with high-level participation from countries all over the
world. The topic of and level of participation in that
conference reflected the conviction of the international
community that peacekeeping operations play a central
role in the maintenance of international peace and
security. It sent a message of support and appreciation
to the contributing countries and the peacekeeping
operations for their achievements.

There is consensus on the decisive role of
peacekeeping operations in reducing tensions and
defusing conflicts. Within that framework, the
Action for Peacekeeping initiative of the Secretary-
General provides the international community with
an updated and comprehensive roadmap to strengthen
and rationalize those operations, and make them
better capable of carrying out their mandate. That
is why Lebanon was first among the countries to
support the initiative. We are convinced that, with
its content, objectives and capacity, it can make a
qualitative change concerning the effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations.

The women and peace and security agenda, as
enshrined in resolution 1325 (2000), is among the top
priorities of the Action for Peacekeeping initiative.
The agenda reflects the acknowledgement of the
international community of the need to integrate the
gender perspective into peacekeeping operations as
an indispensable condition for strengthening and
enhancing them.

Until recently, women made up no more than
4 per cent of the military component of peacekeeping
operations around the world, 10 per cent of the police
component and 28 per cent of civilian personnel.
Those figures illustrate the considerable gap that exists
when it comes to the representation of women, which
requires a major effort to bridge. Working towards
gender parity in peacekeeping would be a victory for
the inalienable right to representation for half of human
society - women - and enable them to carry out their
duties and responsibilities to strengthen international
peace and security. That is an indisputable issue of
principle. Furthermore, it is not a question of simply
attempting to correct an imbalance of rights; it is
also a need for peacekeeping operations as such.
Strengthening the role of women within peacekeeping
operations would enhance those operations and thereby
promote peace.

Indeed, women bring comparative advantages
to peacekeeping operations that improve their
performance. Their presence allows for the empowering
of local women and helps to improve and deepen
the relationship between local communities and
peacekeeping personnel.

As Council members know, Lebanon hosts one of
the largest United Nations peacekeeping operations, the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL).
For four decades, UNIFIL has played a major role
in maintaining stability along the southern border of
Lebanon, thereby helping to maintain stability in the
country and the region. Lebanon highly appreciates the
efforts and sacrifices made by UNIFIL, its commanders
and staff, and we thank the contributing countries for
their long-term commitment to supporting UNIFIL.

In the context of the topic of today's meeting,
my country's delegation pays homage to the women
working in UNIFIL. By late February, the rate of
women's participation in UNIFIL had increased to
5.25 per cent. Although we must recognize that positive
achievement, the current rate remains well below
what we had hoped for. Greater participation must be
encouraged, as appropriate.

In November 2015, UNIFIL created a female
assessment and analysis support team tasked
with various activities, including operational and
communication activities with the local people. Since
the establishment of the team, we have noticed an
increase in the number of social activities involving
women and children within UNIFIL area of operation.

On 13 March, Sector West of UNIFIL hosted a
workshop for the women of the Lebanese army and of
UNIFIL to exchange experiences. That event, the first
of its kind, was part of efforts to strengthen cooperation
and partnership between the Lebanese army and the
United Nations Force and to increase joint activities
related to the gender dimension and civilian/military
cooperation. We thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-
Pierre Lacroix for having spoken at the workshop
during his most recent visit to Lebanon.

I would like to conclude by stressing that correcting
the gender imbalance in peacekeeping operations
is tantamount to strengthening the peacekeeping
mechanism. That is a long-term investment in building
and sustaining peace. I hope that the outcome oftoday's
meeting will be a unified, simple and direct outcome:
more women, more peace.

