Mrs. Picco (Monaco) (spoke in French): The
Principality of Monaco attaches the greatest
importance to the protection of innocent civilian
victims of conflict. Among them, women and children
are clearly the most vulnerable. The fact that, over the
past decade, women and children have become the
targets of unspeakable violence is unacceptable. Thus,
the Security Council's recognition of this scourge when
it adopted resolution 1325 (2000), on 31 October 2000,
was a major turning point in mobilizing the
international community.

We underscore the essential contribution of civil
society, which has made possible significant progress
and helped us to define women's participation as an
essential element of peacebuilding processes and
recovery efforts in affected countries.

Although the role of women in development no
longer needs to be proven, it is equally crucial to
ensuring lasting peace, social cohesion and political
legitimacy. Women's contributions are not an end in
themselves; they are also crucial elements in achieving
peacebuilding priorities. In that regard, in order to
ensure the rule of law, there must be support for the
establishment and strengthening of national
institutions.

Resolution 1325 (2000) also underscores the need
to scrupulously respect the provisions of international
humanitarian law and human rights instruments. It is
imperative that atrocities not go unpunished, especially
those in which rape is used as a weapon of war.

We note with interest the establishment of a
comprehensive framework dedicated to the effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and to
holding all parties concerned accountable. Taking into
account the indicators included in the annex to the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/498) should
allow us to measure progress and highlight areas
deserving of our attention. In that regard, we welcome
the efforts and initiatives of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, in particular in the areas of
training and increasing the participation of women in
peacekeeping operations and police forces.

My delegation unreservedly supports the
determination and commends the courage and resolve
of Ms. Margot Wallstrom, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
and of Under-Secretary-General Michelle Bachelet,
Executive Director of the United Nations Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women, in
coordinating our efforts on behalf of women. We hope
that the political will we have generated will continue
to assert itself.

