Ms. Shilo (Israel): The full participation of women
in every field is vital. From the chambers of Government
to the boardrooms of businesses, women leaders play
important roles in society. That extends to achieving
peace and security, where women must be present
in conflict prevention, peacekeeping, humanitarian
response, conflict resolution, peacebuilding and post-
conflict reconstruction.

That is not for the benefit of women alone, but
for our collective benefit. The data prove it. The
Secretary-General's 2015 global study concluded that
peace agreements are 35 per cent more likely to last
more than 15 years if their processes include women.
We cannot ignore such statistics. Today, we are here to
share ideas on the crucial and unique role that women
play in promoting and maintaining a safer and more
peaceful world.

The landmark resolution 1325 (2000) reaffirms
the important role played by women in the promotion
of peace and security. Allow me to highlight some
examples where women have made a significant
difference.

First, in Colombia, the Government heeded the calls
of its women and established a gender subcommittee
during peace negotiations with the Revolutionary
Armed Forces of Colombia. The result was that women
gained a third of the seats at the negotiating table.

Secondly, in Liberia, President Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf's
election gave women a seat at the head of the table.
As Liberia's first woman president, President
Johnson-Sirleaf passed ground-breaking women's
rights legislation. She, along with two Liberian peace
activists, received the Noble Peace Prize in 2011 for
their outstanding advocacy for women in peacebuilding.

Thirdly, over the past decade, India sent nine
rotations of all-women peacekeeping units to Liberia.
Inspired by the self-defence training that they received
from the all-women peacekeeping units, Liberian
women joined their country's security forces in record
numbers.

Today, despite the recruitment efforts, women
still comprise only 22 per cent of United Nations
peacekeeping staff and 4 per cent of military staff. We
must create an environment for women peacekeepers
in which they feel safe and comfortable in joining
peacekeeping efforts. We should establish and
implement a zero-tolerance policy on sexual harassment
within peacekeeping missions, so that women will feel
safe serving in the field. Preventing and eliminating
sexual harassment in the workplace must be a priority.
In that vein, during the most recent session of the
Commission on the Status of Women, Israel introduced
the first-ever United Nations resolution adopted by
consensus on the prevention and elimination of sexual
harassment in the workplace.

Israel is committed to the promotion and protection
of the human rights of all women and girls. We were the
first country in the world to implement parts ofresolution
1325 (2000) in our national legislation. Amendment
4 to the Women's Equal Rights Law requires the
Government to include women from all parts of society
in all national policy-making committees. Additionally,
over the past decade, the Israeli Parliament has passed
over 50 laws and amendments to further gender
equality. Nevertheless, like most countries, much work
remains to be done.

Women's voices and women's leadership are
fundamental to peace and security. Women's
participation in peace and security is a global issue
that must be met with global efforts. Let us build on
each country's experiences. Let examples of local
implementation inspire global implementation, and let
us continue together on an upward path.

