Mr. Reynders (Belgium) (spoke in French): Let
me begin by thanking the Secretary-General for the
report on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2012/33).
I also wish to thank Ms. Margot Wallstrom, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, and her team of experts. It is
impossible to remain indifferent in reading the report,
for sexual violence in many societies is still a common
practice, often invisible and too rarely prosecuted.

Belgium has always been a strong defender of
resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace and security.
It formally promises to remain so.

Belgium associates itself with the statement to be
made on behalf of the European Union.

I would like to address three subjects.

First is the mandate of the Special
Representative, which for Belgium is very clear. It
allows the Security Council to focus on sexual violence
not only in classic conflict situations but also in
post-conflict situations or other serious situations, such
as political unrest. The Council already regularly takes
up such issues in various types of situations. I welcome
the reference in the report to instances of sexual
violence in situations of unrest and instability,
particularly in Egypt and Syria. To reduce the mandate

12-2393]
solely to cases of sexual violence in conflict situations
would be tantamount to restricting the role of the
United Nations in defending individuals and societies
that suffer from this terrible scourge. We cannot retreat
from the detailed mandate set out in resolution 1960
(2010).

Furthermore, while sexual Violence mainly
affects women and girls, the Secretary-General's report
makes very clear that the situation of men, especially
those in custody, as well as children born as a result of
rape, deserves greater attention from us. Rather than
seeking to lock the mandate into too limited an area of
action, we should develop a comprehensive approach
to protecting civilians.

My second comment concerns some particular
recommendations in the report, first, that concerning
initiatives and modalities relating to security sector
reform, It is indeed our duty to ensure that those who
perpetrate, command or condone sexual violence are
excluded from all branches of government, including
the armed forces and police. In addition, United
Nations mediators and officials also must ensure that
sexual violence is included in the definition of conduct
prohibited by ceasefire and peace agreements. Indeed,
Belgium calls particularly for an increase in the
number of women serving as mediators and special
envoys.

Finally, the third recommendation that I wish to
underline concerns prevention, which is often more
effective than reparation. That is why Belgium
supports any initiative aimed at adopting early warning
systems that could detect risks of imminent sexual
violence in regions affected by conflict.

My third and final comment relates to situations
in some particular countries. The Special
Representative has visited the Democratic Republic of
the Congo several times to discuss with top
Government officials the issue of sexual violence,
often committed by military personnel. Belgium was
among the first to provide financial support for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo's national strategy
to combat sexual violence. We also provided financial
support to the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo for military judges to assist with the

12-2393]

prosecution of soldiers accused of sexual violence in
the eastern part of the country. Belgium intends to
remain engaged in this project, in consultation with the
Special Representative and with national authorities.

As Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission's
Central African Republic configuration, Belgium
attributes particular importance to the issue of sexual
Violence in that country. The Central African Republic
is on the priority list for action by the Special
Representative. The problem of Violence against
women and children is discussed during each
Commission field visit, and regular contact on the
subject is maintained with the Office of the Special
Representative.

The reports on the situations in Libya, Egypt and
Syria are particularly relevant in the context of the
so-called Arab Spring. The issue of sexual violence in
countries in transition should not be ignored. I am
deeply concerned at reports by the United Nations
commission of inquiry to the effect that Syrian armed
forces and security personnel have used sexual torture
against detainees in various detention centers of the
intelligence and political security services. I trust we
shall have an opportunity to speak of that tomorrow, in
the framework of the meeting of the friends of Syria in
Tunis.

In conclusion, I would like to stress the collective
responsibility for the fight against sexual violence. The
Security Council must act on this report, in particular
by transmitting to the sanctions committees the list of
parties responsible for sexual violence, which is
annexed to the report, for effective follow-up. The
development of that list is a first, for which I
congratulate the Secretary-General.

I sincerely trust that the team of the Special
Representative will continue their excellent work. I
believe their report is one stage and that there will be
more.

