Mr. Adom (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): On
behalf of the African countries that are members of the
Security Council, that is, Equatorial Guinea and South
Africa, I should like to thank the German presidency
and you yourself, Madam Minister, for having convened
this open debate on the participation of women in
peacekeeping operations. I would also like to commend
and thank His Excellency the Secretary-General,
Mr. Antonio Guterres, and the eminent briefers for
their high-quality briefings.

Allow me to note here that the three African
countries members of the Security Council align
themselves with the statement to be delivered later by
Ambassador Fatima Kyari Mohammed on behalf of the
African Union (AU).

For more than 70 years now, as United Nations
peacekeeping operations have been serving the lofty
cause of global peace and security around the world,
their numbers have continued to increase. Estimated
at more than 110,000 personnel, the staff of United
Nations missions now reflects the new types of
threats, asymmetric deployment environments and the
multidimensional demands placed upon peacekeeping.

In contrast to these developments, the participation
of women in peacekeeping operations has remained
marginal and falls far below the parity goals set by
the United Nations. For Africa, which hosts seven
peacekeeping operations and has its own peace
Mission, the African Union Mission in Somalia,
women's participation remains a major challenge to
be overcome despite the African Union's commitment
to promoting the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). Indeed, we are convinced that the deployment
of women peacekeepers not only contributes to gender
equality and the empowerment of women but is also
vital to the transformation of United Nations missions
as well as to security-sector reform.

(spoke in English)

In line with its commitments to the women and
peace and security agenda, the African Union, through
troop- and police-contributing countries, has made
progress in institutionalizing women's participation
and leadership in peacekeeping missions. The joint
AU-United Nations fact-finding mission on women and
peace and security, conducted in the field in 2017 and
2018 by the AU Commissioner for Peace and Security;
the AU Special Envoy on Women, Peace and Security; the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations;
and the Executive Director of UN-Women, has clearly
established that women victims of war and conflict are
more engaged with military women and police than
men. Failure to take them into account could have an
impact on reconciliation and peacebuilding processes.

(spoke in French)
Although women provide undeniable added value,
many political and cultural factors continue to hold
back their inclusion in peacekeeping operations. These
include cultural obstacles and stereotypes, unsuitable
training policies and recruitment mechanisms that
put women at a disadvantage. We are therefore firmly
convinced that additional efforts must be made to
eliminate these obstacles, including all forms of
violence and intimidation preventing the deployment of
women in peacekeeping operations.

To that end, the African Union adopted a code
of conduct and a zero-tolerance policy that define
the African Union's position against sexual Violence,
abuse and exploitation committed by peacekeepers and
military personnel. The code is shared with all troop-
contributing countries and integrated into all related
training programmes.

We must also further combat all the forms of
discrimination that women peacekeepers face. Gender
stereotypes must be combated in allocating strategic
roles in missions, and the United Nations must
continue to improve accommodation and sanitation
infrastructure in order better to meet the specific needs
of women.

The African Union has also established a network
of women mediators, Fem-Wise Africa, so as to ensure
women's leadership in peace and security, alongside
the African Women Leaders Network. By endorsing
resolution 2457 (2019), the two networks promote the
role ofwomen in peacekeeping and call for a qualitative
increase in the number of women in peace operations.

The African Union has also assigned gender
officials to the various peacekeeping operations to
ensure that women's voices are heard and amplified and
that women can participate in conflict-resolution and
peacebuilding efforts.

In spite of the many challenges that remain, our
continent has made notable progress, including in the
integration of issues related to women, gender equality
and peace and security into the African Peace and
Security Architecture and general programmes for
peace and security. Currently 25 African countries have
national action plans on women and peace and security,
that is, 31 per cent of the total number of countries
around the world to have such plans.

(spoke in English)

It is undeniable that the inclusion of women in
peacekeeping missions, whether under United Nations
mandates or regional organizations, is a shared
responsibility between troop-contributing countries
and the United Nations. Troop- and police-contributing
countries must therefore work to overcome cultural
barriers and stereotypes and mainstream the gender
dimension into the training and recruitment of the
military and police personnel of their contingents.

With regard to the United Nations, it is important
to continue communication and advocacy for women's
participation in peacekeeping and to provide incentives
for troop-contributing countries that are making
an effort to increase the participation of women in
peacekeeping missions. It is also necessary to provide
peacekeeping personnel with all of the appropriate
resources to carry out their mandate effectively.
Targeted training, capacity development and appropriate
predeployment training and equipment are essential to
advancing the Secretary-General's vision for his Action
for Peacekeeping initiative.

(spoke in French)

Africa's commitment to take ownership of its
collective security through African peace operations
remains firms, as does its commitment to increase
women's participation pursuant to resolution 1325
(2000). Meeting that noble goal also requires resolving
the issue of financing African peace support operations,
the effectiveness of which depends upon predictable
and sustainable funding.

The three African members ofthe Security Council
appreciate the constructive cooperation that exists
between the Security Council and the African Union
Peace and Security Council in seeking solutions to the
current challenges to peace and security in Africa. Our
countries sincerely hope that theirjoint efforts will lead
to a sustainable response to that major concern.

