Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Let me first thank the
Russian Federation for convening this open debate.

Indonesia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Thailand on behalf of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations.

I thank His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka and others for giving
constructive insights into the progress and challenges
of the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda. Indonesia remains committed to
working with Member States, the United Nations and
other relevant actors to empower women and girls
as agents for change for peace and security around
the world.

Conflict is painful. It is disfiguring and debilitating
to anybody's sense of humanity. Women who live in
the midst of conflict are given no choice but to take
charge when they lose their father, brother or husband.
Resolution 1325 (2000) was a call to give notice to the
important role of women as peace-brokers and catalysts
for change. Foremost, it takes notice of women's
resilience, despite the odds they face in conflict.
Through the four pillars of resolution 1325 (2011),
women were recognized as actors, not bystanders,
in conflict management, conflict resolution and
sustainable peace. Resolution 2242 (2015), which was
adopted last year, provides recommendations to better
implement the agenda. Moving forward, there are some
pertinent points to consider.

First, peace is very challenging to establish in
the aftermath of war. While the war may have ceased
externally, often times it rages on internally in the
hearts and minds of those affected. Difficulties and
complexities in the aftermath of conflict could drag
countries and societies back into conflict.
Secondly, investing in the prevention of conflict
has become a necessity in today's world, which is
increasingly prone to open conflicts. We need to
promote the culture of peace and tolerance, and support
global development that is sustainable and inclusive,
particularly in conflict prone regions.

Thirdly, it is important to acknowledge the role
of women, mothers and family in the prevention of
radicalism and extremism and we need to work together
to empower them.

Fourthly, it is important to ensure that the work of
the Security Council in women and peace and security
complement the work of other relevant bodies and
agencies within the United Nations system. We need
to strengthen interaction and information flows across
the entire system. Coordination among United Nations
bodies should respect and make full use of their
respective mandates and competencies, particularly
those whose work is relevant in promoting women's
empowerment and gender equalities in all sectors,
including the prevention of gender-based violence in
conflict situations.

Sexual violence conducted by members of
peacekeepers has been a particular concern. As an
agent ofpeace, every peacekeeper should be held to the
highest ethical and moral standards. Along this line,
Indonesia supports the work of United Nations agencies
in promoting zero tolerance of sexual violence and
abuse in conflict. We urge United Nations agencies to
strengthen their work with Member States in promoting
global initiatives to protect women and children in
armed conflict, such as the Preventing Sexual Violence
in Conflict initiative.

Fifthly, we need to strengthen the contribution of
Member States in peacekeeping missions. Indonesian
military and police forces are currently in 10 United
Nations operations with close to 3,000 personnel in
total, many of whom are female peacekeepers, who
have expertise in conflict resolution and peacebuilding.
Indonesia's Peacekeeping Training Centre has also
incorporated gender perspectives into its programme
so as to equip them in the field.

The participation of women and girls in
peacebuilding is a must and a prerequisite for sustainable
peace. We need to address the problem of ensuring
predictable and sustainable funding for women and
peace and security. Setting specific numerical targets,
such as allocating 15 per cent of peacebuilding funds
to projects whose principal objective is to address
women's specific needs and advance gender equality, is
a step in the right direction.

Finally, as a candidate for non-permanent
membership of the Security Council for 2019-2020,
we are determined to be a true partner for peace and
a promoter of women's empowerment and gender
equality worldwide.

