Mr. Elnour (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): The
delegation of my country would like to thank the
presidency of Peru for dedicating this open debate to
this important subject. We would also like to thank
Ms. Amina Mohammed, Deputy Secretary-General,
and Ms. Pramila Patten, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, for
their briefings and efforts. We thank as well Ms. Sultana
for her briefing this morning.

We align ourselves with the statement delivered by
the Permanent Observer of the African Union to the
United Nations and would like to deliver this statement
in our national capacity.

This important subject requires a comprehensive
approach in addressing this heinous crime in order
to deal with it in all its aspects, given the deep and
significant consequences it has on individuals and
societies. It also requires coordinated cooperation
among all the relevant stakeholders. Allow me to
provide preliminary proposals on how to act and move
forward in the future to address this heinous crime.

First, we should step up efforts to resolve conflicts
all over the world so as to impede those who commit
such crimes. That can be achieved by strengthening
the role of the United Nations in mediation, on the one
hand, and imposing sanctions by the Security Council
on those who obstruct peace, on the other hand.

Second, we should provide assistance to affected
countries to help them build their national capacities
in relation to fighting conflict-related sexual violence.

Third, we should enhance cooperation and
partnerships with the United Nations and regional
organizations to address such crimes.

Fourth, we should allocate sufficient resources
for the Trust Fund in Support of Victims of Sexual
Exploitation and Abuse, as recommended by the report
(S/2018/250) of the Secretary-General.

Fifth, we should promote efforts to empower
women economically, socially and politically. Sixth, we
must address the root causes of armed conflict to ensure
the sustainability of peace and the non-recurrence
of conflicts.

Seventh, we must provide health care and
psychological, social, economic and legal support
to victims.

Eighth, we must impose stricter sanctions on those
committing such heinous crimes.

Finally, we must pay more attention to
the issue of conflict-related sexual violence in
peacekeeping missions.

At the national level, the Government of the
Sudan has put in place a number of plans and policies
on fighting violence against women, particularly in
conflict-affected areas. They include the national policy
on the empowerment of women, adopted in 2007, and
the national plan to combat violence against women for
the period 2015-2030. The Government also adopted a
national plan on women and peace and security in line
with Security Council resolution 1325 (2000).
The Government of my country has established
many institutional frameworks to protect and advance
the status of women. Child protection units have been
established in the armed forces, a family and child
protection unit has been set up within the police and
the number of female police officers has increased,
particularly in internally displaced persons' camps in
Darfur. Training courses have been designed to train
those female officers in investigation, international law
and human rights. In addition, a specialized unit has
been established by the Ministry of Social Development
to fight violence against women and girls.

In cooperation with UNICEF, the Government
has made great efforts to support the establishment
of family and child protection units in Darfur. The
United Nations Population Fund has also provided
health services to victims through the Federal Ministry
of Health in order to coordinate follow-up on gender-
based violence and, through necessary cooperation
with relevant bodies, to provide social, psychological
and legal assistance to victims.

In order to address the challenges related to
achieving justice and ensuring violators of human
rights, and women's rights in particular, are held
accountable, a number of specialized prosecution
offices have been established in Darfur states and new
prosecutors have been appointed since 2015. That has
improved the monitoring of human rights violations,
including sexual crimes. In order to improve and
enhance security, additional police units have been
deployed in many areas in Darfur states.

We would like to commend the United Nations
strategy for the protection of civilians. The African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
and the country team have made progress thanks to
the early-warning and early-response strategies. That
has been achieved by enhancing interaction with
local communities and amending the weekly schedule
of patrols to coincide with the movement of women
and girls.

The Government of the Sudan wishes to seriously
engage in the international community to address the
impact of conflict by ensuring security and providing
the necessary protection for women, girls and children.
It therefore extended a warm invitation to Ms. Pramila
Patten, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Armed Conflict, to visit
the Sudan from 18 to 25 February. The programme
of the visit was coordinated with her Office in New

York. During her visit, she met with a number of
federal ministers to deepen cooperation and eliminate
all causes and factors of sexual violence in areas of
conflict. Ms. Patten also visited North and West Darfur
states, where she examined the situation in a number of
a refugee and internally displaced persons' camps and
witnessed how security prevails in Darfur states.

The visit in itself is a proof that the Government of
the Sudan is engaged in a constructive manner with the
international community and that that has led to what
we are witnessing today: the restoration of normalcy in
Darfur states after 15 years of an exceptional situation
never experienced before in the history of Darfur. We
believe that the visit gave Ms. Patten and her delegation
an opportunity to witness at first-hand the situation
in Darfur and to collect information from reliable and
credible sources.

However, we have questions regarding part of the
content of the Secretary-General's report before the
Council (S/2018/250), namely, paragraph 72. The report
states that Sudan border guards committed sexual
crimes in Darfur, knowing that in the Sudan the so-
called border guards have not existed for more than two
years. We also have questions regarding other words
and phrases in the same paragraph.

In conclusion, the delegation of my country
reaffirms that the Government of the Sudan will
continue to commit to fully cooperating with the United
Nations and its agencies. We will also cooperate with all
regional and international organizations, above all the
African Union. We would like to welcome in particular
the spirit demonstrated by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, and we confirm once again
that the Darfur conflict has ended. Our task now should
be to achieve comprehensive economic and social
development, and that, no doubt, is the panacea to put
all conflicts to an end.

