Ms. Shuurman: Gender equality is not optional.
It is essential. Why? Because it allows us to respond
better and smarter to the many complex security
challenges that we face today. Gender equality is
about our credibility and our capability. It is about the
resilience of our societies, the readiness of our forces
and the effectiveness of our operations. That is what
NATO has learned from more than a decade and a half
ofimplementing resolution 1325 (2000).

At its Summit in July, NATO endorsed a new
action plan on the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda, and 55 allies and partner
nations associated themselves with the plan. We now
host what could well be the largest global coalition on
implementing resolution 1325 (2000). We continue to
build our coalition inside and out. Last week, NATO
broke new ground when we hosted our first ever civil
society advisory panel. This is about cementing our
dialogue - the dialogue between NATO and those
representatives of civil society who work on conflict
prevention and resolution and women's empowerment.
If peace is to be sustainable, we must be inclusive.

We still have a long way to go, but NATO is doing a
great deal, and we keep things as practical as possible.
We continue to learn from our operations, missions,
training and exercises. Gender perspectives are now
at the centre of NATO defence planning and reporting
processes. NATO supports the implementation of
resolution 2242 (2015) by financing research on the
role of gender in countering violent extremism. NATO
strategic commands are now implementing the military
guidelines on preventing and responding to conflict-
related sexual and gender-based violence. Sexual
violence scars families, rips societies apart and slows
down peacekeeping and conflict resolution processes.
It affects the success of NATO missions. We cannot
be bystanders. We need to look at ourselves, too, by
raising awareness of NATO codes of conduct and other
tools designed to prevent sexual exploitation and abuse.

We can do better, however. Just 10 per cent of NATO
armed forces are women; of those deployed in operations,
it is just 5.5 per cent. We understand that improving this
ratio will improve effectiveness, and we urge Member
States to do their part. We support the United Nations
pledge in London to double the proportion of women in
United Nations peacekeeping missions.

Again, we need to lead by example. The gender

balance in the NATO leadership is now improving,

after years of stagnation. Last week, we proudly
welcomed the first female NATO Deputy Secretary-
General, Ms. Rose Gottemoeller. In June, our first
female four-star, American Admiral Michelle Howard,
assumed command of the NATO Joint Force Command,
Naples. The NATO Defence College in Rome will be
led by a woman, too - Canadian Lieutenant-General
Christine Whitecross. We know that we need to
keep up this momentum, and we will, because equal
participation is not a favour to women. It is a hard-core
security requirement. It is essential to the resilience of
our societies, to the effectiveness of our forces and to a
modern, ready and responsive Alliance. But above all,
it is fundamental to achieving lasting peace.

