Mr. Cisse (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the outset,
allow me to commend Chile for holding this debate. I
also wish to commend the President for his outstanding
leadership of the work of the Security Council, which
follows in the wake of the recent laudable Chadian
presidency last month.

Mr. Olguin Cigarroa took the Chair.

This important debate on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict is taking place 15 years after the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) and on the eve of the
twentieth anniversary of the holding of the 1995 Fourth
World Conference on Women, as well as on the threshold
of the adoption of a new generation of development
goals. Those events remind the international community
of its responsibility for women's empowerment, which
has been hindered by the many acute crises of which
they are unfortunately the biggest victims.

Today's meeting gives us an opportunity to closely
look at the progress made as well as at the challenges
that remain, especially in the light of the developments
set out in the recent report of Secretary General Ban
Ki-moon (S/2014/693), which supports the briefings
of Ms. Kyung-wha Kang, Assistant Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Helen Durham of the
International Committee of the Red Cross and Ms. Ilwad
Elman of the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace
and Security. We express our heartfelt thanks for their
briefings.

Armed conflicts, in so far as they encourage
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, such as sexual and gender-based
violence, undermine the foundations of peace and
obliterate development efforts. In that regard, the
delegation of Senegal is pleased at the strengthening of
the normative framework that followed the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), which is evidence ofthe interest
attached to the protection and leadership of women in
armed conflicts.

We take note in that regard, besides resolutions
2106 (2013) and 2122 (2013), of the adoption of two
important texts - the declaration of commitment
to eliminate sexual violence adopted by 150 States,
including Senegal, on the sidelines of work of the
General Assembly at its sixty-eighth session, as well
as the statement of the Peacebuilding Commission on
women's economic empowerment for peacebuilding.

Likewise, it is appropriate to welcome both the
increase in the number ofpeacekeeping operations with
a mandate to protect civilians, including those currently
deployed in Mali and Central Africa, and the inclusion,
in 2013, of the issue of women and peace and security
in a significant number of agreements and resolutions,
including those creating or extending the mandate of
a peacekeeping mission. In addition, the participation
of women took place in all official peace mediations
undertaken by the United Nations in 2013, while their
corresponding participation stood at 86 per cent in
2011. Despite those very encouraging statistics, women
and girls continue to be mistreated in different theatres
of conflicts or as displaced persons, as numerous cases
of rape attest to, as well as exploitation, sexual slavery,
pregnancies, forced abortions and prostitution, attacks
against schools or, still yet, threats against families.

This serious state of affairs is unworthy of a world
that makes the protection of civilians one of its priority
concerns. That is why it is urgent to increase our
efforts to protect women and girls in these moments
of tragedy and horror fuelled by an uncontrolled
circulation of weapons. It therefore seems important
to us - continuing in the footsteps of resolution 1894
(2009) and taking the opportunity afforded us by the
review of peacekeeping operations - to make the
protection of civilians a priority when defining the
mandates of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
We also need to ensure that peacekeeping troops that
are to be deployed in a conflict receive heightened
training in the protection of civilians, as well as be
provided with holistic protection strategies.

Beyond the prevention of sexual violence, there
is an urgent need to impose targeted sanctions and
to ensure accountability for the perpetrators of these
acts, which international criminal law has qualified as
crimes against the humanity and as genocide.

I should also like to welcome here the tireless efforts
of Ms. Zeinab Hawa Bangura, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
to bring parties to conflict to assume their share of
responsibility in the protection of women, particularly
in the context of the United Nations campaign relating
thereto.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the interest
that Senegal has as a troop-contributing country in
the issue of women and peace and security, especially
during this decisive year, which will bring the question
of women to the top of the world's priorities.

