Mr. Kandangha-Bariki (Togo) (spoke in French):
Madam President, I want to thank your country, the
Republic of Rwanda, for having organized today's
debate on the issue of women and peace and security,
as well as to welcome your presence here among us
to lead this work. I would also like to welcome the
Secretary-General, whose presence indicates the
level of concern of the United Nations with regard to
violence against women. We also welcome the presence
ofthe Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic
of Korea. We congratulate Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
dealing with sexual violence committed in times of
armed conflict, for her commitment to consolidating the
progress made in the programme of action established
by her predecessor. We reiterate to her our full support.
Similarly, I would like to thank Ms. Keita Diakite, who
gave us a clear briefing on the situation with regard to
women in West Africa, and particularly in Mali.

Sexual violence today has reached an intolerable
level. In fact, women and girls are victims of all
kinds of violence, particularly rape, sexual slavery,
forced prostitution, pregnancy or forced sterilization,
forced marriage, kidnappings and many other form of
violence. The number of victims of sexual violence has
increased, particularly in Africa with the appearance of
new armed groups, such as the Mouvement du 23 Mars,
the Mai-Mai Morgan, the Forces democratiques de
liberation du Rwanda and the rebel Seleka coalition.

Sometimes, the Government forces of countries
in conflict have themselves also committed the same
Violations. Rape has become a war strategy aimed at
humiliating the enemy and establishing domination.
The figures relating to violence against women and
girls are considerable, particularly in the Central
African Republic, where the rebels of the Se'le'ka
coalition and the Lords Resistance Army operate. In
Mali, for example, we have also seen an increase in the
number of crimes of sexual violence at a time when the
northern region of the country was occupied by rebel
groups. Several dozen cases of sexual violence have
been reported.

We cannot fail to mention the situation in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, where for several years women and children
have been the favourite targets of armed groups. The
atrocities committed are sometimes impossible to
describe - simply horrific. Given those unimaginable
atrocities, we must ask ourselves why this is happening.
Looking for the underlying causes for the violence leads
us to deduce that it is basically linked to economic and
social considerations. Because of economic factors,
armed groups have resorted to organized sexual
violence so as to force the displacement of populations
in order to pillage the natural resources of the regions
where they operate. Likewise, they engage in violence
against entire communities, often on the basis of race,
ethnicity or religion, with the aim of establishing the
domination of their own ethnic group in order to satisfy
their political ambitions.

Another question that we ask ourselves pertains to
the reasons for the persistence ofthese serious violations
of human rights and the exponential increase in the
number of victims. There are sociological reasons, first
of all, which are linked to the refusal of women and
girls to report the facts to the authorities because of

their fear of reprisals, stigmatization or being punished
or rejected by their spouses or their communities.

It appears to us, then, that one of the reasons has to
do with the fact that the parties to the conflict do not
respect their obligations under the relevant international
legal instruments in the area of humanitarian law and
human rights in times of armed conflict, in particular
the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their 1977
Protocol. It has also been seen that States parties to a
number of conventions, such as the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against
Women and its optional protocol and the Convention on
the Rights of the Child and its optional protocol, lack
the political will to implement the relevant provisions.
Moreover, a number of Security Council resolutions
and presidential statements are not being applied by
States, especially not by the belligerents. They are
simply ignored by the parties involved despite the fact
that they have full responsibility to implement them.

Finally - and this is not an exhaustive list - the
early-warning mechanisms established in peacekeeping
operations show that they are limited in their ability to
effectively protect women and girls in times of armed
conflict. For all of those reasons, it is important that
the measures already undertaken by the United Nations
be strengthened in order to ensure respect for all the
relevant instruments and resolutions through, among
other things, the firm commitment on the part of States
to shoulder their responsibilities and deal with those
involved in serious violations of human rights.

Impunity cannot be the rule. In that regard, the
United Nations must help States to establish appropriate
cooperation mechanisms, particularly through bilateral
or regional extradition agreements to deal with
perpetrators. Effective mechanisms must also be put
into place that take into account the needs of women
who have been victims of sexual violence, who are
often abandoned to their fate.

The international community, above all the United
Nations, must become more involved on a legal level in
the search for solutions to the problems raised by the
commission ofthese horrific sexual crimes, particularly
rape. That means that they must encourage recourse to
national courts or international courts competent in
that area to apprehend the perpetrators and thus fight
against impunity. Unfortunately, in this area, the justice
system itself has many problems for various reasons,
including the fact that the judicial system is often slow

and not independent. The international investigation
commissions do not always have sufficient funds to
adequately establish the facts. There is also a lack
of cooperation between States and international
jurisdictions with regard to the implementation of the
international arrest warrants and other decisions.

Despite all of those difficulties and obstacles, we
can say that courageous action has been carried out by
the United Nations, particularly by UN-Women, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and a number
of international and non-governmental organizations.
Togo commends all of those efforts undertaken
to fight against this scourge and welcomes the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2013/l49).

Togo also believes that the international community
should become mobilized to an even greater extent to
put an end to the scourge, as it has done in the case of
the fight against major diseases. In that regard, several
measures should be taken.

First, we should seek to promote a change in the
sociocultural behaviour of men towards women. We
should eradicate preconceptions, customs and traditions
and all other practices based on the idea that women are
inferior, which have led to their being used as objects
during periods of armed conflict.

Secondly, we should encourage all members
of society, particularly men and boys, to actively
contribute to the prevention of all forms of violence
during times of peace.

Thirdly, we should promote or regularly conduct, at
all levels, campaigns and programmes to increase the
awareness and understanding among the public at large
of the different forms and consequences of the various
forms of violence against women, especially sexual
violence, which has serious consequences for women,
society and development.

Fourthly, we should promote cooperation between
international jurisdictions and national courts in
order to track down, arrest and bring to justice the
perpetrators of violence in order to put an end to the
culture of impunity.

