Mr. Sparber (Liechtenstein): At the outset, let
me join others in welcoming the report of the
Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual violence
(S/20l2/33). For the first time, it informs us of the dire
situation regarding the use of sexual violence as a
method of warfare in country-specific situations. Let
me also welcome the dedication with which the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Margot Wallstrom, and her
team have operationalized and implemented important
obligations deriving from resolutions 1820 (2008),
1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010). We are pleased to see
that the monitoring, analysis and reporting
arrangements on conflict-related sexual violence are
now included in the mandates of various United
Nations missions and that the terms of reference of
women protection advisers have been agreed upon.

Sexual violence is used not only as a method of
warfare during armed conflict, but also as a means to
surreptitiously continue conflict after the guns have
fallen silent. Sexual violence can be an important
indicator in determining when conflicts might turn
violent or when a conflict relapses into violence. To
fulfil its mandate towards conflict prevention, it is

therefore imperative that the Council continue to
receive information on sexual violence, including on
situations of concern that are not on its agenda.

Sexual violence not only attacks the dignity and
the body of the victim, but also tears at the
fundamental social fabric of the community. To build
sustainable peace, sexual violence must be addressed
throughout all stages of conflict resolution processes,
starting with ceasefire agreements and the presence of
adequate gender expertise at the peace table. When
provisions on sexual violence are not part of ceasefire
agreements, such violence can be used, in effect, to
continue acts of war, thereby undermining efforts to
reduce violence and leading to a cycle of vengeance.

Moreover, research shows that when sexual
violence is not addressed in the early stages of
mediation efforts, the issue is likely to be ignored
throughout later efforts to create and maintain peace.
Hence, we welcome the work of the Department of
Political Affairs to produce guidance for mediators on
addressing conflict-related sexual violence in
mediation processes and throughout conflict resolution
efforts. In that context, it is worthwhile recalling that
United Nations-endorsed peace agreements can never
promise amnesties for genocide, war crimes, crimes
against humanity or gross violations of human rights.

The Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) has significantly advanced international
law by including sexual violence in the definition of
crimes, in particular, as a crime against humanity. The
ICC therefore represents an important mechanism in
the fight against conflict-related sexual violence. We
call on the Council to use all means at its disposal to
strengthen the fight against impunity for those
violations by making better use of targeted measures,
including sanctions and referrals to the ICC. In
addition to collecting information on trends and
perpetrators of conflict-related sexual violence, we
must simultaneously ensure that support services for
victims are sufficiently funded.

My delegation has therefore pledged to continue
its financial support for the ICC Trust Fund for
Victims, which adopts a gender-based perspective
across all programmes and specifically aims to assist
victims of all forms of sexual and gender-based
violence. The Trust Fund provides direct assistance to
victims, and thus has an immediate impact on the
ground.

As a member of the group of five small States,
my delegation is a long-standing supporter of the
consistent mainstreaming of the Council's thematic
agenda into its country-specific work. To support the
Council's efforts in mainstreaming its thematic agenda
on women, peace and security, my delegation
organized a workshop, from 28 to 30 January in
Schaan, Liechtenstein, hosted by Foreign Minister
Aurelia Frick, on the implementation of the women,
peace and security agenda in Afghanistan. The
workshop was organized in close partnership with the
Liechtenstein Institute on Self-Determination at
Princeton University, and was supported by the
delegations of Afghanistan and Germany.

Since the findings and recommendations are
related to today's consideration, allow me to remind
the Council of the outcome report of the workshop. We
believe that the inclusion of some of the
recommendations within the renewed mandate of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
would lead to an increased participation of women in
peace processes, as well as more reliable information
with regard to the work of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in
Conflict.

