Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
If my voice sounds shaky, it is because I find it very
difficult to speak in this Chamber after Nadia. The walk
from my office to the Chamber today was a peaceful
one. I am lucky not to live in a conflict situation. I am
lucky not to know first-hand what human trafficking is.
I am lucky not to know what sexual violence in conflict
1s.

The closest I have ever been to such situations was
in March when the Secretary-General inaugurated the
Permanent Memorial to Honour the Victims of Slavery
and the Transatlantic Slave Trade at the entrance of
United Nations Headquarters. And I remember that at
that event he said clearly that the monument should lead
us not to forget the past but should above all make us
look to the future - and to take a look at the present
and at human trafficking, which is nothing less than the
modern form of slavery.

I therefore would begin by urging all representatives
and Members of the Organization to look at the Memorial
every time we enter United Nations Headquarters, and
to think of people such as Nadia who have not had the
life the rest of us have had and use all the tools we have
within our reach to fight with greater steadfastness
against human trafficking and sexual violence in
conflict.

I believe the presidential statement adopted today
(S/PRST/2015/25) is a good step in the right direction
but it is certainly not enough. And I congratulate the
Permanent Representative of the United States for
having awakened our consciences this afternoon to
the phenomenon of trafficking, which is something
of which we should really be ashamed. It is probably
one of the most deplorable phenomena currently being
experienced by humankind.

I would like to share two preliminary observations
with the Council, before attempting to propose some
additional measures to fight effectively against human
trafficking. My first observation is that sexual violence
strategically exercised by Daesh and other terrorist
groups can considerably increase the likelihood that
women and girls will be trafficked. I would like to
reiterate the words of the President of the Spanish
Government, who said a few weeks ago that it is more
dangerous to be a woman in armed conflicts than to be
a soldier. That is a very sobering remark.

My second observation is that it is unacceptable for
trafficking in women and children to be a part of the
political economy, or worse, the financial economy, of
terrorist groups. We must fight against this phenomenon
in an absolute and across-the-board manner.

Further, I would refer to two errors that we
simply should not make. The first is believing that the
phenomenon is limited only to Daesh; it is not limited
to Daesh, as the Deputy Secretary-General also said.
Let us keep in mind the 276 girls kidnapped from the
secondary school in Chibok. I think it is important
not to lose sight of that fact. The second is that human
trafficking is not a phenomenon exclusively linked to
terrorism. Rather, it is a phenomenon that is also linked
to the major conflicts we are experiencing today and
the huge number of refugees in the world. Refugees
and displaced persons give rise to making trafficking a
phenomenon that is easier to practice.

Turning now to the United Nations, I believe that,
although the existing legal architecture was inadequate
to help Nadia, and I completely understand that it
was, we need to begin by implementing it much more
effectively, in particular the Palermo Protocol and
other instruments. I can say with pride that my country,
Spain, recently approved a comprehensive plan of
action to fight trafficking in women and children for
the years 2015-2018, in order to ensure that there is no
recurrence of cases such as Nadia's.

Secondly, in strengthening the role of United
Nations and the Security Council in fighing human
trafficking, we must think about incorporating in the
mandates of sanctions committees such serious and
humbling subjects for humankind as the trafficking in
persons.

I would conclude by discussing the victims.
Council members know that my country has been a
standard-bearing country for defending the victims
of terrorism. We organized an Arria Formula meeting
of the Security Council at which, for the first time,
victims of terrorism were able to express themselves.
Today Ambassador Power made it possible for Nadia, a
victim of trafficking, to bravely take the floor and tell
her truth in the Security Council.

Finally, ifbeing a victim of terrorism is serious, one
can imagine how much more serious it would be to be
a victim of terrorism and trafficking at the same time.
Accordingly, I would address Nadia personally and
assure her that the delegation of Spain will continue to
fight to keep experiences like hers from ever recurring.
I hope that within a few years we will no longer need
United Nations funds to help people whose lives have
been as difficult as hers has been.

