Mr. Ben Lagha (Tunisia): At the outset, I express
my thanks to the presidency of Uganda for having
convened this important meeting and my appreciation
to the Secretary-General for his insightful report on
this topic (S/2010/498).

My delegation is particularly pleased to
participate in this debate on the occasion of the tenth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), a landmark
resolution of which Tunisia, as a non-permanent
member in 2000, was among the initiators, along with
Bangladesh, Namibia, Canada, Jamaica and Mali.
Today likewise, my country attaches great importance
to this topic and wishes to underscore its strong
commitment to the protection of women in conflict and
post-conflict situations, as well as to the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in all its
aspects.

Tunisia's interest in this subject arises from its
long-standing commitment to advancing gender
equality and women's empowerment, a strategic choice
made by my country upon gaining its independence in
1956 and which has become an integral part of its
national development policy. The advanced status
enjoyed today by Tunisian women, who hold 30 per
cent of decision-making and responsibility positions, is
one of the most prominent results of that choice. My
country firmly believes that peace, development and
democracy cannot be achieved and cannot be sustained
without the active involvement of women in public life
and in decision-making.

The tenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) is a propitious occasion to take
stock of progress and identify the shortcomings. This
resolution laid out the normative framework that has
guided United Nations work on gender-mainstreaming
policies across a broad spectrum of functions and
projects in which the United Nations is engaged.

It should be recognized that today there is greater
awareness of sexual violence in conflict, as well as an
increased focus on addressing it. It has become widely
accepted that women have a critically important
contribution to make regarding how peace can be
achieved and maintained, and therefore women's views
are more and more taken into account in the planning
and execution of peace processes, peacekeeping
operations and post-conflict recovery.

The appointments of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in
Conflict and the Under-Secretary-General for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women and
Executive Director of the new gender entity, UN
Women, to whom we reiterate our full support, are the
most recent achievements in this regard.

However, despite 10 years of efforts, significant
achievements are yet difficult to identify on the
ground, to use the Secretary-General's own words.
Commitments to the protection of women and girls
have fallen short of the pledges made. Women remain
deliberate targets of gender-based violence, in
particular sexual violence, in many conflict and post-
conflict areas, especially in Africa, as was the case
recently. These shameful crimes are a reminder that we
remain far from meeting the goals set in resolution
1325 (2000).

Moreover, women still have little access to
decision-making positions. Their participation in peace
and security processes remains far below desired
levels, and the gender composition of peacekeeping
missions is still unbalanced. In short, major gaps in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) remain to be
addressed.

The tenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000)
is also an occasion to reinvigorate our efforts at the
international and national levels. We share the view of
the Secretary-General that our efforts need to be
channelled through a single coherent and coordinated
approach, guided by a clear framework with concrete
and specific goals and targets.

It should be recognized, however, that national
ownership of the resolution is the key approach to
ensuring its effective implementation. The prime
responsibility to combat the use of rape as a tool of war
rests with Member States, as does the responsibility to
increase the participation of women in peace
operations and peace talks, to protect and promote the
rights of women and girls, and to integrate the gender
perspective in different policy areas.

Member States can make a particularly important
contribution to ensuring the full implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) through the development of
national action plans. Capacity-building and adequate
funding to implement these plans remain a challenge
that need to be addressed.

My delegation is pleased to state in this regard
that Tunisia is about to finalize and adopt its national
action plan for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). This plan will, among other things, encourage
women's training in peacekeeping and peacebuilding
so as to provide qualified personnel who could be
deployed in field-based United Nations operations. It
will also enhance predeployment training, with
particular focus on the special measures to protect
women and girls from gender-based violence. It will
also endeavour to contribute to international efforts
aimed at raising greater awareness about these issues
through the convening of special regional events.
Tunisia hosted a regional seminar on this topic in
September, which allowed participants from the
Western Mediterranean countries to exchange views
and national experiences regarding the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000).

Tunisia will further develop the implementation
of this resolution as part of its comprehensive approach
to gender equality and women's empowerment because
we believe that empowering women is a moral
imperative. It is also a sound policy and one of the
greatest investments that we can make.

In conclusion, the tenth anniversary, which
coincides with the launching of the African Women's
Decade, provides an opportunity to reaffirm the spirit
and core message of resolution 1325 (2000) that
sustainable peace is achievable only with the full and
effective participation of women. We must seize this
opportunity to refocus international attention on the
aims of the resolution and to galvanize all concerned
parties to turn good intentions into concrete action and
a tangible reality.

