Mr. Muchetwa (Zimbabwe): I wish to
congratulate you, Sir, on your initiative to convene a
meeting of the Security Council on such an important
subject as "Women and Peace and Security". Your
Government and country are well known for providing
leadership and a good example in promoting an active
and Visible policy of mainstreaming a gender
perspective into all policies and programmes.

Today's subject matter lies at the very centre of
our endeavours to promote the culture of peace in
human society. Rather than being treated as an agenda
item to be ticked off the Council's work programme at
the end of this meeting, this issue must be pursued on a
continuing basis, and can be ignored only at our peril.

When war breaks out, invariably we all pay a cost
as individuals, families and societies, and as nations
and members of the international community. Every
occurrence of an armed conflict is a serious indictment
of humanity. War is, in fact, a dehumanizing
experience. To the extent that armed conflict is a
challenge to all of humanity, everything relating to
peace and security becomes the responsibility of all of
us.

Today's specific reference to "women and peace
and security" reflects our acknowledgement of the
particular vulnerabilities of women in conflict
situations. It also reflects our acknowledgement of
current inequalities in decision-making and power
structures and, happily, our sincere endeavour to
address that untenable condition.

That women have everything to lose and an
unbearable cost to pay in the wake of armed conflict
establishes an undisputed mandate and role for them in
all matters of peace and security. Unfortunately, and as
correctly observed in the Windhoek Declaration of 31
May 2000 on the tenth anniversary of the United
Nations Transition Assistance Group:

"So far, women have been denied their full role in
these efforts, both nationally and internationally,
nor has the gender dimension in peace processes
been adequately addressed."

Every episode of war is accompanied by
chronicles of horrendous assaults on the dignity and
humanity of women.

Dastardly as it is, the victimization of womenfolk
has even been employed as a tool for the perpetration
of war in some cases. The humanitarian fallout of
armed conflict has almost always been
disproportionately burdensome on women as refugees,
as displaced persons or as traumatized heads of
households with nothing but debris for a new
beginning. Nobody can understand, let alone address
this fallout better than women themselves.

There is a glaring need for mechanisms that
enhance the protection of women and girls in conflict
situations. Current statistics show that more than three
quarters of all internally displaced persons and
refugees are women and children. My delegation
therefore supports Security Council calls upon all
concerned to refrain from committing human rights
abuses in conflict situations, to respect international
humanitarian law and to promote non-violent forms of
conflict resolution and a culture of peace.

However, it is obvious that preventive measures,
which have the potential to resolve disputes before they
erupt into Violent confrontations, offer the best possible
protection to all members of society. In this regard, it is
crucial that we recognize the important role of women
in the prevention and resolution of conflicts and in
peace-building. The organized involvement of women
at the grass-roots and other levels makes them the
linchpins of any early-warning mechanism.

This meeting offers us an opportunity to once
again call upon the United Nations and the
international community at large to assist and
cooperate with regional and subregional arrangements,
such as the Organization of African Unity's Mechanism
for Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution,
as they seek to build their capacity and develop
common indicators for early warning, taking into
account women and gender issues.

While distant international actors have tended to
highlight only political and economic disruptions in the
aftermath of armed conflict, the victims of war often
wake up to social disorientation and disorder. In these
collapsed communities, the role of women in re-
establishing and preserving social order is unparalleled.
As primary and continuing educators both in their
families and in their communities, women play an
important role in fostering a culture of peace in strife-
torn societies. We call for the promotion and
sustenance of this role on a continuing basis in order to
prevent the resurgence or escalation of conflict, so that
the culture of peace is inculcated in current and future
generations. This constitutes a sure way of planting the
seeds of a sustainable peace.

While women are not necessarily better
connected to the grass roots or more committed to
conveying the concerns of marginalized people, and
while there is no evidence to suggest that women at the
peace table are more committed than men to promoting
the greater good of the population at large, women are
more likely than men to have arrived at the peace table
via civil activism, often with first-hand experience of
the brutal consequences of violent conflict. Both men
and women suffer during war, but women are more
likely to be the targets of gender-based Violence.
Furthermore, the direct participation of women at the
peace table is the most secure way to ensure that
women's demands are incorporated into the
agreements.

The maintenance and promotion of international
peace and security cannot be realized without fully
understanding the impact of armed conflict on women
and girls, without effective institutional arrangements
to guarantee their protection and without women's full
participation in the peace process. We are pleased to
note that, in many parts of the world representing all
continents, from Africa to the Middle East and Asia,
from Latin America to Europe, women have not waited
to be invited to the peace table, but have risen to meet
the challenge, with an impact that has been, in some
cases, nothing short of legendary. While women clearly
need access to the peace table in order to advance
towards the goal of gender equality, the peace table
also requires women's participation to truly uphold the
principle of democracy and to lay the foundations for
sustainable peace.

