Mr. Ileka (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): I will be brief. Allow me at the
outset to express to you, Sir, my joy at seeing you
preside over the Security Council this month. Indeed,
you represent a country, Turkey, with which my
country, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, enjoys
very close relations marked by mutual respect and
esteem.

I also thank you for having kindly agreed to
convene this important meeting of the Security Council
on the situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in particular following the tragedy in Luvungi.
You have thereby given me yet another opportunity to
express my deep disgust over the mass rapes that took
place there a month ago over the course of four days
and nights, in full impunity. Those heinous acts,
wielded as a weapon of war, are yet another chapter in
the unspeakable suffering of the men and women of the
Congo over the course of more than a decade.

The Council has just heard an exhaustive briefing
from Assistant Secretary-General Atul Khare. I should
like to acknowledge its importance and to offer him my
full appreciation. Similarly, I wish most sincerely to
thank Ms. Margot Wallstrom, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
for her important statement on the issue at hand. The
briefings of the Assistant Secretary-General and the
Special Representative, which the Council will shortly
consider during its private consultations, should be
followed up with solutions, proposals and specific
action. Some delegations will be tempted to seek the
easy way out by imposing a litany of sanctions that
will have no impact in the reality of the deep equatorial
forests and will be entirely ineffective and incapable of
offering relief from the daily and now commonplace
horror that our men and women have, as I have noted,
experienced for more than a decade.

In the quest for appropriate solutions to these
mass rapes, which we all regret and condemn, I shall
begin by being politically incorrect. The criminals -
at least, those of Congolese nationality - who
committed these reprehensible acts are mostly young
and themselves the products, and thus the victims, of a
war that has gone on far too long and which we have
endured for more then 15 years. This should give us
food for thought with respect to the impact of the war
on the young people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

Nevertheless, a crime is a crime, and in this case
we need to take robust action against the criminals. I
recall that my Government takes the issue of sexual
violence most seriously. Sexual and gender-based
violence are unspeakable and should be condemned
wholeheartedly. They are a scourge that must be
eradicated. A small number of the Mai-Mai bandits
have been identified by the Congolese authorities and
are currently incarcerated and awaiting trial. Similarly,
I must inform the Council that the zero-tolerance
policy followed by the Government will be tirelessly
applied to the uncontrolled elements of the Forces
armees de la Republique democratique du Congo who
are found guilty of rape.
But that is not enough. In our humble view, the
Security Council and the Secretary-General would
benefit by instructing the Special Representative for

the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) to
fully implement the relevant provisions of resolution
1925 (2010), and particularly its paragraphs 6 and
sub-paragraphs (a), (c) to (f) and (h) of paragraph 12
under Chapter VII of the Charter in support of the
Government's pursuit, arrest and trial of the
perpetrators so that they can be held accountable for
their acts.

It will be recalled that, since 2008, we have
advocated more robust United Nations action, jointly
with us, to put an end to the activities of these agents
of death in our country. At that time, following the
pressure brought to bear by a number of
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) -
particularly international NGOs - that was not
possible. Today, those same NGOs are calling for an
urgent public inquiry into the rapes. I say yes to such
an inquiry. In any case, who could or would dare
oppose such an inquiry? At the same time, however, I
call for an end to a certain hypocrisy. Would such an
inquiry put an end to these atrocities. I doubt that, and
will speak out against this way of making the suffering
and misery of my compatriots into bargaining chips.

I remain convinced that, had the Council deigned
to give the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo sufficient personnel
and equipment in 2008, two years ago, we would be
much further along in the peace process today and in
re-establishing the authority of the Government
throughout the national territory. How many more
rapes and other violations of human rights must we
again condemn before we understand that we must
pursue these terrorists and assassins resolutely if we
are to promote a return to normalcy?

Other delegations will say that it is above all the
responsibility of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to ensure security throughout its
territory and to protect its civilians. That is true, but let
us stop turning a blind eye. If we could do so by
ourselves, we would not have needed MONUSCO or
the whole international presence in our country.
Similarly, if this Council believes that MONUSCO
cannot help us in that respect, then its presence is
totally useless and members will have to draw the clear
conclusion that it must be withdrawn so that we can
address our own demons, be they domestic or
imported.

Lastly, some delegations will seek to attach
blame for the dysfunctional prevention and response to
the news of the mass rapes. As well noted by the
Assistant Secretary-General, the area of North Kivu
province is larger than that of many European
countries. The province lacks those countries'
infrastructure and services. The rugged terrain and lack
of communications are an explanation, but not an
excuse. The province also has the densest
concentration of armed men in the country, but their
total number is sorely inadequate to covering the areas
of operations in comparison to the abilities of the
armed forces of the European countries. Finally, the
resources of the national police are truly pathetic. How
can the police act in such conditions against assassins
armed with war materiel. It is tantamount to mission
impossible.

What can and should we do? While I appreciate
the recommendations and ideas put forward by the
Assistant Secretary-General and the Special
Representative, 1 should also like to advance a limited
number of options.

In the near term, we should provide medical
assistance to the victims. Any assistance, wherever it
may come from and whatever its nature, is welcome. In
that regard, we wish sincerely to thank the United
Nations agencies that have already provided substantial
assistance.

Again in the near term, psychiatric and
psychological treatment for victims is essential. Rapes
having devastated several small villages around
Luvungi and Walikale, it will also be vital to create
space for dialogue that includes local chiefs, churches
and community networks, with a view to preserving the
fabric of the families of those villages as far as
possible. Moreover, perpetrators must be pursued,
apprehended and tried. The Government is already
working to that end. For its part, MONUSCO also
needs to do the same and to assist the Government, as I
have said, under Chapter VII.
12
We need to train and equip national and local
police in order to better ensure the protection of local
people while the army seeks to restore public order.
The Government has already made a request in that
regard. To date, the response has been one of deafening
silence.

Lastly, we need to support the national justice
system. It should be in a position to fully play its role
both in putting an end to impunity and in awarding the
victims restorative justice. It is urgent and important to
provide my country with sound national structures for
the protection of human rights and an appropriate
institutional framework under which criminals must
answer for their acts.

In conclusion, I would like to recall that, in
absolute terms, the Congolese people have by far paid
the heaviest price for the breakdown in international
peace and security, which has continued in the Great
Lakes region for nearly two decades now. Millions of
my sisters and brothers have been massacred. It is they,
not the nationals of another country, who are the
victims of sexual violence.

The horror goes on. Atrocities continue with little
hope for justice. We ask the Council to have the
courage and the political will to decide justly so that
the Congolese people can at last believe in improved
prospects, enabling them to envisage with much greater
calm the future of a country and a region where greater
peace, security, justice and prosperity will reign. For,
ultimately, restoring genuine peace will put an end to
those crimes that we all condemn.

