The Deputy Secretary-General: First, let me
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this open
debate to mark the fifth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000) and for devoting it to the topic of women's
participation in peace processes.

The principle of women's participation is at the
heart of resolution 1325 (2000). That landmark
document called on Member States to ensure increased
representation of women at all decision-making levels.

Awareness and recognition of that issue have
grown considerably in recent years, both in conflict-
affected societies and in the international community.
Yet five years after resolution 1325 (2000) was
adopted, in most parts of the world - and particularly
in those suffering from armed conflict - women are
still not adequately represented at the negotiating table,
the Cabinet table or the conference table. Clearly,
Governments must redouble their efforts.

So must we in the United Nations itself. We need
to appoint more women at senior levels of peace
operations, and in that we must be more proactive. But
we also rely on Member States to present us with
strong candidates.

We need to develop a more systematic approach
to consulting with women in the earliest stages of a
peace process, including in discussions on
constitutional development, judicial reform and
reconciliation. And we need to maintain the utmost
vigilance in preventing further instances of sexual
exploitation and abuse by United Nations personnel
and peacekeepers, which have caused such damage to
the standing of our peace operations and have inflicted
such wounds on the very people we are working to
help.

In a moment, the Council will hear a statement
from Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, who will present an
update on the progress of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations towards the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). They will also hear from
Ms. Rachel Mayanja, Special Adviser to the Secretary-
General on Gender Issues and Advancement of
Women, about the Secretary-General's report of
10 October on women and peace and security
(S/2005/636), which contains a system-wide action
plan on the implementation of the resolution. In
addition, the Council will hear a statement from
Ms. Noeleen Heyzer, Executive Director of the United
Nations Development Fund for Women.

The Secretariat looks forward to the Council's
advice and practical support in carrying out initiatives
to implement resolution 1325 (2000), in finding better
ways to empower women, in sharing good practices
and in enhancing women's role in decision-making at
all levels. I hope this debate will help move that
process forward. In that spirit, I wish members a most
successful meeting.

