Mrs. Baumann (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Madam, for convening this important debate
on women and peace and security. This is an important
opportunity to remind the international community of
the reasons why resolution 1325 (2000) and its follow-
up resolutions matter significantly for international
peace and security. And it further shows why Member
States need to pursue their efforts to implement the
provisions of those resolutions. Resolution 1325 (2000)
has become the main reference for addressing women's
rights and gender equality in conflict and fragility.
Its adoption in 2000 was emblematic of a shift from
national to human and people's security.

Human security, gender equality and the
empowerment of women and girls represent
cornerstones of Swiss foreign policy. The Swiss Federal
Department of Foreign Affairs recently launched its
first comprehensive strategy on gender equality and
women's rights, which highlights the agenda on women
and peace and security as one if its main pillars. The
reasons for that are obvious.

First, gender equality is key for the prevention of
conflict and violence, including violent extremism.
There is a connection between gender equality and
the readiness of a society to take up arms. Secondly,
respecting women's equal rights and ensuring their
inclusion in peace processes are simply a must.
Women and men negotiate equally well, but there are
still numerous obstacles that women face in trying
to be accepted. And let us remember here that the
participation of women in peace processes is not only
about a seat at the negotiation table, but also about the
ability and power to bring ideas and concerns to the
negotiation agenda. In that connection, Switzerland
commends the Secretary-General's strategy on gender
equality and his call for nominating more women as
special envoys, mediators and mediation experts.

Switzerland further commends General Assembly
resolution 70/304, on the role of mediation, which calls
upon Member States to promote the equal, full and
effective participation of women in all forums and at
all levels of the peaceful settlement of disputes and
conflict prevention and resolution. We have learned an
important lesson: we need to engage with civil society,
build capacities and empower women from early on.
We need to work on creating a pool of women who
are ready to get on board when time arrives, both as
mediators and negotiators. Switzerland therefore insists
that women must be included in all mediation training
and activities. We also promote local women's networks
that are active in peace and security.

Thirdly, the agenda on women and peace and
security contributes to better results for sustainable
peace, which requires an integrated approach based
on coherence between political and security measures,
development and human rights agendas. Switzerland
therefore promotes the connection between resolution
1325 (2000) and women's rights frameworks, which
makes it possible to leverage existing United Nations
and treaty bodies and their reporting mechanisms,
in particular the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women, the
universal periodic review and special mandates. That
will strengthen accountability for all actors, including
Governments, and prevent the fragmentation of the
gender equality and women's rights agenda. In that
spirit, Switzerland supports an initiative that focusses on
the implementation of general recommendation No. 30
of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination
against Women, which deals with women in conflict
prevention, conflict and post-conflict situations.

To conclude, let me mention two aspects that
Switzerland deems crucial forthe furtherimplementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), namely, the engagement of
men and boys in women's economic empowerment. The
agenda on women and peace and security should not
focus on women alone. The transformation of power
relations in societies must be at its heart. Engaging
men and boys, who may be allies, victims and potential
perpetrators, in all transformative actions is crucial for
any conflict and violence prevention strategy and will
benefit both women and men.

Finally, women's economic empowerment must
receive greater attention in post-conflict recovery
and State-building. Women's access to resources,
income and economic independence are important
enabling factors in efforts to enhance women's active
participation in matters of peace and security, which
ultimately leads to a safer world.

