Ms. Mejia Velez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Colombia has just lived through five decades of armed
conflict that particularly affected the most vulnerable
groups among our people, children and women, who
are nearly always in the most isolated and rural areas.
We face many huge challenges. Obviously, a country
that has experienced such prolonged conflict has also
suffered from the aberrant conduct of illegal armed
groups, which particularly affect our women and girls.
Therefore, as a representative of my Government, but
first and foremost as a woman and Colombian citizen,
I should like to emphasize the fact that we are guided
by our firm conviction that we should not tolerate the
existence of one single victim. Colombia aspires to an
end of conflict and the acheivement of lasting peace.

That is why, in reading the report (S/2014/181)
we are discussing in this open debate, convened by
the Nigerian presidency, I should have liked to have
seen recognition of the progress made by Colombia
in its public policy, domestic legislation and the
implementation of both. We should also like to have
seen the report reflect the crucial political juncture that,
as we move towards peace after 50 years of conflict,
initiated by President Juan Manuel Santos Calderon,
and which we hope will lead to a peace agreement with
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia.
This is a position of principle with respect not only to
sexual violence against women in conflict, but also to
all victims in general.

First, Colombia adopted a victims and land
restitution law in 2011, which included such huge
advances as in a programme to heal and fully reintegrate
victims and survivors of sexual violence in particular,
highlighting the problem and earmarking the necessary
resources for compensation, 57 per cent of which go to
women.

Secondly, in 2013, the year covered by the report,
the Colombian Government through its National
Council on Economic and Social Policy, which
guides all Government policies nationally and locally
where conflict generally breaks out, promulgated an
inter-institutional strategy to combat impunity and
provide comprehensive care to victims of gender-
based violence in the framework of armed conflict,
in particular victims of sexual violence. The strategy
seeks to identify the barriers that often hinder access to
justice and care for women victims of sexual violence.

Thirdly, in an historic achievement, the Defence
Ministry issued a protocol for the armed forces on
the prevention of and response to sexual violence, in
particular in conflict, which was drafted with civil
society and the United Nations office in Colombia.
Capacity-building was implemented for 350,000
soldiers and police officers in order to ensure its due

implementation.
Fourthly, our Ministry for Foreign Affairs, led by

Ms. Maria Angela Holguin Cuellar, began in 2011 to
promote initiatives to prevent the participation of boys
and girls in armed conflict - which, as Ms. Bangura
knows, often occurs - through a comprehensive
programme that provides opportunities and safe havens
for boys, girls and adolescents in districts where there
is likely to be a high level of recruitment of minors.
We call these safe havens "leisure houses" where
children can come into contact with art, sports and
new technologies during after-school hours, which are
often prolonged in our villages and countryside. These
havens are very well designed, with the help of our
communities. This year, they will be established in 25
municipalities.

Fifthly, I should like to emphasize the active role
of two women, plenipotentiaries of the Government
of Colombia in the peace process. They represent
a necessary complementary perspective in the
decision-making process to put an end to conflict in
my country. All of this demonstrates the Colombian
Government's political resolve to deal with the
phenomenon here.
I should not like to conclude without referring to
the recommendations in the report, and in particular
that on the 2012 the legal framework for peace and its
implementation. To paraphrase Ms. Bangura, we need
to move from legislation to implementation. We need to
strengthen the institutional and legal framework so that
all citizens can enjoy the necessary means to be sure of
access to truth, justice and reparation for all conflict-
related sexual violence. This is our daily priority. As
the report suggests, Ms. Bangura can certainly rely
on our commitment to continuing to comply with the
various Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 1960 (2010), and to coordinate with the
United Nations agencies, always provided that they are
in full agreement in the national authorities.

