Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): In honour
of the Swedish presidency of the Security Council,
let me try to say "thank you very much" in Swedish:
tack sci mycket. We are very grateful to you, Madam
President, for organizing this debate. It is important to
continue to ask that attention be paid to the meaningful
participation ofwomen in matters concerning peace and
security, as we did on 8 March concerning Afghanistan
(see S/PV.8199, and in almost every thematic meeting of the Security Council, including our discussion on the
Sahel today.

In our view, advocating for the meaningful
participation of women is the right thing to do, as it
has concrete, positive effects on peace and security.
We sincerely thank you, Mada President, the Deputy
Secretary-General and the Special Envoy of the
African Union for briefing the Security Council on
the joint visit. It shows how useful joint African Union
(AU)-United Nations high-level missions are as a
means to deepen the AU-United Nations partnership.
In particular, we were impressed with their meeting
with victims of sexual violence and those who may
easily fall prey to the latter. You touched us, Madam
President, when you spoke of the women in Bol who
wished only not to be raped.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands is deeply appalled
by those horrific acts of sexual violence, and the
perpetrators must be brought to justice. This debate
allows us to shed light on the critical role of women
in issues of peace and security in the broader Sahel
region. In that context, I will focus on three issues:
first, the security implications of climate change
on women; secondly, the challenges posed by the
widespread conflict between farmers and herders; and,
thirdly, the importance of women's participation in
decision-making.

Concerning my first point, the security implications
of climate change, the latter disproportionately affects
women in the Sahel, especially owing to its effects
on stability and security, which was underscored by
the concrete examples that you gave in your briefing,
Madam President. Climate change increases the
number of livelihoods lost as a result of conflict. It
decreases women's access to essential resources, such
as water, thereby reinforcing the negative consequences
of conflict for women. As elsewhere, those most
vulnerable in the Sahel become even more vulnerable,
and too often that means that women and girls are the
most affected. In that light, our responses to peace and
security challenges in the Sahel must be both climate and
gender sensitive. In that context, we reiterate the need
for adequate risk assessments and risk-management
strategies. The Council already emphasized that point
in resolution 2349 (2017) and has repeatedly recalled it
since then.

That leads me to my second point. Climate change
intensifies conflicts between farmers and herders
in the Lake Chad region and the wider Sahel region.
Such conflicts have devastating effects for women and
girls. Widows are evicted from their farmland. Women
and girls become even more vulnerable to economic
predation and sexual violence and exploitation. Conflicts
between farmers and herders are reportedly now killing
more women and girls than the Boko Haram crisis, and
Boko Haram by itself was the cause of a staggering
1,000 cases of conflict-related sexual violence last year
in Nigeria alone. Conflicts between farmers and herders
are becoming multidimensional threats affecting the
entire subregion. We join the Secretary-General in
calling on the Economic Community of West African
States and its States members to develop regional,
long-term and integrated strategies in response. We
feel that the United Nations system should support
that, and it is important to develop those strategies in
consultation with affected communities, in particular
with women's participation.

Lastly, concerning participation, you, Madam
President, and others rightly spoke of the vital role of
women's participation in decision-making.

We had an open debate on peacekeeping on
28 March (see S/PV.8218), at which we heard a briefing
by Fatimata Toure of Mali. She spoke of the severe
underrepresentation of women in the mechanisms
set up for the implementation and monitoring of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, in
which currently only 3 per cent of the people involved
are women. That number is way too low. In resolution
2423 (2018), the Security Council rightly urged the
Malian parties to ensure women's equal and meaningful
participation.

The Deputy Secretary-General visited Nigeria last
year. She was able to obtain an agreement that the food
distribution in refugee camps would be in the hands
of women. We felt that to be an excellent example of
women's empowerment, an approach that we believe
deserves to be followed up elsewhere, both in the Sahel
and beyond.

In conclusion, women's empowerment and gender
equality are closely connected to peace and stability
in society. There is overwhelming evidence to that
effect. The meaningful participation of women has the
potential to transform societies and build peace. Let
us all work towards that goal. The women and girls
of the Sahel and elsewhere need our support and the
commitment of the Council.

