Ms. Jashi (Georgia): I express our gratitude to
the United Kingdom presidency for convening today's
important debate. I also thank the Secretary-General,
Mr. Antonio Guterres, and the briefers for their
contributions to this debate.

Georgia aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union. I will add several
remarks in my national capacity.

Human trafficking is a global problem affecting the

most vulnerable: women, children, internally displaced
persons, refugees and minorities. This gruesome
violation of human rights translates to various other
forms of transnational organized crime. As our
colleagues have mentioned, terrorist groups often use
human trafficking as a weapon of terror and a source
of revenue. And increased movements of refugees and
migrants have significantly increased the threat of
human trafficking. We therefore welcome the increased
focus of the Security Council on this matter, with the
adoption of its most recent resolution 2331 (2016).

The United Nations and its agencies have a special
role to play at all levels, especially in addressing the
needs of internally displaced persons and refugees
in emergency and post-emergency settings. The
engagement of the Security Council on the matter will
further promote efforts to that end, alongside the New
York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants (General Assembly resolution 71/1).

Combating human trafficking has been a core
priority of the Georgian Government for over a decade.
The country has witnessed growing high appraisal of
its counter-trafficking measures by the global reporting
mechanisms. The latest 2016 Global Slavery Index, the
2016 United States State Department Country Report
on Human Rights Practices and the second evaluation
report of the Council of Europe's Group of Experts
on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings all
document the visible progress made by the country.
The Global Slavery Index ranks Georgia in second
place in terms of the actions taken, based on its gross
domestic product, and as the seventeenth country
among the 167 States taking the most effective counter-
trafficking measures.

While bearing witness to that progress, allow me
to summarize four success factors and lessons learned
with regard to what has worked in my country. First,
sustainable political commitment and a continuously
evolving legislative framework has been a key to success.
An adequate legislative framework has been put in place,
and human trafficking is explicitly criminalized in
Georgia. Most recently, Georgia consolidated its vision
in its national action plan structured around the so-
called 4Ps, namely, prevention, protection, prosecution
and partnerships around human trafficking.

Secondly, a multisectoral and multi-stakeholder
approach has been critical. The inter-agency
coordination council led by the Ministry of Justice and
including the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the Ministry
of Labour, Health and Social Affairs, non- governmental
organizations and the State fund for assistance for
victims has played a critical role.

Thirdly, focus should be placed on proactive
investigations. Georgia has almost doubled proactive
investigations over the past 4 years, thanks to the
special mobile teams and a special anti-trafficking unit
under the Ministry of Internal Affairs

Lastly, raising public awareness on trafficking
has been critical as an essential prevention measure.
Georgia will therefore intensify its public awareness-
raising efforts through its new information strategy,
which targets the most vulnerable groups.

The illegal occupation of the Georgian regions of
Tskhinvali, South Ossetia and Abkhazia by the Russian
Federation remains the main limitation preventing
the Government of Georgia from fully exercising its
counter-trafficking measures. There are no mechanisms
to effectively identify, investigate and prosecute alleged
trafficking-in-persons cases in the occupied territories,
while the occupying Power continues to place undue
restrictions on the local population, particularly
ethnic Georgians.

Finally, let me reiterate that Georgia remains
committedtoincreasinginternational cooperation aimed
at developing effective cross-border control measures.
We remain committed to stronger international efforts
for preventing and combating human trafficking and
modern slavery.

