The Secretary-General: I thank the Russian
presidency of the Security Council for organizing this
very important meeting to discuss women's role in
peace and security.

Women have a vital role to play in preventing
conflict and building and maintaining peace. But,
although that is now widely recognized, far too often
women are prevented from fully participating in
peacemaking and peacebuilding. We are all suffering
from the effects of that deficit. In our interconnected
world, insecurity and conflict in one country or region
affects us all.

Nine years ago, I addressed the Council during its
first open debate on women and peace and security (see S/PV.5766). Since then, the United Nations has made
some progress in the promotion of the women and peace
and security agenda. The establishment of UN-Women
amplified women's voices and created momentum for
women's leadership on peace and security. The Office
of my Special Representative on Sexual Violence in
Conflict is focusing international attention on one of
the greatest moral challenges of our time. The Council
adopted new resolutions on women and peace and
security. Last year's high-level reviews of our peace
operations and peacebuilding architecture, and the
global study on women and peace and security, spurred
new commitments and determination.

When I became Secretary-General, there were four
countries with national action plans on women and
peace and Security; today there are 63. Ipersonally have
appointed many women as Special Envoys and Special
Representatives. I also appointed the first female Force
commander of a peacekeeping mission and the first
female Police Adviser. Hundreds of thousands of women
and girls are being helped and supported by United
Nations programmes in conflict-affected countries.
National and international tribunals have issued
verdicts that are historic milestones for gender justice.
Many countries have committed to action to prevent
and address conflict-related sexual violence. Perhaps
most important of all, we see more inclusive peace
processes and peace agreements. The Colombian peace
talks included a group dedicated to gender perspectives
and women's rights. More women than ever before are
making decisions for peace and security in the halls of
Governments and international organizations.

I am painfully aware that, despite all those steps,
the situation remains far from equitable. I am ashamed
of the many atrocities that continue to be committed
against women and girls, including by some of our own
peacekeepers. I am angered by the continued political
exclusion of women. Peace processes, humanitarian
programmes and peacebuilding plans ignore them
and fail to meet their needs and protect their rights.
Look at the pictures of peace negotiations on Syria or
Yemen. There may be one woman at the table or in one
delegation. That is fully representative of the general
picture. And all that is against a backdrop of women
and girls suffering inequalities that are aggravated
by conflict, who are targeted for particularly brutal
crimes by violent extremist groups, including Da'esh
and Boko Haram. As we carry this agenda forward and
build on past efforts, I urge members to take several
specific steps.

First, I urge the Council to seek information
on women and girls in all its reports and briefings
on countries affected by conflict. Without relevant
information, peacekeeping mandates will never meet
the needs of women and girls. Too often, what is not
counted does not count.

Secondly, I urge the Council to hold all United
Nations peace operations accountable for putting
women and girls at the centre of their work.

Thirdly, I encourage the members of the Council
to listen to civil society, and in particular to women's
groups, in all their deliberations on conflict prevention
and peacebuilding.

Fourthly, I urge the Council to make sure that there
are funds available for those activities. The failure to
fund this agenda is possibly the greatest obstacle we
face to implementation. I call on members to earmark
a minimum of 15 per cent of funding on peace and
security to programmes that address the needs ofwomen
and girls, and to make full use of the new pooled fund
that was created to channel more resources to women's
organizations working for peace.

And, fifthly, I encourage the Council to consider
ways to make peace negotiations more diverse. After
more than 15 years of advocacy, that has not happened.
Clearly, new ideas and stronger action are needed.

In failing to include women and girls in peacemaking
and peacebuilding processes, we are not only failing
women and girls, we are failing the world. This agenda
is not an optional extra, or a favour to women and
girls. It is fundamental to building sustainable peace
and ending the conflicts that are causing so much pain
and damage around the world. There is more research
emerging every year to demonstrate that. Let me remind
the Council of one finding among many, namely, that
peace accords are 35 per cent more likely to last at least
15 years if women are at the table.

I will never forget the strength of the thousands
of women and girls whom I have met in some of the
harshest places on the planet ravaged by war. I have
been inspired many times by women who are working
to prevent conflict and build peace, and by the sacrifice
of countless women human rights defenders. I urge the
Security Council to do everything possible to create the
conditions for peace in our world. I will never stop, and
we must never stop, in the urgent drive to bring women
into their rightful place at the heart of building peace
and security.

