Ms. Power (United States of America): On
behalf of the United States, I should like sincerely
to thank those countries that voted in favour of
resolution 2272 (2016), which was adopted today.
The resolution underscores the Security Council's
responsibility - our responsibility - to address the
scourge of sexual exploitation and abuse in United
Nations peacekeeping, which has been allowed to
persist for far too long. Impunity for such abuses clearly
undermines our efforts to promote international peace
and security. The resolution makes clear that it is our
job to ensure that there is accountability when men,
women and children are abused by the Blue Helmets
whom the Council has sent to protect them.

The resolution signals the Security Council's strong
support for the zero-tolerance policy of the United
Nations and for the ongoing efforts by the Secretary-
General to strengthen this institution's response,
reporting and remedial measures to prevent and combat
sexual exploitation and abuse among United Nations
peacekeepers. The resolution underscores the fact that
peacekeepers found guilty - not those accused, those
found guilty - of committing sexual exploitation
and abuse do not deserve to serve in United Nations
peacekeeping missions, and sends a clear message to
troop- and police-contributing countries that fail to
take action to prevent or punish credible allegations of
sexual abuse and exploitation, as well as to all States
Members of the United Nations and to United Nations
bodies, to ensure that these investigations are carried
out thoroughly, promptly and impartially.

I should also like to echo my French colleague's
comment that the colour of the helmet means little to
the victim. All of us, wherever we serve, whether we
wear a blue or a green or some other colour helmet,
have a responsibility to live up to the standards that
this resolution tries to enshrine. All of us have a
responsibility with respect to individuals who serve us
overseas, in the same way that we have a responsibility
within our own borders to ensure that these kinds of
crimes are never carried out and that when they are
carried out the perpetrators are held accountable.

The resolution adopted today endorses the decision
of the Secretary-General to repatriate United Nations
peacekeeping units that demonstrate widespread or
systemic sexual abuse and exploitation, and it requests
that the Secretary-General repatriate all uniformed
personnel from a contributing country in a given
mission if that country fails to take appropriate steps
to address credible allegations of sexual exploitation
and abuse, fails to hold the perpetrators accountable or
fails to inform the Secretary-General of the status of
such efforts.

I should like, if I could, to respond to Egypt's
intervention. We were accused, implicitly, politely, of
having an ulterior motive. I confess that I do have an
ulterior motive. My ulterior motive is actually, finally,
to do something about a cancer: the cancer of sexual
exploitation and abuse against people who trust the
United Nations flag. They see a peacekeeper coming
their way and they think, this is someone who is going
to help me; they do not think, I have to run, this is
someone who is going to rape me. That is not what they
think. That is not what they should ever think; but that
is what they are going to think, and that is with some of
them do think, because there is not accountability for
the crimes committed that is in any way commensurate
with what appears to be the scale of this problem.

So that is my ulterior motive, I confess. Sue me.
I also take note of the very important comment that
Egypt made, of the admission that the measures
contained in the resolution - measures requiring
accountability - would not have been passed by the
General Assembly. We agree; the General Assembly
has been totally paralysed. There are countries within
the negotiations that are going on as we speak that
have tried to water down the recommendations that
the Secretary-General has made. It would be one thing
if we were succeeding, if the system was working.
We come in here every day; we lament, we condemn.
We condemn the abuse and we condemn the lack of
accountability, and then we go to the General Assembly
and some of us try to water down provisions to try
to strengthen the system. What is up with that? One
cannot simultaneously try to water something down
in the General Assembly and then complain when
the body that sends peacekeepers out to try to protect
people actually takes responsibility for the fact that
some of those who were supposed to do the protecting
are committing sexual abuse. We cannot have it both
ways.

If the General Assembly had been able to actually
put in place methods for accountability, if the system
were working for girls like the ones Matthew just
quoted, who are now left with the children of the people
who have come and raped them and then gone back to
their countries never having been held accountable - if
the system had prevented these kinds of acts, or least
had some kind of accountability, we would not be
having this conversation. We are here only because it
just keeps happening.
So I think that it is very, very strange to hear
Member States call on the one hand for more aggressive
action or more accountability and then try to punt the
issue to a body that for years has been unable to come to
a consensus; and with several countries, again including
countries on the Council, trying to water down what
happens in the General Assembly, no reasonable person
could expect a different result.

Let me conclude with two messages. To the tens of
thousands of troops and police who serve honourably
in United Nations peacekeeping operations, we salute
them unequivocally for putting their lives on the line,
with little fanfare or recognition, for people who live in
countries far from their own. We and the civilians that
they protect with their bravery are completely indebted
to them for their service. As I did yesterday (see S/PV.7642), I would single out those members of the
Council that have contributed so many peacekeepers,
including Egypt, Senegal, China, Uruguay and, of
course, the United Kingdom, which is becoming
involved again. As a country that does not contribute
a lot of troops, we are in awe of their service. To the
victims of sexual exploitation and abuse by United
Nations peacekeepers, we pledge that we will do better.
We will do better to ensure that the Blue Helmets we
send as their protectors will not become perpetrators.
That is what we are striving for. But if they do, this
resolution demands that we, the Council, ensure that
the people who commit such violations, who violate the
good name of the United Nations and the good names of
their countries, be held accountable.

