Mr. Bui The Giang (Viet Nam): I thank you,
Mr. President, and the delegation of Uganda for
convening this important high-level meeting to mark
the tenth anniversary of the historic resolution 1325
(2000). We thank the Secretary-General for his report
contained in document S/2010/498, on women and
peace and security, as well as his report contained in
document S/2010/466, on women's participation in
peacebuilding, which he presented to the Council a few
days ago.

We congratulate Ms. Michelle Bachelet on her
appointment as Executive Director of the newly
established United Nations Entity for Gender Equality
and the Empowerment of Women (UN Women), and
we welcome her participation in today's meeting of the
Council. We assure her of our full cooperation in the
execution of her important mandate.

Following the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), we have noted with appreciation the Security
Council's increased commitment to women's role in
peace and security, which has been illustrated not only
in its active participation, but also in its role as key
promoter in the United Nations system in advancing
the women and peace and security agenda. We are
heartened to see greater awareness at both the national
and international levels, resulting in an unprecedented
number of activities carried out in highly diverse forms
and in a wide range of areas by all stakeholders to
promote women's role and rights in relation to peace
and security.

Most visible at the international level is the better
coordinated work within the United Nations system -
particularly among the Special Adviser on Gender
Issues, the Department of Economic and Social Affairs,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
United Nations Population Fund, the United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM), the United
Nations Development Programme and the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs - in
mainstreaming gender in peace and security, and in
addressing issues that may impact women's
participation in peace processes, including
humanitarian and socio-economic issues.

We particularly commend the adoption early this
year of the three-year Joint Strategy on Gender and
Mediation initiated by the Department of Political
Affairs and UNIFEM, and the proposed seven-point
action plan, which contains actions needed to enhance
women's participation in peacebuilding - a
fundamental factor to prevent war and empower
women. In this connection, we sincerely hope that the
newly established UN Women, once it has completed
its transitional arrangements, will become a stronger
entity and take the lead in the women and peace and
security agenda. At the national level, among other
things, the national action plans being designed,
adopted and put in place represent a meaningful
contribution. We hope that adequate resources will be
made available to ensure the full implementation of
these plans.

Against such a backdrop, it is worrisome to learn
from the Secretary-General's report that

"10 years after the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), significant achievements are difficult to
identify or quantify. The conditions and
opportunities that women and girls face in
situations of armed conflict continue to be
abhorrent and effective methods for monitoring
impact are lacking." (S/2010/498, para. 3)

My delegation is of the view that much more
remains to be done to better protect women and girls
from all forms of violence in conflict and post-conflict
situations, further empower them and increase their
participation in all stages of peace processes. The fact
that women have constituted less than 8 per cent of
negotiators in United Nations-mediated peace
processes and less than 3 per cent of peace agreement
signatories since 1992; that only 16 per cent of peace
agreements between 1990 and 2010 contained
references to women; and that less than 3 per cent of
post-conflict spending is dedicated to women is
unacceptable.

Women, being not merely victims, but rather
agents of change, should be able to involve themselves
more in peace talks to better reflect their priorities in
the text of peace agreements. Moreover, having
emerged from many destructive wars, we in Viet Nam
are convinced that women can play an active role in
peacebuilding and reconstruction if and when they are
empowered economically, financially, politically and
institutionally, and when their special needs, including
health and education, are properly addressed. With this
in mind, we hope that the seven commitments listed in
the Secretary-General's report contained in document
S/2010/466 can be fully honoured so as to ensure
women's equal involvement as participants and
beneficiaries in local development, employment
creation, income generation, front-line service delivery,
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes in post-conflict situations.

My delegation appreciates the monumental work
done by United Nations entities, in consultation with
Member States and civil societies, in building the set of
indicators annexed to the Secretary-General's report
(S/2010/498). We share the view that the indicators can
provide a helpful tool kit for the United Nations system
and those countries that wish to use them on a
voluntary basis. At the same time, we believe that
certain indicators need more careful consideration in
order for the whole set to be balanced and of an
encouraging rather than an imposing character, and
hence more effective.

As a nation deeply committed to women's
emancipation and empowerment, Viet Nam has always
supported the full implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), and our contribution to the drafting and
adoption of resolution 1889 (2009) by the Security
Council in October 2009 is just one example of this. In
the same vein, we seriously take this review of the
10-year implementation of RESOLUTION 1325 (2000)
as a chance to reinforce our determination to work
harder with the international community, the United
Nations system first and foremost, towards a world of
genuine equity and equality for women.

