The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
an additional statement in my capacity as representative
of Bolivia, which, I promise, will be very short.
IfI may, I would like to read out rule 39 of the
Security Council's provisional rules of procedure, for
the benefit of the representative of Israel:

(spoke in English)

"The Security Council may invite members of the
Secretariat or other persons, whom it considers
competent for the purpose, to supply it with
information or to give other assistance in examining
matters within its competence."

(spoke in Spanish)

It was the Security Council that made the invitation.
I believe that the immense majority not just of the
members of the Council but of those who were kind
enough to participate in this debate was very generous
in warmly welcoming the involvement of civil society
in today's debate.

On the other hand, if we wish to speak of the
human rights situation in my country, I would like to
propose to the representative of Israel that his country
allow a delegation, as has been requested on a number
of occasions by the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, to visit the
occupied territories in order to see the human rights
situation on the ground of the Palestinians living in
territories occupied by Israel. We have our doors open
to any delegation or committee that wishes to come and
look at the human rights situation in my country, of
which we are absolutely proud.

I have just one more comment i I promise it will

be the last - the greatest enemy of the Palestinian
people today - the more than 5 million Palestinian
refugees who cannot return to their lands - is the

Israeli occupation, the illegal Israeli occupation. When
the occupation ends, then the Palestinians will be able
to enjoy the exercise of their self-determination and
resolve the problems they face for themselves.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no more speakers inscribed on my list. I
would like to thank all participants for their patience,
commitment and contribution to today's debate. I would
especially like to thank the staff of the Secretariat, in
particular the entire support team that worked with us
throughout this long day. A special thanks goes to the
interpreters and translators.

The meeting rose at 8.25 pm.
