Ms. Moutchou (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, my delegation wishes to thank the Peruvian
presidency for organizing an open debate on this topic,
the significance of which is seen in its urgency, acuity
and impact on societies. This debate is timely, as the
proliferation of sexual violence in conflict concerns
us all, making the need for joint action more urgent
than ever.

Violence has always been reprehensible, regardless
of who are the victims. However, sexual violence in
times of conflict is even more so. Unfortunately, this
violence persists. It has become systematic, widespread
and appallingly brutal. No woman, girl, man, boy or
old person is spared - not even infants. We strongly
condemn these practices from another era, which
continue to this day. Our debate today is a strong and
eloquent illustration of this condemnation.

Sexual violence not only affects victims; it gnaws
at and wears down communities and societies in their
entirety. It seeks to wound the body, mutilate dignity,
destroy the social fabric, destabilize, ruin and terrorize
societies affected by conflict, and nips any effort at
reconciliation and reconstruction in the bud.

In June, we will celebrate the tenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1820 (2008), which in
paragraph 4 stresses that

"rape and other forms of sexual Violence can
constitute a war crime, a crime against humanity,
or a constitutive act with respect to genocide".

Faced with the persistence of these heinous acts,
indignation is no longer enough. Action must be
taken and real solutions proposed to help survivors
rebuild. Effective measures to prevent and respond to
acts of sexual violence can contribute greatly to the
maintenance of international peace and security. In this
regard, allow me to highlight the following few points.

First, the root causes of conflict-related sexual
violence must be addressed, promoting peacebuilding
and sustainable human development and encouraging
national efforts to end gender-based discrimination.

Secondly, access to justice for victims must be
strengthened, and impunity must be combated by
bringing the perpetrators and those responsible for
sexual violence to justice.

Thirdly, the participation of women in discussions
on conflict prevention and resolution, the maintenance
of peace and security and post-conflict peacebuilding
must be facilitated, and the empowerment of women and
their full and equal participation in decision-making
must be supported.

Fourthly, religious leaders have an influential role
to play in combating the abuse of religion to justify
violence. They must be encouraged to speak out
strongly, firmly and quickly against violence.

Fifthly, cooperation with local actors and
community leaders is crucial, as they can identify
precursor signs of acts of sexual violence, provide early-
warning systems and propose appropriate prevention
and protection strategies.

Sixthly, the stigma surrounding victims of sexual
violence and children born of sexual Violence must be
reverse. These Victims must be accompanied medically
and reintegrated socially and economically.

I take this opportunity to pay tribute to the
Secretary-General, the penholder of the United
Nations strategy to combat sexual exploitation and
abuse, which gives priority to the rights and dignity of
victims and calls for the implementation of the zero-
tolerance policy. The Kingdom of Morocco fully and
firmly supports this policy of zero tolerance and works
tirelessly, taking all measures necessary to eradicate
these despicable acts. We are confident that this
strategy should change the game. My country, which
is a member of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace
and Security, chaired by Canada, and of the Group of
Friends for Gender Parity, led by Colombia, supports
their international commitments to combatting all
forms of sexual violence.

In conclusion, protection, prevention and the
fight against impunity must be the watchwords of our
societies. International law, including international
humanitarian law, must be applied without concession.
It is our responsibility to prevent sexual violence,
protect individuals, respond to the needs of victims,
and ensure that perpetrators are held fully accountable.
It is high time to invest in peace, promote human
and sustainable development, restore dignity to the
victims and make the project of rebuilding societies
and perpetuating peace a reality, so that no one is
left behind. That has been our responsibility since we
adopted the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
That is our responsibility and our duty.

