Mrs. Vargas (Honduras) (spoke in Spanish):
There can be no peace without justice. Without the
tangible support of justice, women will continue to be
victims of violence, for lack of an instrument for world
peace and security. Women who survive war have the
hard task of surviving in the future that war leaves
them. They face humiliation, desolation, despair and
the burden of supporting their families in a world that
has shown itself to be, at the very least, savage.

We cannot talk of peace and security unless we
take concrete action to tackle the terrible injustices
people experience in the world of war. Those injustices
break the peaceful soul of communities, restrict the
participation of women in the socio-economic and
political spheres and leave the next generation weak in
health, opportunities and hope for equality.

There is international awareness. However,
women today still do not have a truly influential role in
peace negotiations or in the elaboration of economic
policies and programmes. On many occasions, they do
not even have an active role in the decisions made in
their own families. Change has to begin at home, in the
expectations among families and communities of what
women can contribute. There has to be a conviction
that women must prepare themselves for taking a key
and equal role in peace processes. To put it most
simply, relations between woman and man must be
improved at all levels. It is a question of not allowing
justice to be sacrificed to the quest for freedom and
peace.

Important strategic plans have been proposed to
foster the participation and protection of women in war
and peace, but action is largely lacking. There is talk of
involving women in peace processes, but even the most
basic support has failed to materialize. Without that
support, the role of women in the search for peace and
security will continue to be limited. Women know the
brutality of war over a shared history passed down
from one generation to the next. It has been shown that
because of their vision and special skills, women bring
to the table of peace negotiations a supremely valuable
ability and dedication to contribute to world security.
Without a fair opportunity for the participation of
women, peace will be long in coming.

Women need to be judges, governors, negotiators
and business people. They must help to rebuild the
world when it has been beaten down by conflict.
Women must be present at every stage of decision-
making for democracy, peace and justice. Only that
way will there be protection from violence and
Violence be prevented, in times of peace and in times
of war.

The Government of Honduras is committed to
supporting all initiatives to strengthen the participation
of women. That will undoubtedly have a positive
impact on speeding world development.

