Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I
welcome this debate on a vital resolution. It was good
to hear, this morning, from members of the United
Nations family and, later this afternoon, we will hear
from civil society representatives. My thanks, as well,
to those who contributed so valuably to the area
meeting that we held yesterday.

I wish to align myself with the statement to be
made in a little while by the representative of Finland
on behalf of the European Union.
The United Kingdom is committed to ensuring
that women are provided with the opportunity to
participate fully in all stages of the peace process -
from early ceasefire negotiations to reforms of the
security sector and restoration of the rule of law,
through all stages of a conflict. The full participation
of women in peace consolidation is vital to sustained
and long-term stability. But it is much more than
that f it is essential that the rights of women, so often
the victims, be respected. This means responding to all
the problems that women confront in post-conflict
situations, and encouraging their empowerment
through education, employment and participation in the
political process - the areas identified in resolution
1325 (2000).

Peacebuilding is difficult enough; 50 per cent of
the countries involved will relapse into conflict within
five to ten years. Excluding women from the process
only makes peace more uncertain.

We have high expectations of the Peacebuilding
Commission. It should produce greater coherence in
the total peacebuilding effort. That includes ensuring
that gender is integrated at the very start of our efforts
to establish peace, and carried through in all its
different aspects: disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, security sector reform and the rule of
law.

The recent meetings on Sierra Leone and Burundi
have identified the need for a more gender-sensitive
approach. We must now see this through, while
concrete steps are taken to build peace in these
countries.

As my Norwegian colleague described, the
Netherlands, Norway and the United Kingdom recently
participated in a joint donor review of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in the United
Nations missions in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Liberia, Sierra Leone and Kosovo. I am happy
to note that progress is being made - but six years on,
that should be the norm and not the exception. Gender
mainstreaming is not taking place; there is an absence
of clear monitoring and evaluation mechanisms, and
therefore accountability is weak. Gender is not
included in a systematic or coherent way in either the
establishment or the running of peacekeeping missions.

The problem is implementation: implementation
by Member States, where national plans are much
needed; implementation by the countries emerging
from conflict; and implementation by the United
Nations family. We all have a responsibility.

Within the United Nations system, there are many
dedicated and serious efforts being made to cope with
the issues in resolution 1325 (2000), but they lack
coherence - they are not necessarily coordinated; it is
not always clear who is responsible for doing what;
and I am not sure that we can consistently say that
relationships are cooperative and not conflictual.

Let me end with a challenge to the United
Nations system: Can we set clear objectives for each of
our peace support operations in every post-conflict
country? The objective is simple - to implement
resolution 1325 (2000). In setting that objective, can
we then develop an action plan, specific to each
country with the consent of the Government of that
country, in which the individual funds, programmes
and agencies assume particular responsibility,
designated so, for the separate elements in resolution
1325 (2000)?

If that were done, as we then looked at country
situations, the Council would be able to assess the
objectives, the intended implementation and the
success in achieving precise outputs. This would be a
systematic application of the resolution and represent
accountability for how it was actually being
implemented.

I hope that in response to this debate the
Secretariat can endorse such an approach, and take on
the responsibility of putting a degree of order and
planning into the way in which this issue is addressed
and the way in which we give effect to resolution 1325
(2000).

As the United Nations looks to new ways to
ensure peace consolidation and to reform our service
delivery, we must accept that women should be full and
equal participants in all parts of the process. To do
otherwise is an injustice to them and an injustice to the
cause of peace, which we seek to serve. We are all
obliged, therefore, to work together to ensure the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). That should
be only too apparent. We all have a part to play in it.
So, now let us plan and be clear that we are doing it,
and that we know how we are doing it.

