Mr. Grono: I thank the Security Council for taking
up the issue of human trafficking in conflict today. The
reality is that armed conflict leaves civilians highly
vulnerable to extreme forms of exploitation, such as
forced labour, slavery and slavery-like practices. We are
seeing that most starkly right now with the enslavement
of Yazidi women and girls by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham (ISIS). The massive displacement of
civilian populations that usually accompanies conflict
also facilitates the movement of people into these
highly exploitative situations. This movement for the
purpose of exploitation is the very definition of human
trafficking provided by the Palermo Protocol.

The connection between conflict and human
trafficking is not new and often involves violations of
other international norms against slavery, forced labour,
torture and enforced disappearance. The historical
context to all of this was set out in a report entitled
Unshackling Development, authored by Dr. James
Cockayne and issued by the Freedom Fund and United
Nations University, which pointed out that for almost a
century the League of Nations and the United Nations

system have addressed human trafficking, forced
labour and traditional forms of slavery all together.

In the Second World War, there was widespread
enslavement, forced labour and sexual slavery, and
these crimes were prosecuted and condemned by the
Nuremburg Military Tribunals and the Tokyo Tribunal.
More recently, Security Council-backed tribunals have
found that human trafficking, sexual slavery and forced
labour have all also played a role in conflicts in the
Balkans, West Africa and Cambodia. The important
work of these tribunals has helped to make it clear that
there will be no impunity for slavery crimes.

But unfortunately, the connection between
conflict, slavery and human trafficking only seems to
be growing. This is most obviously the case with ISIS.
In most conflicts slavery is relatively hidden because
it is utterly taboo, but ISIS is directly challenging that
taboo. Over 3,000 Yazidi women and girls are thought
to be currently enslaved by ISIS, which is advocating
for the revival of slavery through official policy and
media outlets, organizing slave markets and contract
registries, and even issuing official how-to manuals.
ISIS has institutionalized slavery and sexual violence
in order to increase recruitment, by promising male
fighters access to women and girls, to populate a
new caliphate through forced pregnancy, to terrorize
communities into compliance, to displace populations
from strategic areas, and to generate revenue through
trafficking, the slave trade and ransoms. We shall be
hearing shortly from Nadia Murad Basse Taha on the
unconscionable reality of enslavement under ISIS.

We are also seeing enslavement in conflicts in
Africa. In Nigeria, the militant group Boko Haram has
a clear policy of enslavement, child recruitment, sexual
slavery and forced marriage. It has abducted over 2,000
people. Its leader, Abubakar Shekau, has proclaimed
that the hundreds of women and girls it has kidnapped
will be forced into marriage with his fighters, or "be
sold in the market".

More broadly, conflicts in Iraq, Syria, Libya and
the Sahel are displacing huge numbers of people and
leaving them vulnerable to human trafficking and
enslavement. Individuals displaced from these conflicts
are also being exploited elsewhere, including in forced
marriage, in domestic work, on construction sites and
in commercial sexual exploitation, both in the Middle
East and North Africa, and further afield. Increasingly
closed borders and a growing unwillingness on the part
of wealthier States to accept refugees also exacerbate
these problems, as does the failure of officials in States
with a high incidence of trafficking to enforce the laws
already in place.

Conflict is the source of that displacement and
vulnerability. It is the engine that drives the growth of
human trafficking networks. The same is true in South-
East Asia, particularly in relation to the displacement
from Myanmar, which is driving Rohingya into forced
labour, including in the supply chains that provide
seafood to Western supermarkets. Even if individuals
set out on what they believe is voluntary migration,
they may discover along the way or upon arrival that
they are subject to illegal exploitation, and are thus the
victims of human trafficking.

And sometimes human trafficking does not even
involve crossing international borders. Many of the
conflicts with which the Council is wrestling in Africa
are also driven by industrial-scale exploitation of
conflict resources, fuelled by forced labour. In that
respect, it is worth noting that the Council has taken
important steps to encourage corporate due diligence
to prevent conflict resources from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Eritrea and Somalia from
entering global supply chains.

In other cases, the human trafficking involved
is the movement of children into forced labour for
armed groups, as we have seen so gruesomely with the
Lord's Resistance Army in Uganda and neighbouring
countries.

Finally, it is also clear that, in at least one other
situation already on the agenda of the Security Council,
that of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, there
are questions not about non-State armed groups, but
State involvement in human trafficking. In his recent
report to the General Assembly, the Special Rapporteur
on human rights in the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea claimed that up to 50,000 North Koreans had
been sent to work abroad in conditions that amounted
to forced labour and human trafficking, in order to
circumvent United Nations sanctions and earn billions
in foreign currency for the country.

There are several things the Security Council can
do to address some of the most egregious abuses.

First, the Council should send a strong deterrent
signal to armed groups by calling this widespread and
systematic organized policy of human trafficking what
it legally is: a crime against humanity. That would

signal that those responsible are subject to prosecution
not just at the International Criminal Court, but by any
State with jurisdiction.

Secondly, the Security Council should make clear
that it wants all parts of the United Nations system to
work more effectively together to help countries tackle
modern slavery in conflict zones. At present, United
Nations efforts are fragmented and poorly coordinated,
and the peace operations and peacebuilding actors
of the United Nations are hardly involved at all. The
Security Council should call on the Secretary-General
to appoint a time-bound Special Envoy for the next
three years to develop system-wide guidance to help
United Nations actors figure out how to work better
together and establish a strong global partnership with
the private sector and civil society.

Thirdly, the Security Council should tackle the
drivers of the problem by asking the Special Envoy to
develop effective supply-chain measures to ensure that
legitimate businesses do not unwittingly encourage
human trafficking from conflict zones. Such measures
could draw on lessons learned from the corporate
due diligence guidelines on conflict minerals, as well
as recent legislation and regulation in some Member
States on supply-chain transparency.

Let me conclude by again thanking the Security
Council for taking up this critically important issue
on which the United Nations has such an important
leadership role to play. It is only with such leadership
that slavery will truly become a relic of history.

