Mr. Umemoto (Japan): First of all, I would like
to thank the Secretary-General, the new Executive
Director of UN Women and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights for their informative
briefings. I also thank and welcome the participation of
the representative from civil society. I would also like
to welcome today's adoption of resolution 2122 (2013).

As Prime Minister of Japan Shinzo Abe announced
in his statement to the General Assembly last month (see A/68/PV.12), Japan is actively committed to engaging
in the international agenda concerning women and to
making every effort to create a society where women
shine. We are planning to extend official development
aid amounting to more than $3 billion over the next three
years in the areas of women's social advancement and
capacity-building; women's health care; and women's
participation and protection in the field of peace and
security.

In order to protect women's rights and ensure
women's participation in conflict-affected situations,
security for those who serve to uphold the rule of law,
such as police officers and judges, is a basic necessity.
In that regard, gender-responsive transitional justice
measures and justice system reforms need to be
addressed. In particular, women's access to the justice
system must be strengthened so as to protect their
rights, as well as to protect them from the Violence that
too often accompanies the transition from conflict. To
that end, Japan has, for example, supported various
efforts to assist victims of sexual violence in refugee
camps located in such countries as the Sudan, Somalia
and Iraq, by providing legal advice, representation and
awareness-raising campaigns, as well as establishing
relief and recovery systems that include mental health
care.

In order for Member States and the United Nations
system to be able to take effective actions, it is
important that we highlight good practices and share
lessons learned. Today's open debate is an excellent
opportunity to that end.

In order to realize a more peaceful society, Japan
intends to make its utmost effort to ensure women's
participation and incorporate a women's perspective
into each and every phase of conflict prevention,
conflict settlement and peacebuilding, including
election processes. Such women's participation will
also contribute to better protecting the rights and the
physical well-being of women, including female human
rights defenders, female political leaders and female
war correspondents, who are particularly exposed to
danger in times of conflict.

From that perspective, Japan has been earnestly
developing a national action plan based on resolution
1325 (2000). In that action plan, Japan, in collaboration
with UN Women and civil society, will articulate
measures to be taken for the sake of promoting women's
participation in such efforts as conflict prevention,
the protection of victims of sexual violence, and
peacebuilding and restoration processes.

In July, in collaboration with the Global Network
of Women Peacebuilders, our Mission held a special
event entitled "Resolution 1325 (2000) in action:
lessons learned and reflections". The summary of the
discussion held at that event has been included in the
Secretary-General's report. We hope that it will further
serve as an input to the global review of resolution 1325
(2000) in November.

Increasing investment in the capacity and resources
of women's civil society organizations that are active in
conflict-affected countries should also be considered.
In that regard, Japan was one of the initial supporters,
and continues to be one of the main contributors, of
the United Nations Trust Fund in Support of Actions
to Eliminate Violence against Women, which directly
supports such civil society organizations. We will
continue our contribution to the Fund. Furthermore,
Japan co-hosted a special event in July with the Fund to
expand its donor base, including private-sector donors.

In addition, I would like to share with the Council
our experience of making use of an area of Japan's
official development assistance schemes that we call
grant assistance for grassroots projects, which we
believe is apositive example ofa good practice that could
be emulated elsewhere. Grant assistance for grassroots
projects is intended to provide rapid and direct support
to both international and local non-governmental
organizations active on the ground. Through such
assistance, we have been implementing numerous
projects on this basis all over the world, including in
Afghanistan and several African countries, providing
useful synergies for both donor and recipient countries.
In conclusion, Japan will continue to make every
possible efforts to contribute to the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) as we approach the fifteenth
anniversary of its adoption, and will actively participate
in its high-level review in 2015.

