Mr. Errazuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
associates itself with the statement made by the
representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security and the
statement that will be made by the representative of
Costa Rica on behalf of the Human Security Network.

The year 2010 is a year for taking stock of
progress in the human rights of women and in gender
equality. We are commemorating the fifteenth
anniversary of the Fourth World Conference on
Women, held in Beijing in 1995, and its Platform for
Action, as well as the tenth anniversary of the
Millennium Declaration (General Assembly resolution 55/2) and of resolution 1325 (2000) on women and
peace and security. In our hemisphere, the Organization
of American States is marking the Inter-American Year
of Women, under that banner "Women and power:
towards a world of equality".

My Government attaches great importance to this
issue and to the difficult situation created by modern
conflicts, in which women and children are most
affected by the degradation of their living conditions
and fundamental rights. We are therefore particularly
grateful to you, Sir, for having convened this debate at
an opportune moment for evaluating progress and
dealing with pending issues. Among those is the
implementation of this important instrument, which
Chile has always supported together with its
complementary resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009)
and 1889 (2009). In our view, this implementation will
be effective only if we undertake to ensure that this
decade is focused on action and accountability in the
areas of prevention, participation and protection.

Accordingly, we welcome the recent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2010/498) and its annex
containing indicators for a preliminary road map,
which we will have to carefully improve after
consultations with Member States and on the basis of
information they provide. In this connection, we
believe that the questionnaire-based consultations
conducted by the United Nations Development Fund
for Women - part of UN Women - represent an

important innovation in the matter of accountability.
Our country is in a position to issue a national report
on this matter next year, on the understanding that our
country's commitment will strengthen support for the
report.

Women's participation in peace negotiations has
been limited to less than 10 per cent. We therefore
strongly advocate the inclusion of women in the
negotiation processes and the compilation of reliable
statistics on the subject, in line with the indicators
proposed by the Secretary-General, as well as women's
organizational processes and the training of women as
negotiators using, inter alia, mechanisms available in
the system and cooperation initiatives for the training
of women in this area. We also emphasize the need for
greater gender mainstreaming in the system, in
accordance with Economic and Social Council
resolution 2009/ 12, entitled "Mainstreaming a gender
perspective into all policies and programmes in the
United Nations system", which Chile facilitated. This
should be accompanied by a mainstreaming of
resolution 1325 (2000) nationally and internationally.

As stated by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Chile at the ministerial event entitled "A 1325 Call to
Action", held here at Headquarters in September,
Chile's ongoing foreign policy commitment to
peacekeeping operations has resulted in the
introduction into its national policy of the formulation
of new approaches such as that in resolution 1325
(2000), emphasizing the participation of women in
peace and security efforts. Our commitment is reflected
in the adoption of a national action plan for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). It is the
only such measure adopted in our region, and it
concentrates on three major areas.

First, in the area of foreign affairs, although the
Foreign Ministry clearly bears primary responsibility
for the implementation of this plan, we are taking the
initiative of adopting a cross-cutting approach,
incorporating it into our domestic policy. For example,
domestically we are adopting gender-sensitive policies
in staff recruitment, and externally we have shown our
commitment to international humanitarian law through
support for the adoption of the Ottawa Convention and
the Convention on Cluster Munitions.

Secondly, concerning the role of our defence
institutions, these institutions participated actively
through working groups in the drafting of the plan.

Most of the commitments made in this area are now
being fulfilled. The review of the curricula of the
various educational establishments, the compilation of
gender-disaggregated statistics and the inclusion of
more women in peacekeeping operations are examples
of activities included in the plan and that reflect the
contribution of the defence sector.

The action plan's third focus is civil society. One
of the key aspects of the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) was the inclusion of civil society in the
public process of launching this initiative - not as a
mere spectator or recipient of the final result, but as an
active party. Furthermore, the plan resulted in the
acceptance of the proposal to create an observatory of
mixed membership, made up of public agencies and
civil society bodies, with the task of participating in
the process of accountability subsequent to the
publication of the plan. We therefore believe that an
element of vital importance in the implementation
process will be the compilation of statistics to measure
how well the mechanism is working. In our view,
although there are few measurable examples, speedy
action must be taken to allow quantitative and
qualitative evaluation of the results of women's
participation in the processes.

On the subject of regional challenges, we believe
that, with over 6,000 men and women of the armed
forces of Latin America and the Caribbean currently
participating in peacekeeping operations around the
world, the time has come to involve the majority of
countries of the region in the challenge of
implementing this resolution. In this scenario, we see
new possibilities for South-South triangular
cooperation.

In this the inaugural year of UN Women, led by
former President of Chile Michelle Bachelet; five years
after the 2005 World Summit; 10 years after the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000); 15 years after
Beijing; over 30 years since the adoption of the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women; and 35 years after the
first World Conference on Women in Mexico City,
Chile reiterates its strong commitment to women's
human rights and their full and equal integration into
society.

