Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, China strongly condemns the series of explosions
in Sri Lanka. We convey our deep condolences over the
deaths of the victims and our sympathies to the families
of the deceased and the injured.

I welcome the presence in New York of Your
Excellency, the Federal Minister of Foreign Affairs
of Germany, to preside over this open debate. I
thank Secretary-General Guterres and his Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Patten, for their briefings. I also thank the other
briefers for their presentations.

Today, we are confronted with a complex and
challenging international security landscape, the
wide prevalence of armed conflicts old and new, and
rampant terrorist activities, leaving women, girls and
other vulnerable groups to bear the brunt of sexual
violence in armed conflict. China strongly condemns
and stands firm against the use of sexual violence as
a means of war and any and all acts of sexual Violence
against women and girls. In that regard, I would like to
make the following points.

First, we must prevent or end conflict through
peaceful means and root out the breeding grounds
for sexual violence in conflict. The Security Council
should support the settlement of disputes through
political engagement, dialogue and consultation within
the parameters of its mandate under the Charter of the
United Nations, play a greater role in such areas as
conflict prevention and peacekeeping, and effectively
combat terrorism to provide solid safeguards for the
protection of women. Since the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), the international community has created a
good framework for the women and peace and security
agenda. The relevant resolutions of the Council should
be properly implemented on the ground.

Secondly, we must fully respect the sovereignty
and will of the countries concerned and the measures
taken by their Governments in the context of their
national realities. Those countries have the primary
responsibility for preventing and combatting sexual
violence in conflict and protecting their women and
children. We should vigorously support capacity-
building of the countries concerned, provide targeted
assistance, enhance capacity-building in security, social
governance and other areas, and effectively safeguard
the rights and interests of women in conflict.

Thirdly, we need to scale up the protection of
women's rights and interests in the post-conflict
reconstruction process. In particular, due regard should
be paid to the rights of victims of sexual violence in
conflict. The international community should, in a
long-term perspective, provide development assistance
and technical support for the realization of gender
equality and women's empowerment in developing
countries so as to protect women's rights and interests
at a fundamental level. The international community
should actively help post-conflict countries, ramp up
their economic and social development, and ensure that
the development dividend is shared by all, including
women. Attention should be given to guiding women's
organizations and civil society in playing a constructive
role to that end.

Fourthly, we must create synergies among the
relevant bodies of the United Nations. The Council
should fulfil its primary responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security, strengthen
coordination with the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council and the Peacebuilding Commission,
among others, and conduct cooperation in a way that
is consistent with its mandate and expertise. The
United Nations should strengthen its cooperation with
the relevant regional and subregional organizations to
build synergy in combating sexual violence in conflict.

China stands ready, along with the international
community, to continue stepping up cooperation to
jointly create a peaceful, secure and stable international
environment for the effective protection of the rights
and interests of women and girls and for an early
end to sexual violence in conflict, making a greater
contribution to the further advancement of the cause of
women and peace and security .

