Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): Allow me at the
outset to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
important debate. My delegation also thanks the
Secretary-General for his briefing this morning.

It is superfluous to say that women suffer most as
victims of conflict. Even in peace processes, they are
deprived of their due dividends. Women and girls are
often viewed as bearers of cultural identities. Thus,
they become prime targets. It is therefore essential that
the Security Council devote serious attention to the
issue of women and peace and security. We recall that
Bangladesh, when it was a member of the Council, was
closely associated with the adoption of the landmark
resolution 1325 (2000). It is a document that applies
not only to States, but to all actors involved in post-
conflict peace processes.

Unfortunately, even nine years after the
resolution's adoption, an increasing and alarming
number of women and girls are becoming victims of
violence. We are aware that poverty, the struggle for
resources and socio-economic injustice lie at the heart
of conflicts. The impact of this situation not only
affects the safety and security of women, but also
impairs the political, economic and overall security
conditions of the relevant nations.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/362)
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1820 (2008)
provides us with disturbing information on violence
against women. The adoption of resolution 1820
(2008) no doubt helped to draw global attention to the
issue, but an effective plan of action involving the
United Nations system, national and international
actors, civil society, non-governmental organizations
and other stakeholders should follow in order to curb
such violence. My delegation finds merit in the
conclusions and recommendations set out in the report,
and we look forward to engaging with other Member
States in working on them. My delegation also stresses
the need for appropriate training programmes for the
peacekeeping personnel deployed by the United
Nations.

On a number of occasions, my delegation has
underlined the importance of availability of relevant
data in analysing the plight of women and girls who
are victims of conflicts. Focused examination of such
data is important to the formulation of policy
guidelines and to undertaking preventive measures.
The sharing of experiences and lessons learned on a

regular basis is useful in guiding policy measures. We
note with appreciation that this point has been reflected
in the Secretary-General's report.

While we stress the need for concrete actions to
protect women from violence, we believe that
substantial progress should be made in the area of
prosecution. Precedent shows that perpetrators get
away with crimes because of lengthy and complicated
judicial processes. We feel that all concerned should
facilitate the establishment of effective judicial
systems. Moreover, measures should be taken to
address the psychosocial needs of the victims.

As one of the major troop- and police-
contributing countries, Bangladesh emphasizes the
importance of the effective implementation of
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008), as well as all
relevant General Assembly resolutions, particularly
61/143 and 63/155. We wish to reiterate that there
should be adequate representation of women at all
levels of decision-making in conflict prevention and
post-conflict rehabilitation.

It is reassuring that multidimensional
peacekeeping operations have such great potential to
address the security of women. Troop- and police-
contributing countries should continue to increase the
number of uniformed and civilian female personnel. At
present, only 8 per cent of all United Nations police
officers are female; this number was 4 per cent in
2006. The number of women from Bangladesh in
peacekeeping is set to increase in the coming days in
order to ensure gender balance in our share of the
deployment.

It is essential to make women's voices heard.
Women's participation is necessary in the decision-
making process in any post-conflict country. Emphasis
should be placed on the electoral process in post-
conflict environments in order to increase the
participation of women as voters, candidates and
electoral officials.

A critical factor in the successful implementation
of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008) is high-
level commitment and accountability in administration,
without which policy guidelines are of little use. We
believe that the protection of women and girls from
gender-based violence is a primary responsibility.
There should be zero tolerance with respect to the
perpetrators, and impunity must be ended. It is
therefore crucial to mobilize leadership, ensure

accountability, provide adequate resources, identify
challenges and address the root causes in protecting
women and girls.

