Ms. Krisnamurthi (Indonesia): First of all, I would
like to thank you, Madam President, for your leadership
to sustain commitment on this issue.

Indonesia aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of Turkey on behalf of the group
made up of Mexico, Indonesia, the Republic of Korea,
Turkey and Australia.

We also express our deep appreciation to all
the briefers for their comprehensive insights on this
agenda item.

Resolution 1325 (2000) underlines the significance
of women's role in our efforts to achieve peace. We
have heard the countless stories of many women
and girls who showed courage and determination in
working against all odds to ensure that peace prevails.
It would be unfortunate if their bravery and vision went
unrealized. The international community has given its
continuous support to the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). Nevertheless, women remain largely
objects of exploitation in conflict, not to mention the fact
that the complex challenges that women face in conflict
and preventing conflict are compounded by social
and economic inequalities, as well as environmental
degradation. Those challenges certainly undermine the
spirit of resolution 1325 (2000). It also means that we
are still a long way from realizing a just, peaceful and
prosperous world. I would like to take this opportunity
to share some of Indonesia's thoughts and experiences.

First, with regard to fostering an environment for
peace and stability, solutions should focus on building
institutions that encourage the habit of dialogue,
consensus, inclusivity, respect, integrity, the peaceful
settlement of disputes and non-use of force. Only
by uniting our energy - women and men, boys and
girls - can we strengthen our efforts for common
causes. At the same time, it is also significant to
acknowledge and foster the crucial role of women and
families in the prevention of conflicts that may lead to
radicalism and extremism.

Secondly, we must develop an ecosystem that
stimulates prosperity. Member States adopted the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development in 2015, which is
a comprehensive and integrated blueprint to synergize
development with peace, enabling women to participate
in peacebuilding through the economy.

Thirdly, we must foster cooperation to develop
and strengthen the ecosystem for peace, stability and
prosperity. To that end, it is important that we have a
strong global institution, namely, the United Nations,
alongwithpeacebuildingandpeacekeepingmechanisms,
which should continuously be strengthened.

Indonesia stands ready to mediate conflicts and
to contribute to peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
Currently we have nearly 3,000 troops on the ground
in nine peacekeeping missions. By 2019, we aim
to have 4,000 troops, with an increased number of
female peacekeepers.

As part of our commitment to advancing the
2030 Agenda, Indonesia has also been sharing our
best practices and experiences in empowering women
in leadership through South-South and triangular
cooperation. More than 2,000 participants from least
developed and developing countries have benefited
from the programme. At the same time, we continue to
underscore the importance of meeting the international
commitments under the means of implementation of the
2030 Agenda Sustainable Development Goals.
To conclude, I would like to reconfirm our
commitment to working with all Member States as a
true partner for world peace, a partner in advancing
strong institutions, linking peace and development as
well as strengthening cooperation as vital elements that
we believe will deter the forces that devalue human life,
including the lives of women.

