Ms. Chuard (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I take the floor on behalf of Switzerland for two
reasons - first, because sexual violence primarily,
though not exclusively, affects women and girls; and,
secondly because, through its Permanent Representative
and within the framework of the Gender Champions
initiative, Switzerland has committed to increase the
participation of women in the deliberations of United
Nations organs, including the Security Council.

Switzerland would like to thank the Uruguayan
presidency for organizing this timely debate and
welcomes the latest report (S/2017/249) of the
Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual violence
and its recommendations. We also thank participants
for their briefings.
To start with, I would like to underline the
importance of the resolution 2331 (2016), adopted last
December. This first Security Council resolution on
human trafficking condemns this crime and human
rights violation in the strongest terms, and explicitly
recognizes trafficking in persons as a matter of peace
and security.

Today we are discussing a closely interrelated
topic, namely, sexual violence in armed conflict. In that
connection, I would mention three considerations.

First of all, although sexual violence affects a cross
section of the population, certain factors contribute
to greater vulnerability. Forced displacement and
migration increase the risk of abuse and exploitation.
Reports from refugees and migrants arriving in Europe
suggest that many women and girls have been sexually
exploited upon their flight from conflict situations.
At last year's open debate on conflict-related sexual
violence (see S/PV.7704) we referred to the need
to protect women and girls when they are forcibly
displaced or travelling along migration routes. Sadly,
that concern persists. Sexual violence in all its forms
is also a driver of displacement and a risk factor for
people on migration routes and being displaced. The
same holds true for boys and men.

Over the next two years, United Nations States
Members will negotiate a new framework for global
migration governance. The global compact for safe,
orderly and regular migration offers an opportunity to
include some of the issues of this debate in the discourse
on global migration. The thematic debate on trafficking
in persons and smuggling of migrants hosted by the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and to
be held in Vienna in September 2017 is one of many
platforms for addressing those issues.

Secondly, we welcome the Secretary-General's
recommendation to continue including sexual violence
as a designation criteria for sanction regimes, in keeping
with resolution 1820 (2008). Moreover, we need to take
all the necessary measures to prevent organized crime
and to block the financing of terrorist groups through
human trafficking, forced prostitution and other forms
of sexual violence. Those measures logically follow
the acknowledgement that sexual violence and human
trafficking are elements of the economy of war.
Thirdly, we are pleased that the Secretary General's
report makes an important reference to sexual and
reproductive health. We have addressed that topic in
previous debates, but the issue is no less pressing today.
It is our duty to ensure that women and girls affected
by conflict have access to a wide range of quality
sexual and reproductive health services, including
services to prevent and respond to sexual and gender-
based violence.

In that context, among other things, Switzerland
currently supports a psychosocial care programme
in the Great Lakes region. Its objective is to address
sexual and gender-based violence in a comprehensive
manner at the individual, local and institutional levels.
The programme includes medical, psychological and
legal services, and also helps to reintegrate victims
into their communities. Between 2011 and 2016, almost
60,000 women enjoyed comprehensive care and support
through the programme.

Finally, Switzerland thanks Ms. Zainab Bangura
for her devoted service as Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
and pledges its full support to Ms. Pramila Patten, her
successor to that post.

