Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Ms. Rice, Secretary of State of the
United States of America, for having come to New
York to preside over today's meeting. I am
participating in this discussion on behalf of Yang
Jiechi, Minister for Foreign Affairs. At the outset,
please allow me to convey to Ms. Rice the Minister's
cordial greetings. I would also like to thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon and Mr. Kerim, President of the
General Assembly, for their statements.

Nearly eight years have passed since the Security
Council adopted resolution 1325 (2000), which
constitutes a basis for cooperation among all the parties
concerned in the area of women and peace and
security. However, given the changing features of
conflicts and the various complex and cross-cutting
factors involved, the resolution has yet to be
implemented fully. In the many conflicts under way
today, women continue to be the most direct victims,
and violence against women remains an extremely
grave concern.

China condemns all violence against women,
including acts of sexual violence, and urges all parties
involved in conflict to comply with international
humanitarian law and human rights law. We call upon
the Governments concerned to investigate and bring to
justice those responsible for crimes against women.
China urges all countries that have not done so to take
measures aimed at an early accession to the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women. We support the
Secretary-General in his pursuit of the policy of zero
tolerance for sexual exploitation committed by
peacekeepers, and we hope that the troop-contributing
countries will step up the training and monitoring of
their peacekeepers, so that the relevant United Nations
code of conduct can be complied with and
implemented.

On this occasion, I wish to emphasize the
following points in relation to the protection of women
in armed conflict.

First, while the Security Council has a unique
role to play in response to violence against women,
United Nations organs and agencies should strengthen
their coordination and cooperation. The issue of sexual
violence in conflict is closely related to that of armed
conflict itself. As the Security Council bears primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, the Council should focus its efforts
on the prevention of conflict, peacekeeping and post-
conflict reconstruction. Sexual violence should be
addressed through a comprehensive approach in the
context of the peace process and the political situation.
It should not be treated as a stand-alone issue; nor
should attention be given to its symptoms only. In
addition, the Security Council should enhance its
consultation with the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council, the Secretariat and the relevant
treaty bodies in a joint effort to address violence
against women.

Secondly, national Governments bear primary
responsibility for the protection of women. The
international community should provide substantial
support and assistance. The responsibility for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and for the
protection of women lies first and foremost with the
Governments concerned. However, countries in
conflict and those emerging from conflict are often
beset with difficulties and thus require generous
contributions from the international community to help
them build their capacity. Meanwhile, external
assistance should be provided in compliance with the
Charter of the United Nations, respecting the will of
the country in question and avoiding any undermining
of its sovereignty.

Thirdly, the participation of women in every
stage of the peace process should be enhanced. Their
status and role should receive greater attention.
Respecting and protecting women is the hallmark of a
civilized society and of social progress. It is also an
important element of a mature social system. Respect
for and protection of women's rights should be
mainstreamed throughout the peace process. Their
special needs and concerns should be accommodated.
Women should be further empowered to participate and
to make decisions that concern them. In recent years,
we have witnessed a great number of positive measures
taken by the Secretariat to increase the ratio of women
in senior positions, at the head of peacekeeping
missions and in the staff in general. More efforts are
needed in this direction in the future.

Fourthly, civil society should continue to be
encouraged to join the efforts to protect women. Many
of our colleagues in the non-governmental organization
(NGO) community deserve our appreciation for the
work they have carried out in the field to protect the
rights and interests of women under difficult
circumstances. China supports the constructive role
that NGOs continue to play in the protection of women
in armed conflict and encourages them to increase their
communication with United Nations agencies,
especially those with a special mandate on women's
issues, and to offer proposals in this area.
20

We are pleased to note that, under the personal
guidance of Secretary of State Rice, the United States
delegation has submitted a draft resolution under this
agenda item on elimination of all forms of sexual
violence. China supports its adoption. The draft
resolution requests the Secretary-General to submit a
report on its implementation before 30 June 2009.

I would like to point out that, a few months ago,
at its sixty-second session, the General Assembly
adopted resolution 62/134 on the same issue. In that
resolution, the General Assembly requested the
Secretary-General to submit a report on the resolution's
implementation at the sixty-third session. To save
resources and avoid duplication of labour, we hope the
Secretary-General will strengthen coordination and
make good use of all the information available so as to
submit high-quality reports to both the Security
Council and the General Assembly.

The 2005 World Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1) reaffirms that the progress
for women is progress for all. The same is true in the
field of peace and security. The comprehensive
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) would be an
important guarantee for achieving this target. We
support the Secretary-General in his continued efforts
to implement the System-wide Action Plan. The
Chinese Government has always attached great
importance to the protection of the rights and interests
of women and to the advancement of women. We are
ready to work with the rest of the international
community in a joint effort to reduce sexual violence in
every corner of the world and achieve all targets
related to the issue of women and peace and security.

