Mr. Van der Vliet (Netherlands): I would like to
start by thanking Chile for organizing this important
debate on the protection of civilians.

I align myself with the statement made by
the observer of the European Union. I would also
like to thank Ms. Kyung-wha Kang, Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator; Ms. Helen
Durham, Director for International Law and Policy
of the International Committee of the Red Cross; and
Ms. Ilwad Elman, representative of the NGO Working
Group on Women Peace and Security for their valuable
contributions to this debate.

I would like to make three points today on women
as agents of change, on peacekeeping and on the
importance of the prevention of conflict.

First, the rights of women and girls are increasingly
under attack in armed conflicts. When the role of women
as agents of change in society and as contributors to
peace processes is undermined, the stability of societies
and of peace itself is eroded. It is therefore imperative
to integrate the protection needs of women and girls
systematically in the protection of civilians agenda. The
Netherlands attaches great importance to implementing
good practices related to the improvement of the
position of women. For example, in Syria we work with
the United Nations Development Programme and UN-

Women to support the Syrian Women's Initiative for
Peace and Democracy.

My second point relates to peacekeeping. We
welcome the high-level review of United Nations peace
operations, as well as the Global Protection Cluster
whole-of-system review of protection in humanitarian
action. We also welcome the continuing efforts of the
Secretariat to strengthen the policies and guidance
on the protection of civilians. We urge the Council to
examine the challenges impeding the implementation
ofprotection of civilians mandates more systematically,
specifically where they pertain to the needs of women
and girls.

With regard to concrete contributions to
peacekeeping, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
is doing its share. We train our staff to protect
civilians effectively. Between 2007 and 2017 we will
be contributing €54 million for capacity-building
through the Africa Contingency Operations Training
and Assistance programme. Together with Spain, we
conduct gender training for civilian, military and police
personnel who are to be deployed as part of United
Nations missions. We also fund Phase II of the Senior
Women Talent Pipeline project, aimed at placing more
qualified women in senior positions in United Nations
missions. We also fund the female military officers
training project of UN-Women, which aims to facilitate
and increase the deployment of female military, and
we are contributing €5.6 million to the Women on the
Frontline programme for the 2013-2016 period, aimed
at the Middle East and North Africa region.

On 16 and 17 February, we are organizing a
conference on women, peace and security with particular
attention to enhancing participation and leadership of
women in conflict and post-conflict peacebuilding. We
aim to gather concrete inputs for the United Nations
high-level review on resolution 1325 (2000). We want
to share real examples of action and change - and
learn. The conference will take place in parallel with
a regional European conference in support of United
Nations peace operations, also in the Netherlands.
The conference aims to feed into the United Nations
peace operations review. Both conferences intersect on
the topic of gender perspectives in peacebuilding and
peace operations, and both reviews are thus of direct
relevance to each other.

My third and last point is on the importance of
prevention andmediation. Ensuring the rights of civilians
before, during and after armed conflicts is essential,
because we know peace is fragile and conflicts often
repeat themselves. That is why conflict prevention,
good offices and mediation are so important. And to be
effective, we must ensure early on that women are at the
centre of these efforts. When mass atrocities do occur,
the Security Council should strongly condemn them.
Failure to do so contributes to a climate of impunity.
We support the French initiative aimed at voluntary
restraint in the use of veto by permanent members of the
Security Council in situations where mass atrocities are
imminent or deemed to be occurring. And we believe
that the principle of responsibility to protect should be
increasingly applied and further operationalized.

I want to end by focusing briefly on protection
by humanitarian actors and also of humanitarian
actors. Humanitarian relief is under extreme pressure.
Relief organizations are stretched to the limit and
face increasing difficulties due to the arbitrary denial
of access, funding shortages and even attacks on
humanitarian personnel and medical staff. This is
unacceptable and must be condemned by the Security
Council. We welcomed the debate that took place on
this issue at the initiative of the United Kingdom last
August.

