The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia,
Bangladesh, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Cape Verde,
Ecuador, Finland, Germany, Iceland, Israel, Italy,
Kenya, Liechtenstein, the Netherlands, Nigeria,
Norway, Papua New Guinea, Peru, the Republic of
Korea, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Sweden,
Switzerland, Timor-Leste and the United Republic of
Tanzania, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of members of the
Council to document S/2009/362, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General pursuant to Security
Council resolution 1820 (2008).

I should like to start by welcoming the Secretary-
General, who joins us today to present his first follow-
up report to resolution 1820 (2008) on women, peace
and security.

In addition, I should like to extend our welcome
and thanks to three female United Nations police
2

officers from United Nations missions in Liberia, Haiti
and the Sudan, who are here to observe our debate.
Yesterday, they attended a round-table event at the
United Nations that was sponsored by the Canadian
Mission and the Pearson Peacekeeping Training
Centre. It is important that we have opportunities in
New York to hear from field practitioners dealing with
those difficult issues.

Resolution 1820 (2008) builds upon resolution
1325 (2000). It confirms the Council's readiness to
address more systematically the scourge of conflict-
related sexual violence. It also underlines the vital
contribution that women themselves can make as
peacekeepers and peacebuilders.

Our objective today is to hear the views of
colleagues from across the United Nations membership
to aid Council consideration of the way forward in the
light of the Secretary-General's report.

I now invite the Secretary-General to take the
floor.


