Ms. Espinosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank you very much, Mr. President, for
having organized this debate.

My delegation believes that the United Nations
plays an essential role in combating all forms of
discrimination and violence against women and girls.
There can be no question that it is essential to bolster
the work of the Organization in this area, as well as to
improve its internal coordination to ensure a more
effective long-term impact.

Ecuador is fully committed to this effort. We are
a State party to all the relevant international
instruments and have co-sponsored several General
Assembly resolutions on this subject. In its own area of
responsibility, the Security Council made a major
contribution to this effort by adopting several
resolutions on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, especially as regards women and children.
More specifically, the Council adopted resolution 1325
(2000), several of whose paragraphs specifically refer
to the subject of this debate, namely, sexual violence in
situations of armed conflict.

Several elements of the draft resolution to be
adopted by the Council today are incorporated in

08-3908]
resolution 1325 (2000), including the important role
played by women in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts and in peacekeeping, the issue of gender
mainstreaming in peacekeeping operations and the
elimination of all types of gender-based violence,
especially rape and sexual violence.

My delegation believes that, with respect to the
need to request a report from the Secretary-General on
this issue, such a report should deal with situations that
fall under the competency of the Security Council and
that are clearly inscribed on its agenda; otherwise,
there could be duplication of effort, as certain
resolutions of the General Assembly also call for
similar reports from the Secretariat on this matter.

Ecuador believes that, despite the major efforts
being made by the Council, it is urgent to achieve
closer cooperation between the main organs of the
United Nations - bearing in mind that the General
Assembly is the universal body responsible for
providing a normative framework underpinning the
decisions of all States on the issue we are debating
today. My delegation therefore shares the view of the
President of the General Assembly that the subject of
sexual violence, including that perpetrated in the
course of armed conflict, should continue to be
considered by the General Assembly in a systematic
and ongoing manner - as was the case during this
session with the consensus adoption of Assembly
resolution 62/ 134, on the elimination of rape and other
forms of sexual violence in all its aspects, including in
armed conflict and similar situations - as well as in
the thematic debates convened by the President of the
General Assembly on the issues of human security and
human trafficking. The General Assembly also
addressed this issue in its annual resolution on all
forms of violence against women, which was also
adopted by Member States by consensus.

Ensuring an end to impunity and acknowledging
that victims have rights are decisive elements in
combating all forms of sexual violence against women,
including sexual violence as a weapon of war. Ecuador
believes in the essential role of the International
Criminal Court in combating impunity, as well as in its
contribution to peacebuilding processes. The
international community should commit itself to
ensuring that no one enjoys immunity for such crimes
under any circumstances. That should be our
commitment to the victims and our contribution to
peace and justice.
Like other delegations, we believe that such a
sensitive subject as the one before us today, which
should be of concern to all countries, including
Ecuador, should be considered in a comprehensive and
systematic manner by all Member States. Such
consideration should not be confined solely to the issue
of sexual Violence, but should also address all forms of
violence against women and girls.

One way to prevent armed conflict and all forms
of violence and discrimination they generate is to
address poverty and underdevelopment head-on in the
context of the Millennium Development Goals, to
whose achievement all Member States committed
themselves.

Ecuador will continue to cooperate with the
international community to ensure that all forms of
violence against women and girls, especially sexual
violence, are eliminated from every country and region
of the world.

