Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would first like to thank the
presidency of France for convening today's meeting on a
very important topic. I am also grateful to all the briefers
for their very insightful and powerful statements.

Despite the fact that 17 years have passed since the

Security Council's adoption of its landmark resolution
1325 (2000), the normative framework has still not been
fully put in place. Exactly two years ago, in October
2015, some 100 countries announced their commitment
to promoting the women and peace and security agenda.
We were one of them, of course. At the time, Japan
made a number of commitments that included, first,
our determination to steadily implement our national
action plan and ensure its effective monitoring. The
second was increasing our financial support to UN-
Women and the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
The third was investing in developing human resources
and the education of displaced women. We like to think
that Japan has faithfully fulfilled those promises.

This year we completed the first evaluation
report on our national action plan, and are steadily
implementing its commitments. Our cooperation with
UN-Women is growing. In 2016, Japan became its
second-largest contributor, with those contributions
largely directed at efforts to support human-resource
development and education for displaced women in the
Middle East and Africa. We also continue to be one
of the top donors to the team of experts of the Office
of Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, and we affirm our ongoing
support for their work.

According to the World Bank, as many as 90 per
cent of conflicts between 2000 to 2009 were relapses.
Women's meaningful participation and leadership
are key to preventing conflict, sustaining peace and
avoiding relapses into conflict. Today I will focus
on the areas of peace negotiations and peacekeeping
missions, in which Japan has been actively involved
and has some expertise. While the reality represented
by the reported figures is a stark one for both areas, we
strongly believe in their potential to drive the women
and peace and security agenda significantly forward.

Past experience has shown that women's effective
participation and influence in the peace negotiation
process are closely linked to the eventual achievement
of sustained peace. In that regard, I commend the
efforts of the regional networks of women mediators
in the African, Nordic and Mediterranean regions, a
subject that the representative of Italy already touched
on. Japan is ready to work to apply this positive trend
to other regions, including Asia. Training is central to
our efforts. For example, Japan supported UN-Women's
technical training on peacebuilding, mediation and
conflict prevention for 230 women through the Peace
Support Training Centre in Kenya in 2016, which
significantly changed the mindset of the whole
community, including its male leaders, and promoted
women's participation in traditionally male-dominated
local peacebuilding committees. It genuinely helped to
mitigate tensions between communities.

Making a peacekeeping mission as gender-
responsive as possible is directly linked to its success.
It is key to the consolidation of peace on the ground.
The United Nations system-wide strategy on gender
parity is an excellent guide and, needless to say, we
must ensure its full implementation. Pooling and
training mission staff are crucial. We were pleased to
join the collective effort to support the Department of
Field Support's senior women talent pipeline project.
In that connection, we will hold an outreach seminar
for the project in Tokyo this very weekend, inviting
potential senior women candidates. Improving the
gender-responsiveness of peacekeeping missions
will contribute significantly to eliminating sexual
exploitation and abuses by peacekeeping personnel.

Finally, in the wake of UN-Women's HeForShe
Champion movement, we should note the importance
of mobilizing men's active engagement in efforts
to establish gender parity and the equality and
empowerment of women, which of course includes the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda. Japan will continue to work with members of
the Council and the United Nations to promote that
agenda further.

