Mr. Jaime Calderon (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish): We wish to associate ourselves with the
statement made by the representative of Canada on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace
and Security.

El Salvador is pleased to participate in this important
open debate focused on the theme of women and peace
and security. We wish to express our commitment to
the work of the Council on this agenda item.

El Salvador, as a country that overcame an armed
conflict through negotiation, is a faithful advocate for
the commitment to peace and development. We are
convinced that the consolidation of democracy and its
institutions is a determining factor in the development
of our peoples. In recent years, El Salvador has made
important advances in its protection of women's rights
legislation and architecture because of its belief that
gender equality and the empowerment of women are
fundamental conditions for development, governance,
peace and democracy.

Likewise, for El Salvador it is important to
recognize the role played by women in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts and in the consolidation of
peace, as recognized in resolution 1325 (2000). We
therefore consider it essential to give attention to the
violence against women by including the problem as an
important component of public policy. That is why in
July, El Salvador launched its national action plan for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on women
and peace and security, which bolsters our commitment
to women in different areas, particularly in building
peace and security.

The plan represents the efforts made on this
issue since 2014 with the establishment of a national
committee for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and subsequent resolutions. It is a pioneering
document in the Central American region, and includes
in its five pillars measures to promotw the inclusion of
women in peace consolidation processes, especially in
the area of citizen security. Furthermore, the actions set
out in the national action plan transcend the security
issue by outlining innovative actions that address other
aspects of social security, which we consider to be
equally important for a comprehensive approach and
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

El Salvador is involved in an ongoing process
of internal dialogue that seeks the engagement of all
stakeholders of the country with a view to continuing to
build upon the peace it achieved in 1992 by promoting
the participation of women and their experience on
gender issues, in accordance with the provisions of
resolution 1325 (2000). We recognize the indispensable
role of women and young people in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts, and emphasize the need to
promote their full participation in the maintenance and
promotion of peace.

Moreover, El Salvador considers it essential
to guarantee the highest level of ethical conduct
of personnel participating in the United Nations
peacekeeping operations, and we therefore reiterate
our absolute commitment to the Organization's policy
of zero tolerance of sexual exploitation and abuse. In
that regard, as a country we have voluntarily joined the
Secretary-General's compact to end sexual exploitation
and abuse.

We would also like to express our appreciation
for the measures taken by the Organization within
the framework of prevention, training and assistance
to victims, and we stress the importance of reviewing
the progress made in that aspect and of including a
focus on reducing the stigmatization of survivors of
sexual violence in conflict zones. El Salvador wishes
to reiterate its commitment to supporting peacekeeping
operations by contributing the best trained personnel
and including more women in the troops and police
assigned to different missions.

To conclude, we reiterate our support for all
initiatives that ensure the participation of women in
various contingents, in accordance with the provisions
of resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions of
the Security Council. We recognize the important work
of France in presiding over the Security Council, and
we thank UN-Women for its support for and technical,
political and financial assistance to our national
committee efforts and in the preparation of our national
action plan of the resolution. I call on it to continue
supporting our country's growth in such important
area. We hope that by learning of our experience, other
countries of the region will also be encouraged to work
in greater depth on the issue of peace and security,
especially from the perspective ofinclusion manifested
in resolution 1325 (2000).

