Ms. Patten: I would like to thank Germany for its
leadership in spearheading this resolution (resolution 2467 (2019)), which marks the tenth anniversary of
this mandate. I would also like to thank all members
of the Council for the resolution and the way in
which the resolution has demonstrated the Council's
receptiveness to many of the recommendations of the
Secretary-General.

From the perspective of mandate-holder, I want
to thank all members of the Council because despite
the limitations that many members have highlighted I
see the resolution as a step in the right direction and,
in my view it is very operationally oriented. The main
focus of the resolution is on prevention, fulljustice and
accountability, and a survivor-centred approach, which
is fully in line with the strategic priorities that I set for
the mandate.

The resolution has significant value in the
sense that it is operationally oriented. Both its
preambular and operative paragraphs reaffirm and
recognize some new elements that are critical for my
mandate - the recognition that women and girls are
specifically targeted; the recognition that the violence
is not only widespread and systematic but has also
become very brutal; the recognition of different
vulnerable groups, so that we have departed from
treating victims as a homogeneous group and recognize
that men and boys are also being affected; the focus
on the consistent and rigorous prosecution of sexual
violence; and the focus on the root causes of sexual
violence - which will all be very helpful to me in
taking this mandate forward.

I wish to sincerely thank the members of the
Council for the focus that they have brought on the
root causes of gender inequality and discrimination,
as well as a range of other factors that exacerbate the
disproportionate impact of sexual violence. In spite of
its limitations, the resolution is groundbreaking to the
extent that it is the first resolution that emphasizes the
need for a survivor-centred approach. It is also the first
resolution that recognizes the plight of children born
out of sexual violence and calls for respect for their
rights, in line with the Convention on the Rights of
the Child.

Last but not least, I want to emphasize the
important recognition by the resolution of the use of
sexual violence as part of the strategic objectives and
ideology of certain terrorist groups and the importance
of survivors being treated as victims and not as
intelligence assets or affiliates of such terrorist groups.
From my side, we look forward to submitting a gap
assessment and recommendations to the Council in
next year's report.

