Mr. McNee (Canada): I wish to thank the United
States for convening this open debate on conflict-
related sexual violence and to say that Canada was
very happy to co-sponsor resolution 1960 (2010),
which was adopted today.

Canada strongly supports the Security Council's
recognition of the need to take effective measures to
address conflict-related sexual violence and welcomes
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/604)
pursuant to resolutions 1820 (2008) and 1888 (2009),
including their recommendations. The systemic acts of
sexual violence recently perpetrated in the eastern part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo starkly
demonstrate the urgent need for serious action.

Canada welcomes today's presentation by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Wallstrom,
and strongly supports her efforts to provide strategic
leadership and strengthen United Nations coordination
mechanisms in order to prevent and respond to
conflict-related sexual violence. Addressing sexual
violence demands a double focus: ensuring women's
empowerment and participation, while also focusing on
matters of accountability and justice.

In this sense, preventing, addressing and
eliminating sexual violence requires cultural, societal
and institutional changes. Canada calls on Member
States and the United Nations system to ensure that
Ms. Wallstrom's Office is adequately resourced and
capable of timely action to support such changes. We
also suggest to the Council that it request regular
briefings by the Special Representative following her
visits to countries on its agenda.

Canada's long-standing support for the rights and
well-being of women and girls in situations of conflict
is reflected through our continuing active
implementation of Council resolutions, including
through strong advocacy work, significant international
programming addressing sexual violence, support for
civil society and efforts to strengthen international
criminal justice mechanisms. Canada's National Action
Plan on Women, Peace and Security, adopted in
October, will help us to focus and coordinate
implementation of our commitments and increase the
effectiveness of Canada's response.

Canada welcomes the jurisprudence of
international courts and tribunals confirming that rape
and sexual violence can be war crimes and crimes
against humanity. Individuals responsible for these
crimes must be brought to justice; that includes those
responsible by virtue of command responsibility.
Canada calls on Member States to ensure that these
crimes are investigated and that those responsible for
committing serious crimes are held to account.

In addition, as recognized in resolution 1820
(2008), we also strongly support the exclusion of
crimes of sexual violence from amnesty provisions in
the context of peace processes. Furthermore, Canada
calls on all parties to conflict to make specific
commitments to ceasing all acts of sexual violence, and
urges the Council to support the efforts of United
Nations officials to engage in dialogue with parties to
elicit commitments to that effect.

Canada also calls on the Council to increase
pressure on States to hold perpetrators of sexual
violence to account through adoption of sanctions and
other targeted measures against individuals and entities
that have perpetrated sexual violence. This must, of
course, be done in accordance with standards of due
process. We also support the Secretary-General's
recommendation to make public in his annual reports
the names of parties who engage in patterns of sexual
violence in situations of armed conflict.

Systematic data collection on grave violations of
women's and girls' human rights, including on sexual
violence, is of the utmost importance in effective
monitoring and response. In order to tailor the
international response to specific contexts, it is also
important that all relevant country reports to the
Security Council include information on the situation
that pertains to all aspects of the resolutions on women,
peace and security, in addition to information on sexual
violence. United Nations reporting on the movement
and activities of armed groups, for example, should
systematically include information on the threat of
sexual violence. With this in mind, Canada supports
the recommendation to establish monitoring, analysis
and reporting arrangements on conflict-related sexual
violence.

(spoke in French)

The prevention of and response to sexual
violence should also be included in the mandates of all
United Nations peacekeeping missions. To that end, the
Council must design and implement mandates to
support peace efforts that better respond to all forms of
violence against civilians, and ensure that strategies for
combating sexual violence in conflict are integrated
into the work of United Nations country teams. Local
organizations devoted to protecting women often
assess the ongoing threat of sexual violence in their
communities.

For those reasons, networks among United Nations
peacekeepers, local and international non-governmental
organizations and women's networks must be
strengthened to facilitate the establishment of early
warning mechanisms on conflict-related sexual violence.
Consequently, we welcomed the efforts made by the
United Nations this year, through the Open Days on
Women, Peace and Security, to engage in dialogue with
local communities and women's groups. We noted at the
time that the most frequent protection concern raised by
participants was the level of sexual violence during and
after conflict and the impunity enjoyed by perpetrators
of those crimes. We call on the United Nations to pursue
dialogue with local communities and women's groups so
that the international community can respond effectively
to these issues.

To conclude, we are encouraged by the additional
measures proposed in the Secretary-General's report.
Canada calls on the Security Council to take action
today to respond to the report's recommendations so
that the international community can undertake active
and coordinated efforts to prevent and respond to
conflict-related sexual violence.

