Ms. Darisuren: It is a great honour for me to
be here representing the Secretary General of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). I commend the focus of this year's debate
on moving the women and peace and security agenda
towards a systematic implementation leading to
tangible results. The Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe is the largest regional security
organization under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations. With our comprehensive approach to
security, the women and peace and security agenda is a
common thread throughout all our work, not only in the
political and military fields, but also in economic and
environmental issues, and in the promotion of human
rights and democratic institutions.

The Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe is active in all phases ofconflict, from prevention
to conflict resolution, post-conflict rehabilitation and
peacebuilding. The inclusion of a gender perspective is
essential in all those phases. The OSCE approach aligns
closely with the goals set out in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. We support our participating
States in fulfilling their gender-equality commitments
and in enhancing comprehensive security. We recognize
that formal political processes provide, unfortunately,
little access and space for women.

There is a clear need to increase the meaningful
inclusion of women in all phases of the conflict
cycle, so that we give more recognition to the central
contribution of women, in particular at the grassroots
level. For example, the OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine makes sure, in its monitoring
work, that the experiences of women and men from the
conflict-affected populations are heard and are making
their way into the daily public reports. We need to
further invest in improving the gender balance among
our monitors in order to ensure mixed patrols that reach
out more effectively to the local population.

Allow me to share with the Council some examples
of progress achieved over the past year by the OSCE.
A total of31 countries members of OSCE have adopted
national action plans on resolution 1325 (2000), an
increase of three since last year. OSCE continues to
build the capacity of participating States to develop and
implement their national action plans, by exchanging
experiences and by providing targeted support at the
national level. Just last week, the OSCE secretariat
conducted the second National Action Plan Academy
for five countries, and there are several more in
the pipeline.

We welcome the development and implementation
of localized action plans at the subnational level in
Ukraine. We will be supporting that initiative, which
presents a unique opportunity and potentially good
practice. OSCE field operations, institutions and
our secretariat work to build women's leadership at
the national and local levels, through mentoring and
supporting their networks and capacity development.
For example, the Border Management Staff College
in Dushanbe offers specialized training for women
border guards.

We continue to work on gender-inclusive mediation
processes. In April this year, we organized a high-level
mediation retreat with heads of mission and special
representatives. Building on that meeting, OSCE is
preparing an analysis of our OSCE-led mediation
processes and practical guidance.

OSCE political-military bodies, such as the Forum
for Security Cooperation and the Security Committee,
increasingly incorporate gender perspectives in their
agendas, and the High-level Planning Group has
mainstreamed gender in its work plans. The OSCE
has been at the forefront in ensuring that a gender
perspective is included in its efforts to prevent violent
extremism and radicalization, which may lead to
terrorism. The new Leaders against Intolerance and
Violent Extremism project specifically includes women
community leaders and young women and men. Strong
leadership is essential if we are to achieve progress.
We have therefore introduced the executive gender-
coaching programme for the Secretary General and
secretariat Directors so as to provide them with the
necessary skills and tools to mainstream gender into
their work.

Within our organizations, we recognize that
more efforts are needed to implement a sustained and
systematic approach aimed at improving women's
participation in peace processes and at preventing
and effectively responding to conflict. The OSCE will
continue building stronger synergies and linkages and
participating in key initiatives, such as the Woman,
Peace and Security National Focal Points Network and
the regional acceleration initiative. We look forward to
developing even closer partnerships with the United
Nations and other organizations.

