Ms. Gamliel (Israel): I should like to thank
you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to address
the Chamber on this important topic. However, I
feel compelled to begin by speaking out against the
unrelenting campaign ofterror being carried out against
my people. In recent weeks, Israel has been rocked by
a spate of violent attacks, stabbings, car bombs and fire
bombs. Men, women, children and even infants have
been targeted as they walk the streets or on their way
home from prayer.

We would expect to hear loud condemnation of such
violence, but when it comes to terror attacks on Israelis,
the international community and the Council seem to
lose their voice. Even this morning, I have heard fellow
leaders in this Chamber talking about terrorism while
not mentioning a word about terror in Israel, where
today we are burying its latest victims.

Unfortunately, Israel is facing a generation of
women, teens and even young children incited to hatred,
martyrdom and killing innocents, and not to peace and
coexistence. A l3-year old boy, instead of going to
play outside, comes to kill after being brainwashed. A
student who has her whole life in front of her comes
to murder. As a woman and as a mother, I believe that
education is the key to raising a generation of young
people committed to understanding and tolerance. In
Israel, the very first words our children learn at school
are shalom and salam - peace.

I am here today as Israel's Minister for Social
Equality - a ministry established for the first time
in Israel's history to deal with minorities and gender
issues and to enhance Israel's efforts to fight prejudice
and combat social inequality. Since its founding,
Israel has been committed to a vision of a society of
equal opportunities. Our Declaration of Independence
guarantees equal rights for all citizens, regardless of
gender, ethnicity or religion.

We believe that women should be free to choose
their own path in life, unhindered by barriers and bias.
This freedom paves the way for a better and more
stable society for all. In our efforts towards peace and
security, Israel believes that women are powerful agents
ofmoderation, particularly in the face of extremism. As
leaders and decision-makers, we can be a stabilizing
force. Especially in my region of the world, women are
an untapped potential for more peaceful societies.

As part of our commitment to gender equality,
Israel enacted legislation in 2005 that guarantees
women's equal participation in public decision-making,
peacebuilding, reconciliation and representation of
women in all national policy issues. The inclusion of
women is the key to opening the door to a sustainable
peace. Mashav - Israel's Agency for International
Development - has been actively training women from
throughout the world to equip them with the necessary
leadership skills so they can hold senior positions in
society. Israel's commitment to full participation has
been recognized here at the United Nations. Israel is
proud to have recentlyjoined the 48 States members of
the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security.
Together, we will work to advance global progress
towards women's empowerment.

The peace and prosperity of tomorrow depend
on the path we take today. Gender equality and equal
participation are the first steps on the road to conflict-
resolution, peacebuilding and peacekeeping. Israel is
proud to join its partners on the march towards a new
era in which women stand alongside men and lead the
way to the lofty goals of peace and security.

