Ms. Schuurman: I thank you, Madam President,
for giving me the opportunity to address the Security
Council in this open debate as the new NATO Special
Representative for Women, Peace and Security. The
creation ofa dedicated position within our organization
is in itself a clear sign of NATO's strong commitment
to deliver on the women and peace and security agenda.

I enter that office as we enter the fifteenth year of
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). It is a
year of reflection. What did we achieve and how do we
sustain our achievements? How can we ensure that it
becomes simply inconceivable to work for lasting peace
and security without engaging half of the population?

The issue of full participation of women is
particularly relevant for today's central theme:
displacement. The majority of displaced people
are women and girls. The already existing gender
inequalities make women particularly vulnerable in
situations of displacement. But that vulnerability should
not lead us to conclude that displaced women and girls
are unable to take on leadership roles. On the contrary.
time and again, it has been proven that women are key
assets in preventing conflict, in better responding and
in finding lasting solutions.

Unfortunately, women and girls remain all too
often an untapped resource. I therefore commend
the presidency for highlighting the need for the
meaningful inclusion of displaced women and girls
in decision-making and for integrating a gender
perspective in policies relating to refugees and displaced
persons in all four pillars of the women and peace and
security agenda.

Increasing awareness is key. Within NATO,
integrating a gender perspective in crisis management
exercises - for instance, through scenarios that include
possible indicators that sexual violence is taking place
- has proved to be an important tool for increasing
the understanding and preparedness of our staff. At
the recent NATO summit in Wales, we published a
progress report on the NATO implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda. Much has been
accomplished in order to integrate the agenda into
NATO's everyday activities. We need to continue to
show leadership and commitment in order to sustain
and consolidate our achievements. To do that, this year
we endorsed a revised policy and an action plan with
clear and ambitious objectives.

I would like to stress that we did not do that alone.
Both policy and action plan were developed with the
participation of all 28 allies and almost 30 partner
nations from all over the globe. Well over 50 nations
signed up for concrete action to further reduce barriers
to meaningful participation, to broaden our partnership
with civil society and to continue to mainstream a
gender perspective in our everyday security business.
One of the very concrete deliverables is to develop
military guidelines to prevent and to respond to sexual
Violence in conflict. We will strive to deliver on that
commitment within the months to come.
The greater empowerment of women will benefit
all our societies. It will also further our common cause
of promoting lasting peace and security. NATO will
continue to play its full part in the effort and translate
its firm commitment into day-to-day practice.

