Mrs. Byaje (spoke in French): On behalf of the
Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS), I would like to start by thanking the delegation
of Germany for the excellent work carried out during its
presidency of the Council during this month of April,

and by wishing you, Mr. President, every success in the
work that remains to be done.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative on Sexual Violence in
Conflict, as well as all the other speakers who have
preceded me, for their constructive contributions to this
open debate.

The choice of today's topic reflects your
commitment, Sir, to the protection and advancement
of women and girls against sexual violence in conflict
situations, within the United Nations humanitarian
framework. It is a pledge of your firm commitment to
address that worrying question with renewed vigour in
order to finally move from words to deeds.

The Economic Community of Central African
States congratulates you, Mr. President, on this
undertaking and takes the opportunity to commend
the concrete initiatives taken by its member States, as
well as their sustained political will, as evidenced by
the implementation of laws, policies and mechanisms
to address abuses of women in conflict-affected areas.
ECCAS continues to assure its member States of its
full collaboration in the process of aligning national
legislation with regional and international instruments.

Despite the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) and
subsequent resolutions, which have been crucial in
raising awareness regarding violence against women
and girls during times of conflict and in humanitarian
environments in which they are regularly raped and
abused with full impunity, nonetheless women and girls
continue to be subjected to all kinds of sexual abuse in
the midst of conflict, where the use of that inhumane
and degrading practice has become the norm and rape
is a weapon of war.

It is urgent that we put an end to that trend in the
name of the young girls, women and children who are
seeing the world crumble around them without any
hope of resuming a normal life or having their attackers
brought to justice. To that end, a change in our practices
and actions in peacekeeping and peacebuilding
missions, as well as in the protection of civilians, is
essential if we are to eradicate the scourge.

It is in that context that ECCAS is striving to
consolidate early warning mechanisms to strengthen
its capacities in preventing and managing armed
conflict by advocating for the participation of women
in peace and security processes. It is also for the
sake of contributing to that effort that seven of its 11
member States have adopted national action plans on
innovative resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace
and security. A regional action plan for the resolution's
implementation has also been approved and adopted by
member States.

It should also be emphasized that the economic
and social empowerment of women is at the heart of
all the actions undertaken in the context of national
plans, because it is indeed a cross-cutting issue in all
sectors. It is therefore imperative, including in the
areas of peace, security and inclusive governance,
that a favourable climate be established to ensure that
women participate actively in mediation, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding, as well as in post-conflict building
efforts, while benefiting from laws that protect them in
armed conflict.

Allow me to recall an example that was highlighted
so eloquently by the representative of Rwanda, namely,
the 250,000 rape victims of Rwanda - one of our
member States - during the genocide perpetrated
against the Tutsi in 1994, who saw their hopes and
dreams forever shattered, especially since the majority
of them contracted HIV/AIDS. I am also compelled
to mention the daily abuses suffered by women in the
areas where armed groups thrive in our subregion. Such
heinous and humiliating crimes, such as rape, sexual
abuse and violence against women in times of conflict,
rob victims of all dignity and lead to discrimination
against them and stigmatization, while leaving them
with moral, physical and psychological wounds.

In order to address the root causes of all forms of
violence against women and girls, the following essential
steps have been proposed in some ofour member States'
national plans for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), which should be encouraged and supported:
first, allocating resources to prevent sexual abuse and
mitigate its consequences, while raising awareness
of violence against women in conflict settings;
secondly, strengthening social justice mechanisms
and creating institutional and legal frameworks to
facilitate access to justice, while developing policies
to fight impunity; thirdly, monitoring and evaluating
progress; fourthly, prosecuting the perpetrators of
such crimes and providing support and reparations to
survivors of sexual violence; and lastly, ensuring that
women are represented in the contingents deployed in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations, as well as

in post-conflict building, and sharing good practices
with local authorities.

To conclude, the ultimate goal of today's debate can
be attained by adhering to the different preconditions
that we have just cited. If we establish all the necessary
circumstances, we will be able to arrive at practical
solutions for transforming the negative experiences
of victims of rape and sexual violence into positive
developments so as to restore human dignity and
eliminate once and for all violence against women and
the structural obstacles to their economic, social and
political empowerment and gender equality.

ECCAS will continue its reach out to member States
to encourage them to accelerate the implementation
of their national plans on resolution 1325 (2000), as
well as the legal decisions and instruments adopted
to enable women to participate in all spheres of life.
To that end, ECCAS welcomes the collaboration with
its strategic partners, particularly the United Nations,
the African Union and the other regional economic
communities, as well as civil society and the private
sector, in exchanging experiences and good practices.

Finally, we welcome the support of those partners
in pooling human and material resources at the regional,
national and continental levels with a view to charting
the way forward and identifying the collective actions
to be taken to win the fight against sexual violence.

