Mrs. Theofili (Greece): At the outset, I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
highly relevant and timely debate. My delegation aligns
itself with the statement to be made by the observer of
the European Union and would like to contribute the
following remarks.

Nearly 20 years after the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), the achievement of full and equitable
participation of women in peacekeeping operations is
still a work in progress. We believe that this situation
is detrimental not only to the cause of gender parity
but also to the efficiency of peacekeeping missions
themselves. Peacekeeping is a highly complex form
of military operation. It requires skills that often go
beyond traditional military training and it demands a
higher degree of human sensitivity, diplomatic skills,
cultural diversity and professional composure. Against
that background, women peacekeepers are not only
equal but sometimes better equipped. Gender parity
is a question of not just female underrepresentation in
peacekeeping but rather a chronic underutilization of
our greatest asset for achieving its objectives.

In that context, we welcome the commitment,
clear vision and concrete action plan contained in the
uniformed gender parity strategy 2018-2028. I am
glad to report that the troop contribution of my own
country, Greece, to the maritime component of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon includes a
percentage of military personnel that is at least three
times higher than United Nations average. We are well
on track today to achieving the strategy's objectives
for 2028.

Earlier we heard Major General Lund describing
her experience in United Nations Peacekeeping Force
in Cyprus (UNFICYP), I am proud that through our
considerable budgetary contribution to UNFICYP, we
support the peacekeeping mission with the highest
record in achieving gender parity at all levels, including
the upper echelons of command.

However, for gender parity to be fully achieved,
further action is needed to promote gender positive
training. For our part, we are happy to share our
experiences through the United Nations military
observers course offered by the Multinational Peace
Support Operations Training Centre in Greece. In
addition to that, training can take place in the form of
mentoring programmes in the field, which have an even
greater potential for disseminating gender positive
narratives to the local armed forces and deployed
personnel of troop-contributing countries alike.

Finally, creating an operational environment for
women in uniform that is free from gender bias and
abuse should be a top consideration when prioritizing the
allocation of relevant human and budgetary resources.

To conclude, the Security Council can contribute
to lifting the afore-mentioned internal barriers by
consistently and horizontally following up on the
subject when discussing relevant mandates. By doing
so, it may even mitigate the effects of broader external
barriers, such as the unfavourable distribution of family
responsibilities and professional opportunities with
which women in uniform have to contend.

