Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia) (spoke in French): We
thank the French presidency for organizing today's
open debate. We also thank the briefers for sharing their
thoughts and perspectives on the question of women
and peace and security.

(spoke in English)

Ethiopia welcomes the positive developments that
have taken place over the years in advancing the women
and peace and security agenda since the adoption of
the Security Council's groundbreaking resolution 1325
(2000), particularly in ensuring the participation and
representation of women in political processes. We
also welcome the initiatives and measures taken by
the Secretary-General and the broader United Nations
system aimed at advancing the women and peace
and security agenda through a renewed commitment
to gender equality and women's representation and
improving gender mainstreaming in United Nations
planning, programming, resource mobilization and
rapid deployment. We also welcome the work of the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and her team of
experts for their efforts to strengthen national capacities
to address sexual violence.

We note with serious concern the challenges
identified in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/861) in relation to the issues of gender
inequality, of ensuring women's participatio, and of
conflict-related sexual and gender-based violence, as
well as the unprecedented increase in the number of
women who participate in violent extremist and terrorist
groups, including as foreign terrorist fighters. We also
recognize that much more needs to be done to address
sexual exploitation and abuse, based on substantiated
evidence. Taking into account both the progress that
has been made and the continuing challenges regarding
the women and peace and security agenda, we would
like to highlight a few points that focus on the best
way to integrate an original approach into the broader
women and peace and security discussion, based on our
experience in Africa.

In the past few years Africa has registered
significant progress in advancing the women and
peace and security agenda, both at the continental
and subregional levels. As indicated in the Secretary-
General's report, a number of African countries have
adopted national action plans based on resolution
1325 (2000) and other subsequent resolutions on
women and peace and security. The African Union,
along with subregional organizations such as the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, has also
adopted gender policies. In our view, those policies,
coupled with other legal instruments, could provide a
very good basis for coordination between the United
Nations and the African Union in facilitating greater
implementation and enhancing the advancement of the
women and peace and security agenda in Africa.

Among other things, such coordination could focus
on ensuring the active participation of women and
women's groups in peace processes, conflict prevention
and resolution and peacebuilding activities, as well
as on promoting and protecting the human rights of
women in conflict and post-conflict situations. One
way of enhancing such cooperation could be through
missions such as the recent joint United Nations-African
Union high-level solidarity mission to Nigeria and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, led by the Deputy
Secretary-General in July. Mechanisms to utilize the
good offices of the Special Envoy of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission on Women, Peace
and Security could also be explored with the aim of
advancing the women and peace and security agenda at
the continental level.

We believe it is also important to further strengthen
support in the African Union or at subregional levels
for initiatives and frameworks such as those aimed
at ensuring women's participation and leadership
as observers or in advisory roles in peace processes,
in mediation and election observer missions or in
countering violent extremism. It is in that context that,
while we welcome the focus of the next annual report
of the Secretary-General on the quality of participation
and representation of women in peace processes, we
encourage the Secretary-General to include in the
report regional approaches adopted by the United
Nations to advance the women and peace and security
agenda, with a particular focus on cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union.

I would like to conclude by emphasizing the
importance of addressing systemic challenges to
women's access to political and economic spaces in order
to ensure prosperous and peaceful societies. That will
require a renewed commitment to building partnerships
with various stakeholders, particularly regional and
subregional organizations, the States concerned,
development agencies, civil-society organizations,
women experts and groups and peace and security
partners within the women and peace and security
agenda. I would therefore like to affirm Ethiopia's
commitment to working towards this objective.

