Mr. Schieb (Germany): At the outset, let me thank
all the briefers for their insightful presentations, as well
as Chile for having organized this open debate. I also
thank Ms. Elman for her statement on behalf of civil
society.

Mr. Llanos took the Chair.

Germany aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union and by the
representative of Switzerland on behalf of the Group of
Friends of the Protection of Civilians.

Women and girls face special challenges and needs
in armed conflict and post-conflict settings. They are
particularly vulnerable and affected, since they face
an increased risk of sexual violence. Rape, forced
pregnancy, sexual trafficking or enslavement, and
many other forms of brutal abuse have become vicious
tactics of warfare for many parties to conflict. As we
speak, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and
Boko Haram 4 just to name two of the many vicious
perpetrators - are killing, raping and abducting
women and girls, and leaving thousands behind forever
traumatized. In Syria, indiscriminate aerial bombings,
including the use of barrel bombs, and indiscriminate
shelling continue to result in deaths, injuries and
the displacement of civilians, including women and
children. In December alone, at least 107 civilians
including 27 children, were reportedly killed in Aleppo
as a result of aerial attacks and shelling.

This has further devastating effects. Many women
and girls in conflict areas, as well as boys, no longer
leave their homes out of fear. As a consequence, they
have no access to medical care or education. In such
a situation, we face the risk of a generation of lost
children without an education who bear the trauma of
war. And they are the ones who are supposed to rebuild
their society after the end ofa conflict.

Women play an equally key role in post-conflict
situations. Armed conflicts often lead to fundamental
changes to the social fabric. Many children grow up
without a father, and women have to assume more
responsibility if society wants to advance. Therefore,
resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent related
resolutions focus on the two aspects of strengthening the
participation of women in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts, and incorporating policies and procedures
that protect women from gender-based crimes, such as
rape and sexual assault.

From the outset, Germany has been a strong
supporter of resolution 1325 (2000) within the United
Nations framework, as well as in terms of activities
and project support. Let me mention some aspects that
are particularly important for the better protection and
strengthening ofwomen and girls in armed conflict and
in post-conflict situations.

First, for peacekeeping or peacebuilding missions,
gender-sensitive predeployment training is essential.
Germany believes that standardized gender-sensitive
training for participants in United Nations-led peace
missions should be made a prerequisite for deployment.
Nationally, our Federal Ministry of Defence attaches
particular importance to gender-related issues in
intercultural and regionally specific preparations
for international operations. Moreover, it regularly
conducts courses to train women for peace and security,
together with police and other agencies.

The second element is accountability. If perpetrators
can expect to go unpunished, parties to conflict are
more likely to use sexual violence as a tactic of warfare.
Nowhere is this more evident than in Syria, where the
regime and the foreign militias it has invited, as well as
some extremist groups, are killing and abusing women
daily without any fear of punishment. Accountability is
also crucial for reconciliation. Ifhatred and fear prevail
in a society, peace will not be possible. Obviously,
accountability is first and foremost the responsibility
of each State. Therefore, national capacities need to
be built and supported. It is crucial that victims not be
afraid to speak up. Justice and security sector reforms
are essential. When effective prosecution in a State
concerned is not possible, then the only way to achieve
justice for victims and survivors is to transfer these
cases to international jurisdiction, including to the
International Criminal Court.

Thirdly, victims of sexual violence need as much
assistance as possible to find their way back to a normal
life. We have to set up the necessary capacities in the
given region. Countries that participated in the Berlin
Conference on the Syrian refugee situation last October
committed themselves in the Berlin declaration to
taking action against sexual violence. Germany funds a
number of relevant projects in that respect. To name but
a few, in Iraq we have helped to set up six centres for
psychological trauma treatment and a social forum for
victims of the Anfal campaign. In Syria's neighbouring
countries, we are building centres for treatment, support
and counselling for Syrian victims of sexual violence.

Fourthly, monitoring and reporting on conflict-
related sexual violence is central to all protection. Data
collection is essential to our ability to prevent, protect
and respond, and the precondition for any justice
and accountability mechanism at the national and
international levels. In addition, casualty recording is
crucial. Sex- and age-disaggregated casualty data can
reveal the tactics and patterns of determination of the
perpetrators that cause particular harm to women and
girls. Women protection advisers therefore need to be
deployed, and monitoring and reporting arrangements
should be established in all relevant peacekeeping
and special political missions. A good example is the
mandating ofwomen protection advisers in the Mission
in the Central African Republic.

As in the past, Germany will maintain its strong
support for UN-Women, UNICEF and all other relevant
actors, including civil society organizations, to ensure
that women and girls are protected in armed conflicts
and can play a strong role in post-conflict societies.

Before closing, let me touch upon the conflict in
Ukraine, where civilians - among them, many women
and girls - are being killed on a daily basis in the heart
of Europe. On 24 January, a horrific attack on residential
areas occured in Mariupol, killing at least 30 civilians
and injuring many more. The Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission
confirmed that the rockets were launched from rebel-
held territory. In his recent briefings to the Council,
Under-Secretary-General Feltman expressed the View
of the United Nations that the indiscriminate shelling of
civilian areas of Mariupol could constitute a war crime.
How many more reminders does it take to make sure
that all sides to that conflict push more vigorously for a
peaceful solution?

