Mrs. Sulimani (Sierra Leone): Owing to time
constraints, 1 will just say all protocols observed;
permit me to cut the opening courtesies. That said, we
will submit our detailed statement to PaperSmart.

Since the adoption of the ground-breaking resolution
1325 (2000), country has remained committed to the
implementation of the spirit and letter of this and other
relevant resolutions, including the one that was adopted
six days ago, resolution 2493 (2019). As we resume
discussions today to assess the progress made so far,
ahead of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), my delegation is pleased to
update Member States on how far we have come on the
road to implementation.

Soon after the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
Sierra Leone joined Member States that were ready to
take the lead in implementing that forward-looking
resolution. We were the fourth country in West
Africa, the seventh in Africa and the seventeenth
globally to adopt a national action plan for the full
implementation of the resolution. Our first national
action plan highlighted our commitment to, as well as
accountability in, ensuring the security of women and
girls and enhancing their direct participation in conflict
prevention, resolution and peacebuilding efforts in
the country.

Building on those gains and in keeping with the
commitment we made to UN-Women in April this year,
we have developed and adopted a second-generation
national action plan, which underscores the core values
of the prevention of violence, protection, participation
and recovery. The plan deals with issues ranging from
the prevention of conflict in communities to addressing
its root causes at all levels.

Cognizant of our reporting obligations under
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW), we have
developed and finalized our seventh periodic report. We
await its submission to the CEDAW Committee. As part
of our commitment to the promotion of gender equality
and women's empowerment, we have dedicated cluster
5 of our medium-term national development plan for
the period 2019-2023 to empowering women, children
and persons with disabilities.

Sierra Leone will continue to provide the policy
and legal environment for the protection of women
and girls and their inclusion in decision-making,
peacebuilding and development processes at all levels.
We recently enacted the Sexual Offences Act 2019,
which is an amendment to the Sexual Offences Act
2012, to include elements of deterrent penalties against
the perpetrators of rape and other forms of sexual and
gender-based violence.

As a country that experienced a civil war, during
which sexual violence was extensively and systematically
used against defenceless women and girls, the issue of
protection from abuse, exploitation and violence will
remain a top priority on our development agenda. The
Government of Sierra Leone will continue to give the
issue the attention it deserves. The Parliament of Sierra
Leone, for instance, adopted the women and peace and
security agenda on 14 February, which is an important
milestone in moving the women and peace and security
agenda forward in Sierra Leone.

We believe that violence against women and girls
has no place in our society and will do our utmost to
intensify efforts to build prevention and response
mechanisms. The official declaration of a national
emergency on rape and sexual violence made by our
President, His Excellency Mr. Julius Maada Bio, on
7 February, is one such major prevention mechanism,
with various elements, including life imprisonment for
the sexual penetration of minors and the creation of
a special division for the rape and sexual penetration
of minors.

The role of women in peacebuilding cannot be
overemphasized in our contemporary world. The
Government of Sierra Leone values their contribution
to nation-building, especially in peacemaking and
peacebuilding initiatives. Our women will therefore
continue to play critical roles in the attainment ofpeace
and sustainable development.

My delegation is delighted to note that much has
been achieved by our individual countries, the United
Nations and other relevant institutions towards the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). Our army
recently recruited all-female military personnel. The
recruitment of females in the police and other law
enforcement agencies has also increased over the years.
That, we believe, will increase female participation
in peacekeeping missions around the world where we
have personnel.

We will continue to support the Council's call in
resolution 2242 (2015) for the doubling of the number
of women in the military and police contingents of
United Nations peacekeeping operations.

Let me conclude by saying that resolution 1325
(2000) was adopted three years before the civil war
Sierra Leone was officially declared over. We therefore
believe in the core tenets of that and other relevant
resolutions and will continue to consolidate the
gains made by ensuring the inclusive participation of
all stakeholders.

