Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): Iwould
like to begin by congratulating the United Kingdom on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
November. China is also grateful to South Africa for its
practical and efficient work as President of the Council
for October.

China thanks Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed and Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed,
Permanent Observer of the African Union (AU) to the
United Nations, for their briefings.

We welcome the AU-United Nationsjoint solidarity
mission to the Horn of Africa and commend the United
Nations and AU for attaching importance to the
significant role of women in regional peace, security
and development. Given the important strategic
location of the Horn of Africa, maintaining stability
in the region has a bearing on peace and development
throughout Africa.

Recently, positive progress has been made on the
political, economic and security fronts in the Horn
of Africa, which have been widely acclaimed by the
international community. Challenges nevertheless
remain. In particular, the rights and interests of women
in peace and development have yet to be effectively
guaranteed, which necessitates continued international
assistance. In that regard, I would like to underscore the
following points.

First, there is a need to resolve differences through
dialogue and consultation. The United Nations and
the international community should act on the basis
of respect for State sovereignty, actively mediate and
facilitate peace talks, help regional countries build
mutual trust, resolve hotspot issues politically and
provide an enabling environment for the survival and
development of women affected by conflicts. China has
always supported African countries in seeking African
solutions to their problems and supports their efforts to
engage women as major players in conflict prevention
and mediation, while ensuring their full involvement in
decision-making and post-conflict peacebuilding and
national development processes.
Secondly, there must be respect for the leading role
of the countries concerned, which bear the primary
responsibility of protecting women in conflict. They
should adopt an integrated approach to providing
security guarantees and humanitarian relief and
resolutely combat violations of women's rights in
conflict situations. The international community should
fully respect, trust and support African countries
and provide constructive assistance in response to
the needs of the countries concerned. The Security
Council, the Peacebuilding Commission, UN-Women
and other relevant agencies should, in accordance with
their respective mandates, maximize their respective
advantages and strengthen coordination to jointly
promote the important role of women in the field of
peace and security.

Thirdly, due regard must be given to economic and
social development. We must give top priority to those
areas and strive to eliminate the root causes of conflict
by promoting the comprehensive economic and social
development of countries of the region. The Horn of
Africa faces issues such as unemployment and refugees
and needs help from the international community in
meeting its development challenges, strengthening
capacity-building and leveraging the role of conflict-
affected women in contributing to regional peace and
security. The United Nations should make full use
of various mechanisms, including its country teams
and the United Nations Development Programme, to
provide constructive assistance, thereby improving the
capacity of African countries to achieve sustainable
economic and social development.

China and Africa have always been part of a
community of shared future. China firmly supports
African countries in their efforts to maintain regional
peace and stability. China stands ready to work
with African countries and the wider international
community to bring the work of United Nations on
women, peace and security to a new high and make new
contributions to peace and development in Africa.

