Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): I thank you,
Mr. President, and the United States delegation for
convening this important debate on sexual violence in
situations of armed conflict as a follow-up to Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace
and security, an issue to which my country attaches
great importance. I thank Secretary of State Rice for
personally presiding over the Council's deliberations
earlier today. I also thank Their Excellencies the
Secretary-General, the Deputy Secretary-General and
the President of the General Assembly for their
participation and their statements.

Commitments to resolve the issue of sexual
violence against women are contained in major
documents such as the 2005 World Summit Outcome
Document (General Assembly resolution 60/1), the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women and the Convention on
the Rights of the Child.

These, together with the 2008 adoption by the
General Assembly of resolution 62/134 on
"Eliminating rape and other forms of sexual violence
in all their manifestations, including in conflict and
related situations" and the Secretary-General's launch
this year of a multi-year global campaign to end
violence against women, manifest the concern of
Member States about the widespread nature of this type
of inhumane acts against the "better half" of
humankind as well as their determination to tackle it.

My delegation is deeply concerned by the grave
sexual violence in many conflict areas, which
continues to occur despite repeated strong
condemnation and calls for the parties concerned to
take measures to prevent and put an end to such acts,
whose consequences are not only the personal suffering
of women and girls, but very often also the breakdown
of their families and the spread of contagious diseases
such as HIV/AIDS, which adversely affect whole
communities and their post-conflict reconstruction
processes. The consequences are even more severe
when victims are under-age girls.

Viet Nam holds the view that the most effective
way to protect women and girls from sexual violence,
including sexual violence in armed conflict, is to
empower women and girls, help them understand their
fundamental rights and raise their awareness and their
capacity to protect themselves. We fully endorse the
women's empowerment and advancement measures set
out in the Beijing Platform for Action. As sexual
violence, including sexual violence in armed conflict
situations, has been a major topic intensively debated
by other pertinent United Nations bodies, it is
important to enhance the efficiency of those existing
mechanisms and improve coordination and cooperation
between the Security Council and those bodies, while
avoiding duplication of their work.

The inter-agency United Nations Action against
Sexual Violence in Conflict should serve as a tool to
enhance such coordination. At the same time, we must
make sure that any new mechanism to be established
will be given careful consideration so as not to create
unnecessary administrative and financial burdens for
Member States and United Nations agencies.

I wish to further emphasize that States bear the
primary responsibility to protect their own civilians
and deal with violence against them, including sexual
violence.

As far as peacekeeping missions are concerned,
we support the recommendation contained in the draft
resolution presented for adoption by the Council today
that the Secretary-General, in consultation with the
Security Council, the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations and its Working Group and
relevant States, develop and implement appropriate
training programmes for all peacekeeping and
humanitarian personnel deployed by the United
Nations in the context of missions, as mandated by the
Council, to help them better prevent, recognize and
respond to sexual violence and other forms of violence
against civilians.

This and the empowerment of women and girls
are essential measures of prevention, which is, in my
delegation's view, always more effective and less
costly than cure.

