Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): At the outset, I convey
condolences on behalf of my country and myself to the
families of the victims of the recent horrible terrorist
attacks and the assassination.

I thank Spain for convening this very important
Security Council open debate. Trafficking in persons in
conflict situations is still a new matter for the Council.
We would also like to congratulate Spain for initiating
the adoption of today's historic resolution 2331 (2016),
on this extremely important topic. Hungary was happy
to co-sponsor the resolution.
We are deeply troubled that trafficking in
persons - often but not only for sexual purposes - has
become a recurring feature and by-product of armed
conflicts. In conflict and post-conflict situations, the
level of insecurity, as well as the breakdown in family
and community structures and other safety nets,
increases the exposure of women, men, girls and boys
to diverse forms of human exploitation. In order to fight
trafficking in persons in situations of conflict more
effectively, Hungary proposes the following.

First, the United Nations and its States Members
need to play a more active, leading role in the fight
against human trafficking and other forms of modern
slavery. We encourage the incoming Secretary-General
to place the fight against this global threat, which affects
tens of millions of people, at the top of his agenda.

Second, it is essential to ratify and effectively
implement the relevant international instruments,
such as the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children, supplementing the Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime, and the Protocol of
2014 to the Forced Labour Convention, 1930.

Third, strong prevention and protection efforts are
urgently required in order to ensure that those impacted
by conflict situations do not become vulnerable
to traffickers.

Fourth, accountability for trafficking in persons in
conflict is essential. While in specific circumstances
the International Criminal Court and other international
accountability mechanisms could, and should, play an
important role, we must not forget that the primary
responsibility for bringing those responsible to justice
lies with States.

Fifth, Hungary supports the inclusion of
perpetrators of trafficking in persons in United Nations
and unilateral sanctions.

Sixth, Hungary is also ofthe view that coordination
and cooperation among all relevant United Nations
entities - including the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC), the International Organization
for Migration, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the International Labour
Organization, UNICEF and UN-Women - will also
need to be improved. The new Secretary-General will
need to play a key role in that regard.

Seventh, we need more, and more reliable, data
on the subject. In that regard, Hungary welcomes
the launch of the 2016 UNODC Global Report on
Trafficking in Persons.

I would like to thank the briefers for their accounts,
because they were so important and moving to all ofus:
the Secretary-General; Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive
Director of UNODC; the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Zainab Bangura; and the two
very important activists who have brought this matter
to life for the Council. Hungary is ready to participate
actively in discussions and activities to strengthen the
response of the United Nations to this global threat.

