Ms. Mutsch (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
I thank the United Kingdom presidency for taking
the initiative to hold this open debate, which accords
the fight against human trafficking the importance it
deserves. This morning's briefings rightly underlined
the need to redouble efforts to combat this scourge,
which affects millions of people.

Luxembourg fully supports the intervention to be
made by the observer of the European Union.

Luxembourg is aware of its responsibilities as a
country of transit and destination. No country can
claim to be spared from the scourge of trafficking in
human beings.

The overwhelming testimony of survivors of
the slave trade shows how much the latter is the very
negation of humanity. Let us recall here the words
(see S/PV.7685) of Ms. Nadia Murad Basee Taha,
who exposed the sexual slavery perpetrated by Da'esh
against civilian populations, in particular Yazidis in
Iraq. It is mainly women and children who are targeted,
and the international community must assume its
responsibility to protect these populations.

Displaced persons regardless of their
status - whether internally displaced persons, migrants
or refugees - are particularly vulnerable. That should
be borne in mind at the time of the adoption, in 2018,
of the draft global compact on refugees and the draft
global compact for safe, orderly and regular migration.

In the European context, Luxembourg is committed
to trafficking that affects migrants and refugees. My
country is therefore stepping up its participation in
Operation SOPHIA by providing a second maritime
surveillance aircraft. The objective of this European
Union operation, authorized by the Security Council,
is to dismantle the economic model of the networks of
human smugglers and traffickers in the Mediterranean
Sea. It has already saved thousands of lives.

Also at European level, we participated in the Dutch
initiative "Team Work!" to strengthen cooperation
against trafficking in human beings for the purpose of
exploitation through labour.

Luxembourg made the fight against trafficking
in human beings a priority of its presidency of the
Benelux Union in 2016. We have renewed cooperation
between our three countries and brought together
actors on the ground, including non-governmental
organizations, in order to provide better assistance to
victims of trafficking.

At the national level, our policy to combat
trafficking in persons employs a horizontal approach
that involves all stakeholders. In 2009, we set up an
inter-ministerial monitoring committee, whose work
has led in particular to the adoption by the Government
of a national action plan agaomst trafficking in
persons, in December 2016. In my role as Minister
of Equal Opportunities, I presented, along with the
Minister of Justice, a strategy to regulate prostitution,
which provides for the strengthening of the legislative
framework. A draft law that aims to punish the clients of
victims of trafficking in persons for sexual exploitation
is being considered by Parliament. Finally, a national
awareness campaign was launched at the initiative of
the monitoring committee to better detect and counter
the trafficking in persons in all its forms.

The perpetrators of human trafficking must be held
accountable for their actions, whether at the national or
international level. Here too, the International Criminal
Court has a role to play. The Rome Statute identifies
trafficking in persons, women and children in particular,
as a crime against humanity when committed as part
of a widespread or systematic attack directed against
any civilian population and with knowledge of the
attack. Justice, by its punitive and dissuasive nature, is
indispensable to our collective action.

