Mrs. Garcia Gutierrez (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome the fact that, since the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), the women and peace and
security agenda has gained significant importance
as part of the normative architecture of the United
Nations as a crucial component in order to prevent
conflict, maintain peace and achieve the Sustainable
Development Agenda. It should continue to be included
in all areas of the Security Council's work as a priority.

We recognize the various steps taken to improve
the implementation of this agenda in various areas.
However, the gender balance at the senior management
level is desirable and necessary. According to the
Secretary-General's report (S/2017/861), to date only
23 per cent of senior peacekeeping posts are held by
women. Therefore, the gender parity commitments
have not been complied with. We call upon both
the permanent and elected members of the Council
to unequivocally support the Secretary-General's
commitment to achieving gender parity at all levels in
the appointments of the United Nations.

It is crucial to include gender and human rights
perspectives in various areas of peace and security
processes, such as, for example, in commissions of
inquiry, in mediation processes and in justice and
transition mechanisms. We welcome some efforts in
that regard, such as the systematic inclusion of women
protection advisers in strategic planning processes
for political missions and peacekeeping operations, in
the training of experts on the rule of law and sexual
violence in conflict and as gender advisers in each
commission of investigation of cases of crimes related
to cases of sexual violence and abuse. The incidence
and widespread use of sexual violence as a tactic
of terror and a weapon of war is heartbreaking and
unacceptable. Such acts must be punished with full
force, while completely eliminating impunity and
referring perpetrators to the International Criminal
Court. These acts are a crime against humanity.

We commend the efforts of the Secretary-General
to reform the Organization's peace and security
architecture, in particular the initiative to address
sexual exploitation and abuse, with regard to which we
reiterate our zero-tolerance policy. Costa Rica joined
the voluntary compact on this issue, launched last
September, as a way of reiterating our commitment to
the prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse. We also
welcome the appointment of a victims' rights advocate
and the establishment ofa trust fund to support victims.

We stress the need to provide the necessary support
to victims and survivors of sexual violence in conflict
so that they have the ability to properly reintegrate into
their communities in a dignified manner. The economic
empowerment of women has a positive effect on post-
conflict recovery, and on economic growth in general.
We must break the standards of discrimination and
guarantee women's access to economic and financial
resources, to property, inheritance, health services,
including sexual and reproductive health, and to justice
and education.

It is also necessary to address the effects of armed
violence on women, and in particular recognize the
important role that women can play in disarmament,
non-proliferation and arms control. The adoption of the
Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons was a
historic achievement that included a large number of
women's groups and organizations. The leadership of
the conference that culminated in the adoption of the
Treaty was held by a woman from Costa Rica.

To guarantee equal opportunities and the economic,
social and political empowerment of women is an
imperative so that women and girls can take on, with
all the tools necessary, their essential transformative
role in their communities during post-conflict periods.

