Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to express my thanks for the presentation
of the report of the Secretary-General on women and
peace and security (S/2012/732) and for the briefings
by Ms. Michelle Bachelet, the Executive Director of
UN-Women, Under-Secretary-General Herve Ladsous,
and Ms. Bineta Diop, who spoke on behalf of the
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security.

This is a good opportunity to consider the work
being done by UN-Women, which as part of the General
Assembly's strategy has integrated the international
community's goals relating to gender equality and the
empowerment of women. It is also a good opportunity to
give special recognition to the enormous and dedicated
work being done by Madame Bachelet, her team and all
who collaborate with her to consolidate the agency as
an institution and to raise universal awareness of the
principles behind the mission of UN-Women.

Colombia has benefited from United Nations
technical and financial assistance to ensure the
introduction of a gender approach into its national
policies and laws. We are firmly committed to
implementing resolution 1325 (2000), specifically
by gradually increasing women's representation in
decision-making, supporting their peace initiatives,
strengthening their access to justice, empowering
them economically, creating jobs and identifying
their needs. Our purpose is to ensure the effective
enjoyment of women's rights in terms of equality and
non-discrimination, through positive actions with a
calibrated approach and through laws, taking into
account the importance of giving special attention and
protection to those affected by such events as armed
conflict and displacement.

With regard to the body of the Secretary-General's
report, our attention is particularly drawn to the
prominent role assigned to the culture of preventing
situations negatively affecting women, with special
emphasis on conflict situations, through mechanisms
such as early warnings, cooperation, constructive
dialogue and effective support for them in the public
decision-making arena. Also important are the
considerations concerning the importance of including
a differentiated approach in mechanisms for protecting
women, in accordance with their special characteristics,
and the full reinstatement of their rights and economic
empowerment.

States should be aware of the challenge posed by
the integrated implementation of a broad legislative
framework and protection initiatives geared towards
women and girls, as well as the difficulties involved in
prosecuting and punishing the perpetrators of crimes
affecting women and girls, particularly sexual violence
and related crimes. Prevention strategies aimed at
eradicating all forms of violence against women and
the special protection that should be provided to the
victims of this scourge are of fundamental importance.

In Colombia's case, we should highlight the
adoption of policies intended to include women,
eliminating discrimination and promoting women's
economic, political and social empowerment, and
their more active participation in development, both in
decision-making and in the benefits derived from it. We
emphasize successful initiatives such as the forming of
women's community councils, regional workshops for
indigenous women, and local boards. Such instruments
seek to strengthen women's links to public policies
and to maintain an ongoing dialogue with institutional
sectors and social organizations.

To that end, on 13 September, the Government
of Colombia launched its national public policy on
gender equality for women and the integrated plan
for a violence-free life, a national event at which,
moreover, Madame Bachelet was present, at the side
of our President and his Cabinet. Through such means
we intend to strengthen State action aimed at women's
equality and empowerment and to combat the scourge
of violence against women in Colombia. My country
has also joined the UNiTE to End Violence against
Women campaign, coordinated by UN-Women.
With reference to Ms. Diop's mention of Colombia,
I should state that we have welcomed the creation
of a chapter of Women for Peace and its noble goal
of contributing to the process currently under way.
Regarding another reference to women's participation
in the peace processes, I have just seen a photograph
on the BBC showing, among the negotiators, a woman
at the side of a man, both part of the guerrilla group's
negotiating team. There are women in the Colombian
Government's delegation as well. In fact, among the
signatures on the document launching the negotiation
agreements, there are those of women on both sides.
There are women in the support groups as well. I can
thus assure the Council that they will have a very
important voice throughout the peace process in my
country.

Concerning the indicators adopted to evaluate
progress in implementing resolution 1325 (2000) and
subsequent resolutions on the same subject, these have
the potential to become an important tool for designing
mechanisms for preventing harmful acts against
women and girls and for strengthening the protection
of victims. We believe it is important to emphasize that
such indicators should also be used in strict conformity
with the mandate as laid out by the various resolutions.
Maximum use should be made of the United Nations
reports and special political missions as references for
evaluating prevention. However, it is not helpful to take
those findings out of context when they have already
been discussed with States and do not contain new
information regarding the indicators.

In any case, what is highlighted are assessments
based on aspects particular to the internal functions of
the United Nations, such as the percentage of instances
of wrongful conduct by members of peacekeeping
missions,the proportion ofwomen inhigh-levelpositions
in field missions, the percentage of field missions with
gender experts, the degree to which measures to protect
the human rights of women and girls are included in
directives issued by peacekeeping missions, and the
proportion of United Nations financing used to tackle
gender-equality issues.

To deal with that assessment, States will have to
include in their reports updated figures on the numbers
and percentages of women's participation in their
Government bodies and parliaments, as well as the
percentage of temporary employment benefits received
by women in the context of early economic recovery
programmes.

It should be recognized that the primary
responsibility for protecting women in matters
related to peace and security belongs to States. Thus
multilateral bodies and reports submitted should
focus on coordinating procedures that facilitate
performances, help to reduce duplication of efforts and
build a coherent focus on the ground. The approaches
should not concentrate exclusively on mechanisms
designed to identify problems of human rights, since
they do not contribute to lasting solutions. What makes
a genuine contribution to reaching effective solutions
is mechanisms geared to cooperation, constructive
dialogue and effective support to countries.

