Ms. Shalev (Israel): Allow me to congratulate
you, Sir, on your able stewardship of the Council this
month and to thank you for convening this open debate
on woman and peace and security. It is an important
debate that reflects our commitment to the United
Nations founding ideals of peace and security for men
and women alike. As for myself, it is both a privilege
and an honour to address this body on behalf of my
Government as Israel's first female Ambassador to the
United Nations.

This year we mark the sixtieth anniversary of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, a document
that set out a noble vision for the world and reaffirmed
the equality of men and women. The past 60 years have
witnessed substantial progress for women around the
world. I come from a country that has had many
women actively involved in the political process and
public affairs from its establishment to the present day.
Today, Israel features women in significant and
meaningful positions of influence and authority,
including the Foreign Minister and Vice-Prime
Minister, the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court and
the Speaker of the Knesset, to name just a few. In
Israel we continue to witness increasing numbers of
women in all walks of public life, including in peace
negotiations and diplomacy.

All over the world, much more needs to be done.
A recent presentation by the Special Rapporteur on
violence against women stated that such violence
persists in every country as a pervasive and universal
violation of human rights. The United Nations and its
various entities have an important and leading role to
play in the protection of women's rights worldwide and
in the promotion of women in national and
international public affairs.

However, the commitment of the United Nations
on this issue does not diminish the primary
responsibility of national Governments and institutions
to protect women, promote their equality and ensure
their participation in all spheres of society.
On a local and national level, Israel remains
committed to the principles of the landmark Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000), which calls for an

increase in the participation of women at decision-
making levels in conflict resolution and in peace
processes. Israel amended its women's equal rights law
in the spirit of that resolution, mandating that the
Israeli Government include women in any group
appointed to peacebuilding negotiations. On a regional
level, and just as the resolution calls for, Israel is proud
that Foreign Minister Tzipi Livni is leading our peace
negotiations with the Palestinians.

As part of our engagement on an international
level, Israel contributed its first peacekeeper, a female
police officer, to the United Nations peacekeeping
mission in Georgia. In addition, Israel's international
aid agency offers courses around the world in women's
leadership as well as capacity-building for women's
organizations across the developing world.

Those are only a few examples of Israel's
commitment to the implementation of the Security
Council resolution.

While resolution 1325 (2000) addresses women's
participation in public life, the issue of violence against
women remains a critical component of any such
debate regarding women and peace and security. Israel
co-sponsored Council resolution 1820 (2008), which
signalled that acts of violence against women, in
particular rape and sexual violence as instruments of
warfare, are not only despicable acts but should be
classified as war crimes and crimes against humanity.
Sadly, across certain parts of the world we witness
violence and continuing discrimination against women.
In some countries, women and girls are subject to
stoning, rape and violent repression. The international
community should always, and consistently, confront
and condemn such violations of basic human rights.

It is my hope that our words and our actions will
offer hope to women around the globe. Today's
discussion reflects our common vision for a better
world and our commitment to the noble founding
principles of the United Nations.

