Ms. Anderson (Ireland): I would like to thank the
delegations of Guatemala and India for preparing and
scheduling today's important debate. To respect the
time constraints, I will touch on just a couple ofpoints,
and circulate a slightly longer written text.

The first point relates to transitions. The Secretary
General's report of 2 October bluntly states that
"considerable obstacles persist to women's participation
and representation in public decision-making in relation
to peace and transition processes" (S/20]2/732,para. 65).
Times of transition are absolutely critical; as a society
is being reshaped, opportunities can be either seized
or squandered. If such periods of transition are used
to comprehensively strengthen women's political and
economic participation, the foundations will be laid for
more just, more stable and more prosperous societies.
The prospect of critical transitional opportunities
being squandered should concern us all deeply. And
the risks are clearly and visibly there. Although we
are witnessing parts of the world, especially the Arab
world, undergoing social and political tumult and
transformation, when the smoke clears there tends to
be one striking constant: women still struggling to
secure a place at the table. It would seem that there is a
deep-seated reluctance, even more ingrained than fear
of authoritarian rulers, to let women play their rightful
role in charting the way forward.

The empowerment agenda is not an outsider's
agenda; it is one that is arising organically from within
those societies. Women, either individually or in civil
society organizations, have demonstrated, often at great
personal cost, their hunger and passion for change. And
we know that change is both necessary and possible.
The Secretary-General points out in his report that a
combination of strong gender analysis, active efforts by
his Special Adviser on Yemen and close engagement
with women leaders and groups resulted in the
inclusion of gender-specific commitments in the Yemen
Transition Agreement.

In its recent statements on women and peace and
security, the Security Councilhas recognizedthe primary
role and responsibility of national Governments. That
is indeed true, and we all recognize the importance of
national ownership. But national ownership can never
become a rationale or alibi for inaction by the rest of
us. For example, Member States taking an active role in
supporting the Syrian opposition coalition that is trying
to organize itself have themselves a responsibility to
seek to ensure the adequate representation of women in
that opposition.

It may be objected that in the immediacy of a
crisis there are other priorities requiring more urgent
attention. But there is a clear message in the Secretary-
General's report, that is, if a proper role for women is
not built in at the key moment, it will become much
harder to graft it on later. Women's role and concerns
are time and again pushed down the priority list; they
become in effect preamble or postscript issues, instead
of getting the front-and-centre treatment they need.

To make just a quick point in relation to civil society,
the Secretary-General's report makes specific mention
of one model for civil society engagement, namely, the
election "situation room". It was my privilege recently
to co-host at the Irish Mission a panel discussion on
the contribution made by the women's situation room
to ensuring peace and stability during the Senegalese
presidential elections held earlier this year. Ms. Bineta
Diop, who addressed the Security Council this
morning, was our main speaker. It was immensely
encouraging to hear about this participative, bottom-up
initiative. In the dynamism and proactive participation
of civil society at the grassroots level, empowering and
building on the capacities and real-life experiences of
local women, the women's situation room is a model to
be emulated and replicated widely.

The challenge is to document and disseminate such
initiatives in different countries so as to transform
single experiences into mainstream policy. The
strength of civil society initiatives often lies in their
spontaneity and local buy-in; the weaknesses can be in
ensuring structure, durability and transferability. The
Senegalese experiment was a particularly successful
one, and it is encouraging that UN-Women and the
United Nations Development Programme are working
to ensure that it is properly recorded and adapted for
use in other situations.

It is evident from the Secretary-General's report
that there is a substantial and expanding conceptual
infrastructure dedicated to women and peace and
security issues. As in so many other areas of United
Nations work, the challenge is implementation,
implementation, implementation. We need to ensure
that fine words in New York translate into measurable
and meaningful results on the ground. These regular
Security Council debates are worthwhile insofar as
they allow us to make that connection.
