The Secretary-General: I commend your
initiative, Mr. President, to convene this Security
Council debate on one of the important priorities of the
United Nations: women, peace and security.

Despite some progress over two decades, the
deliberate targeting of civilians through acts of sexual
violence continues on a widespread and systematic
basis. Parties to armed conflict continue to use sexual
violence with efficient brutality. Like a grenade or a
gun, sexual violence is part of their arsenal to pursue
military, political, social and economic aims. The
perpetrators generally operate with impunity.

I have met victims of sexual violence. I am
haunted by their testimony, and I will not relent in
calling on States and non-State parties to prevent those
terrible crimes. Beyond its enormous toll on victims,
sexual violence in armed conflict hurts recovery and
peacebuilding. In Burundi, Liberia and Sierra Leone,
the fighting may have ended but sexual violence
persists on a very serious scale. We are helping those
countries to recover, but we must also do more to
prevent others from suffering the same fate.

My report (S/2009/362) highlights where States
and other parties must act. I also call on the Security
Council to focus on concrete actions. Allow me to
briefly underscore four areas.
09-44842

First, preventing and responding to sexual
violence requires a multisectoral response, the pillars
of which are interdependent. The efforts of the United
Nations system reach across our main work areas from
the normative to the operational. I am committed to
strengthening the United Nations system to ensure that
we deliver as one.

Secondly, sexual violence should be addressed
from the planning to the implementation of mandates.
Our actions must be focused and sustained over time to
achieve results, as the causes and consequences of
sexual violence are often intractable. I am pleased that
the issue will be included in the terms of reference for
technical assessment missions and the integrated
mission planning process. Peacekeeping missions and
United Nations country teams will establish joint
priorities in that regard through integrated strategic
frameworks.

I am also working with my top advisers to ensure
that the United Nations gives priority attention to
preventing and responding to sexual violence.
Yesterday, in my meeting with force commanders, I
gave a clear and strong instruction that military leaders
should keep that issue as the top priority in working to
maintain peace and security. I call on Council members
and other States, as well as civilian and military
leaders, to join forces to address that grave problem. I
repeat: N0 act of sexual exploitation and abuse by any
United Nations personnel will be tolerated.

Thirdly, I urge the General Assembly to conclude
its deliberations on the creation of a United Nations
institution to advance gender equality and women's
human rights. I am also in discussions with the United
Nations system partners on appointing a new senior
system-wide official to address sexual violence. I am
considering that in the light of the General Assembly's
discussions and existing mechanisms, such as the
Special Rapporteur on violence against women and the
Special Representative on Children and Armed
Conflict. I am also studying the additional costs that
this would entail.

Fourthly, we must improve monitoring,
investigation and documentation to address the many
challenges that we face in gathering information and
reporting on sexual violence. We will also continue to
promote a greater understanding of resolution 1820
(2008) in all United Nations missions and duty stations
and to adapt our approaches and systems, including for
09-44842
monitoring and reporting, to support its effective
implementation.

The recommendations in my report are mutually
reinforcing. If they are carried out together, we can
foster greater progress. Those recommendations are
also designed to provide the Council with more
consistent, evidence-based and timely information to
help it in addressing that challenge.

Towards that end, I urge the Council to
immediately authorize the establishment of an
independent commission of inquiry, supported by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights. It would be tasked with investigating
and reporting on violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law in ongoing conflict
situations in Chad, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Sudan. That independent commission of
inquiry should recommend to the Council the most
effective mechanisms to ensure accountability for those
egregious crimes.

I also draw the Council's attention to the brutal,
predatory and deliberate targeting of civilians by the
Lord's Resistance Army, whose activities have
destabilized civilians in the Sudan, the Central African
Republic, Uganda and the Democratic People's
Republic of the Congo.

I am prepared to submit an annual report on
resolution 1820 (2008). I want to help ensure that all
parties respect their obligations under international law
and are held accountable when they violate them.
Victims of sexual violence are among the world's most
vulnerable and traumatized people. For the sake of
these innocent women and men, their families and their
societies, we must come together and act. That will
help victims in war-torn countries and set us on a
course for a better world.

