Mr. Kolby (Norway): Norway aligns itself with
the statement to be given by Austria on behalf of the
Human Security Network later in this debate. Allow
me, however, at this stage to make the following
remarks in my national capacity.

Resolution 1325 (2000), which was adopted two
years ago, has put the gender issue on the agenda of the
Council in a new way. It has provided us with an
instrument to ensure the full and equal participation of
women at all levels of decision-making and of the
implementation of peace processes, including conflict
prevention and resolution and post-conflict
reconstruction. Moreover, the resolution has
contributed significantly to ensuring that gender issues
are systematically taken into account when conflict and
peace efforts are being considered by the United
Nations system as a whole. There is, however, still a
long way to go before the strategy of gender
mainstreaming can be said to be fully reflected in these
activities.

We welcome the recent report of the Secretary-
General (S/2002/1154), in which he highlights the
findings of the groundbreaking study by his Special
Adviser on Gender Issues. The study convincingly
demonstrates that the linkages between gender equality
and peace are pervasive and powerful. Its main
conclusion is that sustainable peace and lasting security
cannot be achieved without women's empowerment
and full involvement.

The progress we have made so far on gender
issues related to peace and security makes it
abundantly clear how much we will gain by further
intensifying our efforts. Our point of departure is that
women have a pivotal role to play in the prevention
and peaceful resolution of conflicts and in post-conflict
peace-building. Yet women are systematically kept at a
distance from the very processes that stand to gain
from their participation.

Our main concern is how to ensure that women
do indeed exercise their right to participate in shaping
and securing the peaceful development of the
communities in which they live. Our goal is that gender
issues take their rightful place in Council affairs and
thereby become part and parcel of our efforts to
promote international peace and security. Our task is to
give new impetus to the important work being done to
mainstream a gender perspective in peace operations.
Women are a resource that should be included at all
levels of peace planning and peacemaking.

We must ensure that gender-specific aspects of
peace operations are reflected in reports to the Security
Council. All too often, reports submitted to the Council
do not include a gender perspective. Moreover, in
peace operations the Council must ensure that
international humanitarian and human rights law is
fully implemented. That would ensure the protection of
the rights of women and girls during and after
conflicts.

The low level of participation of women in
leading positions in United Nations peacekeeping
operations should be addressed. Efforts should be made
to identify and to promote women candidates both in
peace missions and as special representatives of the
Secretary-General.

The establishment of a gender focal point in the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations has been
debated in the General Assembly's Special Political
and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
and in the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations on numerous occasions. We are hopeful that
the proposal will finally be approved by the
Assembly's Fifth Committee at the end of this year.

Finally, peacekeeping personnel need to be
trained in the fields of protection, human rights and the
special needs of women and children in conflict
situations. In line with this, Norway has argued for a
strategy of zero tolerance in relation to sexual
exploitation of women by peacekeeping personnel.

The Security Council is the primary global body
for promoting international peace and security. As
such, we would like to see it become more involved in
bringing together peace and security, on the one hand,
and development cooperation, humanitarian assistance
and the promotion of human rights, on the other.
Gender issues have a bearing on both peace and
development, and women are an asset in the promotion
of both. By focusing on women and peace in a broader
contextual framework, the Council could assume an
even more efficient role in addressing the interlinked
scourges of war, poverty and suffering around the
world.

We have every reason to give women a greater
role in decision-making in connection with conflict
prevention and resolution. Not only do women have a
legitimate role to play in peace processes, but, in our
experience, their full participation makes a significant
contribution to the general maintenance and promotion
of peace. That is one reason why Norway argued
strongly in favour of active participation by women in
the peace talks on Afghanistan.

Norway stands fully behind the recommendations
of the Secretary-General's report on women, peace and
security. We note with particular satisfaction that the
focus is more and more explicitly being put on women
as active players in promoting peace and security,
rather than merely as victims of conflict.

It is imperative that the Security Council actively
follow up the actions proposed by the Secretary-
General in response to resolution 1325 (2000). In this
regard we are pleased to note that the proposed actions
include practical and detailed mechanisms to ensure
accountability for gender mainstreaming.

