Ms. Lee (Singapore): Almost two years ago, the
Security Council passed the landmark resolution 1325
(2000) unanimously. I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this open meeting
for us to review what we have done to implement
resolution 1325 (2000). I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for being present earlier today to
introduce his report.

The report which we have before us is an
excellent and very comprehensive one, with many
recommendations that we can support. For example, we
support the Secretary-General's proposals for gender
advisers and gender units in peacekeeping operations,
and for women to be included in the negotiation of
peace agreements. Our appreciation goes also to
Ms. Carolyn Hannan, of the Division for the
Advancement of Women, and to Ms. Noeleen Heyzer,
of the United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM), for their efforts on this issue.

At an earlier meeting on conflict, peacekeeping
and gender in July this year, we said that we were
ignoring an invisible elephant of scepticism among
Member States by our failure to incorporate a gender
perspective into peace and security issues. We also said
that we needed to show that what we were doing was
not an abstract exercise, but one which would have an
impact on real lives. In this regard, instead of
reiterating the points made by many of our colleagues
with regard to the Secretary-General's
recommendations, we thought that it might be useful to
mention how Singapore has been trying to play its part
on this issue, including through the Arria-formula
meeting on women, peace and security that we chaired
last Wednesday, 23 October.

Since there is no formal mechanism whereby the
information shared at the Arria-formula meeting can be
transmitted to the Council, we feel that we need to
share some of what was said at the meeting, so that the
public record of this debate will be a testimony of what
was transmitted to us. We hope that, by putting on
record what was said, these accounts will be
remembered when the topic of women, peace and
security is raised again.

At that meeting, we heard poignant and
passionate statements from women who had been
personally affected by the conflict. For example, we
heard a direct account of how women had been affected
by the conflict in Burundi and how they had played a
part in the Arusha Peace Accords. We also heard about
the Lord's Resistance Army attacks on camps for
refugees and internally displaced persons in northern
Uganda and the sexual and gender-based violence that
was often inflicted during such attacks.

Fortunately, one point which emerged from the
Arria-formula meeting is that the Security Council is
clearly fully committed to implementing resolution
1325 (2000). But we are barraged by recommendations
from all sides - some presented by the Secretary-
General through his report, some by the United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) in its soon-
to-be-released independent assessment and, lastly,
some by non-governmental organizations through their
materials. A cursory glance at the documents will show
that many of the recommendations are similar and can
be amalgamated and clustered.

At the Arria-formula meeting, some members
therefore felt that there was a need to prioritize. The
Security Council needs the help of relevant agencies to
reorganize and integrate the recommendations. But
more important, the relevant agencies need to prioritize
what needs to be done first. We simply cannot do
everything at once. For example, at the Arria-formula
meeting, a representative from the non-governmental
organization (NGO) Working Group on Women, Peace
and Security felt that the key priority was for a gender
unit to be set up at Headquarters and for all
peacekeeping operations to have a gender adviser. This
is all well and good, but merely saying it will not make
it so. The NGO Working Group, UNIFEM, the
Department for the Advancement of Women and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) will
need to sit down and work out the possible terms of
reference for the gender unit and the advisers. One of
the UNIFEM. experts, Ms. Elisabeth Rehn, also
reminded us that we will have to bear in mind that the
gender adviser should be of sufficiently high rank to
have direct access to the Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General. And of course, we will need to find
the funding to ensure that adequate resources are
provided for those offices.

Unless we can decide what our first step should
be and map out clearly the route to take toward fully
implementing resolution 1325 (2000), we are likely to
go around in circles. What is urgently needed, as our
Colombian colleague mentioned at the Arria-formula
meeting - and as Ambassador Valdivieso reminded us
again today - is a timeline or a programme of action
for the effective implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). In that regard, Singapore would be happy to
work with Cameroon and our other colleagues on the
planned presidential statement to provide for concrete
initial steps that could be taken.

