Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg congratulates the United States
presidency of the Council on organizing this open
debate, which gives us an opportunity to review the
implementation of resolutions 1820 (2008) and 1888
(2009) and the challenges still to be addressed in order
to fight effectively against sexual violence in conflict
situations. We welcome the Council's adoption of
resolution 1960 (2010), which we had the honour of
co-sponsoring, as we did for resolution 1888 (2009) a
year ago also under your presidency, Madame. We
hope that the Council will proceed with determination
to ensure the use of these new mechanisms and
implementation of the new resolution.

Luxembourg fully aligns itself with the statement
to be made by the representative of the European
Union.

In his report (S/2010/604), the Secretary-General
provides a relevant analysis of sexual violence
committed in the course of conflicts. We welcome the
follow-up that the Council has devoted to the report, in
particular to the Secretary-General's recommendation
to create a monitoring, analysis and reporting system
that will allow the Council and the United Nations
system as a whole to receive timely, objective, accurate
and reliable information on which to base their
interventions. This system will also help to improve
efforts in the field of prevention, since trends and early
warning indicators will be better known.
As the Secretary-General notes in his report,
impunity for perpetrators of sexual violence remains
the norm in the vast majority of countries where it
occurs. This impunity risks undermining public
confidence in the nascent justice and security sectors
and eroding the whole process of peacebuilding. It is
therefore essential for the Security Council to step up
pressure on the perpetrators of sexual violence. We
welcome the Council's intention to consider sexual
violence as a criterion for applying sanctions against
individuals. The recommendations made in that regard
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict will be most important.

We warmly welcome the fact that the Council
also encourages the Secretary-General to list in an
annex to his annual reports the parties that have
systematically engaged in acts of sexual violence in
situations of armed conflict on the Council agenda.
However, we would have preferred that the Secretary-
General could also have been invited to provide
information on perpetrators of sexual violence in other
conflicts and situations, which should not escape the
attention of the international community.

We must all redouble our efforts to contribute to
better protection of women in conflict and post-conflict
situations. Let me dwell for a moment on some
initiatives that my Government has decided to support
since our debate on women and peace and security in
October (6411th meeting).

The mass rapes in Walikale in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo this summer were a brutal
reminder of how sexual violence continues to be used
as a weapon of war. In that context, Luxembourg has
just decided to make a voluntary contribution to the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo for the
financing of a training programme for 120 trainers and
thus help to professionalize the Congolese national
police. That training will also raise awareness among
the members of the Congolese police with regard to
sexual violence and will give them the ability to better
protect women and children against acts of sexual
violence.

At the same time, in a broader context,
Luxembourg has just decided to fund a major project of
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations that is
aimed at strengthening the leadership and participation
of women in peacebuilding activities in countries
emerging from conflict. That project includes the
organization of several meetings at national and
regional levels - one on West Africa, the other the
Great Lakes region - to facilitate the exchange of
good practices in that regard. The protection of women
and girls against sexual violence will also be discussed
in that context.

Luxembourg will continue to pay close attention
to the needs of women and children in conflict
situations. We encourage the Security Council not to
relent in its efforts to achieve concrete progress and
reduce the suffering of women and children in conflict
situations.

