Ms. Mendelson (United States of America): I
would like to begin by expressing our condolences to
the friends, family and colleagues of Andrey Karlov
and all those affected by yesterday's attacks.

We would like to thank the Secretary-General, the
President of the Government of Spain, Mr. Rajoy Brey,
Executive Director Fedotov, Special Representative
Bangura and, of course, Ms. Ameena Saeed Hasan
and Ms. Nadia Murad Basee Taha for their dedication
to combating trafficking in persons in all its forms.
We particularly appreciate Spain's leadership on the
issue and its initiative in introducing today's historic
resolution 2331 (2016).

A year ago, as many today have noted, the Council
met for the first time in its 70-year history to discuss the
issue of human trafficking in conflict (see S/PV.7585).
Before that meeting, and again today, some argued that
the subject did not belong in the Security Council and
was not really a security issue. Yet those of us who
were in the Chamber a year ago, and again today, will
never forget Nadia Murad's testimony about Da'esh's
institutionalization of slavery and sexual violence,
and the nihilistic use of Yazidi women as "trafficked
flesh" to recruit male fighters. It is an honour to know
Nadia. Her testimony bears witness in a way that not
only moves the human spirit but provides the sort of
gripping, empirical account of how Da'esh functions
that was heard at the Nuremberg trials. Her very being
is a reminder of the resilience, bravery and strength that

some, including her, are capable of.

Thanks to the tenacious efforts of civil
society - non-governmental organizations, journalists,
religious leaders and survivors - we have seen
progress. Governments, the United Nations and other
organizations have elevated attention both in the public
consciousness and political discourse to the horrors of
modern slavery and the duty we have to respond. A year
on, I wish we could say that, thanks to advocacy and
collective action, the exploitation of human beings in
times of conflict has abated.

Unfortunately, that is not the case. In 2016, children
were still lured by human traffickers from refugee
camps, and young boys were forced to pick up guns and
become soldiers. In Da'esh-held territory, the depravity
of sexual slavery has continued to shock. Thanks to the
courageous work of Special Representative Bangura
and her staff, the United Nations has incontrovertible
proof that young women are bought, sold and
horrifically abused on a daily basis. The United States
appreciates the initiative of the United Kingdom in the
pursuit ofjustice for Da'esh's Victims, and is working
with it and Iraq to explore the best ways to hold Da'esh
accountable, including gathering and preserving
evidence of its crimes.

Although much recent attention has focused on
human trafficking in situations of conflict in the
Middle East we know that trafficking in conflict
zones is not a new phenomenon and that researchers
and activists, myself included, have documented it
in many conflict and post-conflict situations, from
Bosnia and Kosovo to Nigeria and Afghanistan. Yet
despite increased attention and outrage, we still face
critical gaps in our understanding of human trafficking
in the context of conflict and post-conflict situations.
Where we know that trafficking is taking place, our
ability to stop the abuse, hold traffickers to account and
deliver assistance to the victims is often non-existent or
woefully inadequate.

That is why the resolution that the Council adopted
today is so important. By articulating the nexus
between conflict, sexual violence and trafficking in
persons, we can take practical action. Together, we can
get Governments, civil society and the United Nations
system to begin to systematically monitor for signs of
trafficking in conflict, to train relevant humanitarian
personnel and all peacekeeping personnel in how to
recognize and respond to victims, to analyse financial
flows - follow the money - in order to identify where
terrorist and armed groups are profiting from the
proceeds of human trafficking, and to share information
on and to seekjustice for those crimes.

While it is critical to close the information gap - let
me note that too few people know and understand this
issue, including too few inside ministries of
defence - knowledge is but one critical aspect. The
resolution also calls on all members to criminalize
and vigorously prosecute the individuals and groups
that facilitate and profit from human trafficking. It
encourages the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and the Special
Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially
women and children, to brief sanctions committees
on identified trafficking patterns and perpetrators. It
provides arms committees with a mandate to sanction
perpetrators, as part of established sanctions regimes.

Within the context of emergency humanitarian
operations, resolution 2331 (2016) underscores the
importance of humanitarian actors identifying and
providing services to trafficking victims during and after
humanitarian crises. Those services must be resourced
by Member States and, again, the humanitarians must
be trained to identify possible victims.

Finally, the resolution recognizes that individuals
who are subjected to sexual violence and human
trafficking at the hands of terrorist groups are also
victims of terrorism and should be provided with the
same restorative services and support available to
other such victims. Since 2000 and the adoption of its
Trafficking Victims Protection Act, the United States
has been a leader on this issue. The United States is
proud to support resolution 2331 (2016). Consistent with
our dedication to ending trafficking in persons in all its
forms, we look forward to strengthening international
cooperation in combating trafficking.

