Mr. Skinner-Klee (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
First, allow me to commend the Russian Federation
for convening this open debate on the occasion of the
sixteenth anniversary of the women and peace and
security agenda. This is an opportunity to underscore
the commitment of Member States to empowering
women and to facilitating their participation in conflict-
prevention, peacebuilding and in decision-making on
matters relating to peace and security. I would like
to thank Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive
Director of UN-Women, and Ms. Rita Lopidia, on
behalf of the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace
and Security, for their statements.
A year ago the Security Council adopted resolution
2242 (2015). As Guatemala was one of the 72 sponsors
of the resolution, we are happy to inform the Council
that pursuant to the resolution, the Government of
Guatemala has established an inter-agency panel
on women, peace and security in order to improve
governmental coordination for the establishment
of a national plan of action, which is expected to be
completed this year.

The appropriate implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) requires the unwavering political will
of all competent Government authorities, requiring
the allocation of clearly earmarked resources both in
national budgets and in the contributions of international
donors. Governments and civil society should work
together and complement each other's efforts.

We reiterate that the prevention and protection
of women against gender violence and sexual abuse
require the involvement of all, including men and
boys. We strongly condemn cases of sexual violence
and the fact that it continues to be used as a tactic of
intimidation or terrorism. We also condemn violence
and sexual abuse in peacekeeping operations. We
demand the implementation of the zero-tolerance
policy. Security forces entrusted with ensuring the
security and integrity of women as an important aspect
of peace and security must be made to understand that.

Guatemala is striving to combat impunity and to
bring the perpetrators of sexual abuse to justice. In that
regard, early this year we brought to justice two soldiers
who were responsible for the sexual enslavement of 15
Quechi women in the military base of Sepur Zarco.
Although it took 32 years to bring this case to trial,
we believe that it is worth mentioning because access
to justice should be guaranteed for all Guatemalans.
However, we must improve access to justice and
strengthen the participation of women in the process of
drafting national legislation.

We welcome the fact that the women and peace and
security agenda is being addressed in a cross-cutting
fashion, in coordination with the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office and the Peacebuilding
Fund. It is also worth noting the establishment of the
Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and
Security and of the national focal point network for
women and peace and security on 23 September under
the leadership of Spain.

Moreover, we acknowledge the contribution
of mechanisms, such as the Global Acceleration
Instrument for Women and Peace and Security and
Humanitarian Action, together with additional existing
mechanisms, as a way not only to raise resources, but
to coordinate responses and accelerate implementation.
The participation of women is essential to ensuring
operational effectiveness and ensure sustainable peace.
The concept of sustainable peace is very important,
as Ambassador Rosenthal mentions in his report
(S/2015/490).

The Rome Statute, which is the international
legal framework on gender-based crimes, is the most
progressive to date. It is important to incorporate it into
national legislation so that States have a comprehensive
framework for investigations into international crimes of
sexual and gender-based violence, targeted proccedings
to support victims and witnesses, programmes to
inform women of the laws that concern them, resources
to monitor the implementation of laws that take the
gender perspective into account, and provisions for the
compensation of victims. All of those components are
essential to ensuring that women have access to justice.

Guatemala has always supported that agenda
and eiterates that women play an essential role in
preventing and resolving conflicts, promoting justice,
fostering reconciliation, supporting disarmament,
demobilization and social reintegration, and rebuilding
national institutions. Women are the critical link in
development as they are the centre of the family and the
source of its values, customs and the identity of each
child. All these are essential pillars for consolidating
lasting peace. It is essential that women be involved in
decision-making at all levels.

In conclusion, we urge all Member States
represented here to take this unique opportunity
to move towards a much stronger and substantive
commitment to gender equality so as to ensure that the
empowerment of women and girls becomes one of the
cornerstones of peacebuilding.

