Mr. Kickert (Austria): Austria aligns itself with
the statement delivered earlier by the observer of the
European Union.

We also co-sponsored resolution 2331 (2016),
adopted by the Security Council earlier today. We
welcome the fact that the resolution - alongside
prevention and prosecution - also puts a strong
focus on supporting victims in their recovery and in
overcoming traumatization and stigmatization, or, as
the Secretary-General said this morning, "in helping
victims heal and become agents of change". In conflict
and post-conflict settings, the risk that civilians
can become victims of trafficking is clear. Those
displaced by conflict, especially women and girls and
minorities, are particularly vulnerable to that form of
crude exploitation.

Recently, Austria was affected by mass migration
and refugee movements as a transit and destination
country. Close to 90,000 persons applied for asylum in
2015. Most of them came from conflict zones. Aware
that persons fleeing conflict risk becoming trafficking
victims along their migration route or after arrival
in their destination countries, Austria has scaled up
measures to enable the active screening of potential
trafficking victims among migrants and refugees and
to facilitate access to services for identified victims.

We would like to emphasize the important need for
all parts of the United Nations system to work effectively
together in assisting States to tackle trafficking in
persons in conflict zones and also to mainstream the
awareness of such issues in humanitarian response and
protection efforts. We would also like to highlight the
key role and contribution of civil society in enhancing
the identification and referral of victims of trafficking,
including those originating from conflict and post-
conflict areas.

Austria is currently supporting projects conducted
by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and by the International Centre for
Migration Policy Development. The projects aim at
building the capacities of front-line officials and at
improving the identification and integration of victims
of human trafficking along migration routes. We would
also like to take this opportunity to encourage all
States to contribute to the United Nations Voluntary
Trust Fund for Victims of Trafficking in Persons,
especially Women and Children, as Nadia Murad and
the Secretary-General have also called for today.

Conflict-related sexual violence and sex as payment
for passage for women and girls on the move, as well
as the sexual enslavement of and trading in women
and girls by terrorist groups, are a shockingly common
reality. Austria hosted an international conference in
June this year, entitled "Fighting Conflict-Related
Sexual Violence - Grassroots Women as Agents of
Change", which focused specifically on the contribution
and the role of women in civil society in Syria and Iraq.
We reiterate our support for the important work on that
topic by the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Sexual Violence in Conflict.

With its portfolio of technical assistance
programmes, the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime has been and continues to be a central partner
in assisting Member States in implementing practical
measures to combat trafficking in persons. We are also
particularly appreciative of the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, which, through its monitoring
and reporting mechanism on grave violations against
children, documents abductions of children and related
violations, including human trafficking.

A substantial number of radicalized foreign
fighters - also from Austria - have joined terrorist
groups in conflict areas and might, among other crimes,
be perpetrators of human trafficking. In that regard, we
fully support the Secretary-General's recommendation
that Member States consider establishing jurisdiction
to prosecute instances of human trafficking committed
by their nationals abroad.

We would like to emphasize that States have the
primary responsibility for bringing perpetrators to
justice and ending the climate of impunity. In post-
conflict settings, accountability and transitional-justice
mechanisms are key elements for sustainable peace.
We also call on those States that have not yet done so
to ratify or accede to the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime and its Palermo
Anti-Trafficking Protocol.

With the assumption of the chairmanship of the
OSCE in 2017, Austria will further put a spotlight on
the interlinkages between migration and trafficking
and between radicalization, terrorism and trafficking.

