Mrs. Villalobos Brenes (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): The full text of our statement is available
on PaperSmart.

We are very concerned by the findings of the
independent evaluation contained in the report of the
Secretary-General on women and peace and security
(S/2019/800), which reflects the fact that with respect
to resolution 1325 (2000), we have achieved only half of
the proposals. For 40 per cent of the recommendations,
further work needs to be done, while 10 per cent have
not progressed or have even regressed.

We recallthatin2000,we recognizedtheimportance
of women's participation in all conflict-related
processes, ranging from prevention to peacekeeping.
Costa Rica wishes to highlight the following aspects on
which we must focus efforts in areas that are lagging,
as per the report of the Secretary-General.

First is the issue of the protection of women. Just
as our discussions on peace and security emphasize the
importance of the protection of civilians, we must insist
that the protection of women and girls is always taken
into account, both in its the humanitarian aspect and
with regard to the use of sexual aggression and sexual
violence as weapons of war.

The second aspect is the participation of women in
peace negotiations. The inclusion ofgender perspectives
is new but it is no excuse for doing nothing. The
Secretary-General notes the new challenges posed by
conflict, such as the proliferation of non-State actors
and, specifically, the challenge of gender inequality as
an objective of conflict itself. To that end, Costa Rica
believes that we must redouble our efforts to empower
women so as to ensure that they are fully involved in
the restoration of peace and reconstruction processes.

A third aspect is related to impunity. Bringing
culprits to justice helps to prevent the resurgence of
atrocity crimes against women. Costa Rica is concerned
by references in the report of the Secretary-General
on deficiencies in responses to sexual violence and
the lack of access to security and justice institutions
women face because of their gender.

The fourth aspect is inclusiveness in special
political operations and peacekeeping operations. The
specific needs of girls and women must be included
in the strategies of those missions. Missions must
incorporate women as a way of building trust, ensuring
understanding and facilitating rapprochement during
reconciliation and reintegration processes.

Fifth is compliance with conventions on human
rights and international humanitarian law. So long as
the universally recognized rights of women continue to
be denied, the women and peace and security agenda
cannot be fulfilled. All recommendations will become
dead letter until inclusive policies are adopted.

It is necessary to put an end to gender-based
violence and to discrimination against women and
girls, which impede their right to express themselves,
socialize, learn, enjoy freedom of movement and the
possibility of exercising their political rights, among
others, so that they can be part of the agenda.

Costa Rica hopes that in 2020, the commemoration
of 20 years since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000)
will focus on practical and concrete actions that will
result in gender parity, where the voices of women and
girls will be heard.

