Ms. Carrera (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I am
grateful for the valuable introductory remarks made by
the Secretary-General, Michelle Bachelet, Alain Le
Roy, Ambassador Hamidon Ali and Thelma Awori. I
also thank Mr. Eriya Kategaya, the First Deputy Prime
Minister of Uganda, for having convened this very
important debate.

I should like to convey to Ms. Bachelet the most
heartfelt congratulations from the Government of
Mexico upon her appointment as head of UN Women.
As she carries out her important mandate, she can rest
assured that in Mexico she has an ally committed to
gender equality. The women of the world and the
women of Latin America in particular are very proud
of her appointment.

Ten years ago, when it adopted resolution 1325
(2000), the Council acknowledged that women and
girls suffered disproportionately from the effects of
armed conflicts and were frequently the specific and
deliberate victims of various forms of violence. The
Security Council took an important step in
incorporating the agenda of women and peace and
security into its work and in recognizing the
importance of the participation of women in all stages
of armed conflict, post-conflict reconstruction and
peacebuilding.

Women are part of the solution to the structural
problems of conflict and one of the driving forces
behind reconstruction. However, unless we provide
effective tools and mechanisms to ensure their
participation, we are perpetuating inequality,
maintaining the spiral of violence and delaying the
very solution of these conflicts.

The international community has developed a
robust legal framework for the protection of women in
armed conflicts. The challenge now is to achieve its
full implementation, given the lack of respect for the
standards of international law by parties to conflicts.
My delegation reiterates the importance of having a
comprehensive strategy for compliance with
international humanitarian law and human rights law as
an essential component in conflict situations.

The establishment of the International Criminal
Court represented an important step forward in the
fight against sexual violence and gender-related
violence. Mexico is fully convinced that we cannot
achieve lasting peace without guaranteeing the delivery
of justice, promoting accountability and fighting
impunity. We therefore support the decision of the
Secretary-General to carry out or support impartial and
independent investigations into cases of sexual
violence against women in the Republic of Guinea,
Timor-Leste and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, to mention only a few cases.

The number of women appointed as Special
Representatives or to other senior positions has
increased since 2000, and gender advisors have been
deployed in almost half of the political and
peacekeeping missions. Furthermore, we have seen an
increase in the participation of women in decision-
making, as well as in the operational functions in
peacekeeping operations.

Despite some progress, much remains to be done
for us to meet our responsibility to effectively address
the needs of women and to ensure that they do not
suffer the effects of violence inherent to armed
conflict.
Mexico believes it is crucial that the Security
Council adopt a systematic gender approach in its
activities and resolutions as a central element for
international peace and security and not as something
marginal or separate. Incorporating the gender
perspective in peacekeeping requires close cooperation
and coordination in the following areas: first, clear and
consistent decisions; complementary efforts with other
political bodies of the United Nations within their
respective mandates; support from the various
programmes, funds and agencies of the United Nations
and cooperation with regional organizations;
strengthening of the activities of strategic partners such
as civil society and humanitarian agencies; and, lastly,
timely action by States at the national level.

That is why we welcome the indicators
introduced by the Secretary-General in his report, as
they can serve as a valuable instrument for planning
and decision-making and can be used as a diagnostic
tool and road map. The most important thing is that we
be able, in coming years, to assess with certainty that
we are heading in the right direction.

The indicators could lay the foundations for a
coherent and coordinated approach for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). To achieve
this, we need additional efforts in order to ensure its
effective implementation and, above all, to change the
reality on the ground. The Council must begin by
implementing the indicators in its own work and
decisions.

The empowerment of women and gender equality
are our common responsibility. Every State must take
the necessary measures, in the light of its own
particular situation. Mexico understands that the
provisions of resolution 1325 (2000) are also relevant
for countries that are not facing a situation of armed
conflict. Under a violence-prevention approach, my
country has highlighted the need for a discussion on
the implementation of that resolution.

Mexico is not a stranger to the phenomenon of
violence and its consequences for women and girls. We
have sought to adopt a comprehensive approach for the
social prevention of violence, together with efforts to
strengthen protection measures. While my country
faces challenges, the institutions in charge of ensuring
security and law enforcement - the federal police and
the armed forces - are receiving gender training, and
increasing numbers of women are joining this
important effort.

Furthermore, as we know that women must take
part in all aspects of public life, we have promoted the
legislative changes necessary to ensure their equal
inclusion in decision-making processes in the areas of
public security and the prevention of violence.

My country is pleased with the tireless efforts
carried out by civil society as the engine for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), as it is a
force for change on the ground. We draw the attention
of the Security Council to the importance of the gender
perspective and to reprehensible acts of gender related
and sexual violence against women.

The recent Arria Formula meeting drew our
attention to the importance of broadening the
involvement of women in peace processes, as well as
addressing the needs of particularly vulnerable groups,
such as women with disabilities.

The scope of resolution 1325 (2000) has not been
exhausted, as has often been said in this forum. On the
contrary, much remains to be done to ensure the
implementation of the four resolutions that have been
adopted on the subject. Today we can say that we are
on the right track.

Mexico believes that this joint discussion is
bringing us closer to the goal of eliminating the effect
of conflict on women and ensuring their involvement
on an equal footing in all aspects of international peace
and security. The decisions that we have adopted to
protect women's rights and to ensure their participation
will be our best investment in a future of peace and
stability. Today we have this opportunity, as well as the
responsibility that goes with it towards the women and
girls of the world.

I would like to conclude by expressing Mexico's
support for the presidential statement that the Council
adopted at this meeting.

