Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We
welcome you, Mr. President, in convening and presiding
over this meeting. We also welcome the Ministers from
Equatorial Guinea and the United Kingdom.

I would like to express our condolences to
the families of the victims of the recent heinous
terrorist attacks. We affirm our sympathy and solidarity
with the Government and the people of Sri Lanka at
this time.

We would like to begin by thanking the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2019/280) and his valuable
briefing. We would also like to thank Nobel Peace Prize
laureates Ms. Nadia Murad and Dr. Denis Mukwege
for their tireless efforts to combat sexual violence in
conflict and empower survivors, and Ms. Inas Miloud,
a representative of civil society, and Ms. Amal Clooney
for their valuable briefings.

I would like to focus my statement on three
fundamental issues. The first is sexual violence in
conflict as a violation of human rights and a threat
to international peace and security. The second is the
importance of ensuring accountability and ending
impunity for perpetrators. The third relates to ensuring
justice for the victims of sexual violence in conflict.
With regard to sexual violence in conflict, more than
10 years ago the Security Council adopted resolution
1820 (2008), in recognition of the fact that sexual
Violence in conflict represents a threat to international
peace and security and requires a serious international
response. Since then, unfortunately, these heinous
crimes have been on the rise all over the world. They
are often used as a tool of intimidation and a tactic of
war for targeting specific communities based on their
ethnic, religious or political affiliations, with the aim
of forcibly displacing them and seizing their property.
A case in point is the situation and forced displacement
of the Rohingya, a minority in Myanmar. Displacement
makes refugees and internally displaced persons
(IDPs), especially women and girls, more vulnerable
to sexual exploitation, human trafficking and sexual
violence in conflict. Crimes of sexual violence in
some conflict zones represent part of the political and
terrorist economy of extremist groups, including the
terrorist group Da'esh.

With regard to ensuring accountability and
ending impunity, and in order to prevent sexual
violence in conflict from increasing, we have to hold
the perpetrators of these crimes accountable and end
their impunity, as laid down in local and international
law. These crimes have become a systematic tool of
war that can amount to war crimes and crimes against
humanity. The Security Council has established a
strong normative framework aimed at combating
sexual violence in conflict and ensuring accountability
for perpetrators, while another important tool at its
disposal is the integration of specific measures into
the mandates of peacekeeping operations in order to
send the message that combating such crimes is one of
its priorities. The Council also plays a pivotal role in
addressing crimes of sexual violence by strengthening
the mandates of peacekeeping operations and United
Nations political missions to include the empowerment
of women in conflict and post-conflict situations,
ensuring accountability for sexual violence crimes and
reporting any violations that amount to war crimes and
crimes against humanity.

Ensuring justice for the victims is a prerequisite
to achieving sustainable peace. Sexual violence
undermines victims' psychological and physical health
and has cumulative effects on societies and generations.
Its implications can also undermine the sustainability
of peace. In the absence of accountability, conflicts
can become protracted and refugees and IDPs may not
be able to return to their homes in a safe, dignified
and voluntary manner. There are multiple forms of
sexual violence in conflict, as well as multiple ways to
achieve justice in all its dimensions. That can be done
by dealing with the health, psychological, physical,
economic and social impact on victims in the short
and long terms as well as by treating survivors and
their children as victims. In adopting a victim-focused
approach, it is vital to take into consideration their
culture, values, and social characteristics. We have to
improve Member States' capacities to address these
situations, enable survivors to receive compensation
and justice in a manner that respects their culture as
well as their psychological, physical and social health,
and ensure that any justice mechanisms are sustainable
and enforceable. States have the primary responsibility
to provide protection for civilians in conflicts, facilitate
victims' access tojustice and ensure that the perpetrators
of sexual violence crimes are held accountable.

At the international level, we commend the role of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict. This year marks a decade
since the establishment of her mandate pursuant to
resolution 1888 (2009). We support her role, based on
her mandate, in dealing with the parties to conflicts
and exchanging best practices in a manner that
strengthens national security and judicial systems with
a view to ensuring justice and accountability. We also
welcome the serious steps that the Secretary-General
has taken to implement his zero-tolerance policy on
sexual exploitation and abuse. The commitment of the
United Nations to holding itself accountable for sexual
exploitation and abuse strengthens its credibility and
helps efforts aimed at ending sexual violence in conflict.

In conclusion, we stress the importance of
ensuring that the Council maintains its unity and
that the international community generally addresses
the problem of sexual violence in conflict. We are all
unquestionably acting on the same principle, which
is the condemnation of all forms of sexual violence,
especially when committed during conflict. The
international community must therefore send a united
message and work collectively to reduce and ultimately
end sexual violence in conflict, while ensuring
justice for its victims based on the social and cultural
specificities of all Member States.

