Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank you, Sir, for convening this open
debate and to commend the presidency's continued
commitment to an issue of such importance to the
international community.

It is my honour to be present here representing
the President of the Eastern Republic of Uruguay,
Mr. Tabare Vazquez, and to offer Uruguay's vision on
the challenges and the commitments ahead of us in this
area.

We recognize the contribution of the international
community, and especially of the United Nations system,
but we must acknowledge that the full implementation
of the objectives set out under resolution 1325 (2000)
and subsequent resolutions has not yet been achieved.
Those resolutions show clearly that the prevention and
resolution of conflicts requires the inclusion of women
playing an active role in all efforts to achieve lasting
peace.

There is clear evidence that women are the
most reliable spokespersons for the needs of local
communities. They are the ones most trusted in the
gathering of evidence and the reporting of information
on sexual violence. They are key to the development
of local economies through small and medium-sized
enterprises, and there are many other examples of their
importance in the rebuilding of conflict zones. Despite
that, UN-Women notes that of all the peace agreements
signed between 1990 and 2010, a mere 15 per cent
contained references to women.

It has been 15 years since the adoption ofresolution
1325 (2000), and women head 19 per cent of United
Nations field missions; they constitute 3 per cent of
military personnel and 10 per cent of police personnel
in peacekeeping operations. Our major concern in citing
those numbers is to underline the opportunities and
capabilities that have been squandered through the lack
of an intensive focus on the inclusion of women in the
conflict-resolution process. In that respect, we would
like to highlight in particular the Secretary-General's
commitment to allocating at least 15 per cent ofthe cost
of peacekeeping operations to women's empowerment
and gender equality programmes.

Uruguay is seriously committed to the women and
peace and security agenda. It will continue contributing
to the implementation of the agenda and will step up
its efforts. First, we will maintain an above-average
percentage of women deployed in peacekeeping
missions. Currently, 9 per cent of the Uruguayan
troops deployed in peacekeeping missions are female
staff. Secondly, we will continue the mandatory
predeployment training of troops who will be engaged
in preventing and responding to violence, exploitation
and sexual abuse. Thirdly, we will continue to rigorously
apply the zero-tolerance policy in cases of misconduct,
particularly with regard to cases of sexual exploitation
and abuse.

We believe that specific commitments such as
those I have just mentioned, along with measures
such as expressly including the gender dimension in
the mandates of peacekeeping operations, providing
normative, substantive and technical support for
UN-Women in the effective implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), and focusing on the relevant
recommendations of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations, are prerequisites for making
substantive advances in implementing the agenda being
discussed today.

Finally, I would like to state that, if elected as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council,
Uruguay will continue the work of promoting the women
and peace and security agenda, based on the conviction
that resolution 1325 (2000) continues to be extremely
relevant and remains a substantive reference point on
the path towards the achievement of international peace
and security.

