Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): The Kingdom
of the Netherlands aligns itself with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union and that
made by the representative of Canada on behalf of the
Group of Friends on Women, Peace and Security. In
addition, we fully support the statement to be made by
the representative of Italy later today, in the light of our
cooperation related to our upcoming split term in the
Security Council. Together with Italy, we will continue
to place gender at the heart ofpeace and security issues.
We feel proud that resolution 1325 (2000) was adopted
by the Council the last time that the Kingdom of the
Netherlands was a Council member, in 2000.

I will focus on three issues: first, on the Dutch
vision; secondly, the integration of resolution 1325
(2000) in our foreign and security policies; and, thirdly,
on the importance of national action plans.

My first point concerns the Dutch vision. Perhaps
I will also include a comment on our support for the
Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and
Security. We are a strong supporter of the entire women
and peace and security agenda. As the global study has
shown us, our focus should be on putting the normative
framework we have built together over the past 15 years
into practice - into daily reality. We are convinced
that the only way to achieve sustainable peace is
by the meaningful inclusion of women in conflict
prevention, in conflict resolution and in mediation and
peace processes.

We promote the engagement of women and men
in changing power relationships and gender norms in
support of a more inclusive society. We believe that the
way forward is to take our best practices and turn them
into standard practices. The inclusion ofwomen in peace
processes should be the rule rather than the exception.

We welcome the establishment of the Informal Expert
Group on Women and Peace and Security by the
Security Council as a result of resolution 2242 (2015).
We commend Spain's efforts to make that resolution
a reality. We support the regular participation of civil
society in that Group, and we hope the Group will
continue to prove its added value to the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda.

That brings me to my second point, that is, the
integration of resolution 1325 (2000) in our foreign and
security policies. This is a key aim in the Netherlands.
I will provide an example. In the joint Spanish-Dutch
Gender in Operations training initiatives, we tried to
teach diplomats and military personnel about gender
and human rights issues. In that way, we tried to
contribute to the effectiveness of peace missions and
crisis management operations. Another example relates
to the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali. There, the Kingdom
of the Netherlands has made senior gender experts
available in an effort to address the high numbers of
sexual violence cases in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Mali.

Our third point focuses on the implementation of
our national action plan and on our support for the
national action plans of other countries. We published
our third national action plan last March. We drafted
it in partnership with more than 50 Dutch civil society
organizations and knowledge institutions. By trying
to coordinate our activities with those of civil society,
we aim to make each other stronger and to achieve
better, more sustainable results. The Kingdom of the
Netherlands encourages other countries to develop their
own national action plans, and we will try to support
them in doing so. Currently, in our third national action
plan we focus on eight countries in Africa and the
Middle East and North Africa region.

We supportwomen'sparticipationinpeaceprocesses
through the support of civil society organizations. For
example, together with UN-Women - I am glad to
see the head of UN-Women is here - we assist female
members of Syrian civil society to unite in the Syrian
Women's Initiative for Peace and Democracy. With
that initiative, which dates back a couple of years, we
aim to help Syrian women from different backgrounds
to pursue a common agenda and to give them a voice
during the Syrian peace talks. Some of the women we
supported have joined the Women's Advisory Board of
the United Nations Special Envoy for Syria, Mr. Staffan
de Mistura,
The advancement of the role of women is crucial in
all our efforts for peace, justice and development. The
Kingdom of the Netherlands will remain a partner to
promote the rights of women in all those dimensions.

