Mr. Schwaiger: The candidate countries Turkey,
Croatia, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
the countries of the Stabilization and Association
Process and potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Montenegro, Serbia, as well as Ukraine,
the Republic of Moldova, Armenia, Azerbaijan and
Georgia align themselves with this statement.

The European Union would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his presence yesterday at the
open debate. We are also grateful for the presentation
of his Special Representative, Madame Wallstrbm, and
would like to express our gratitude to Under-Secretary-
General Le Roy and Military Adviser Lieutenant
General Gaye for all the efforts undertaken by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to combat
sexual violence in armed conflict and post-conflict
countries.

Continuing evidence of daily sexual violence in
armed conflict and fragile countries underscores the
need to intensify our efforts to prevent and combat
such violence. Although attention has been focused on
the Democratic Republic of Congo, alarming reports
have also been coming from other countries, including
countries that are not on the Council's current agenda.
Impunity continues to prevail for most acts of sexual
violence committed in the course of recent conflicts.
The European Union (EU) therefore warmly welcomes
the present report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions 1820
(2008) and 1888 (2009) (S/2010/604).

The EU calls on the Security Council and all
States Members of the United Nations to redouble their
efforts, notably in the fight against impunity. Often,
amnesty is given in the name of peace to combatants
who have used sexual torture or sexual violence as a
tactic of war. But there can be no sustainable peace
without prosecution of perpetrators and justice for
victims. Targeted and appropriately tailored measures
should be imposed on all parties to a conflict
responsible for grave instances of sexual violence.
Perpetrators should be held accountable. Data
2
collection and follow-up on the prosecution of sexual
offenders requires urgent strengthening.

At the Security Council's open debate on the
subject held on 26 October, the European Union
reiterated its firm call for the reinforcement of global
monitoring of situations pertaining to sexual violence
in armed conflict. The recommendations of the
Secretary-General in the current report provide
concrete suggestions in that regard, and the European
Union fully endorses those recommendations. The call
to establish monitoring and reporting arrangements is
particularly noteworthy. Robust monitoring
arrangements will enable the Council to track, deter
and combat the use of systematic sexual violence in
conflict situations.

The European Union warmly welcomes the
adoption yesterday of resolution 1960 (2010) on sexual
violence in situations in armed conflict. We urge the
Security Council to build on its strong commitment to
that issue and to ensure the full implementation of that
and all other relevant resolutions.

The Security Council should adopt a zero-
tolerance approach by including issues of sexual
violence as a priority element in resolutions
establishing the mandates for its sanctions committees,
and the mandates should explicitly include sexual
violence as a criterion for the designation of political
and military leaders for targeted measures.

The Security Council should also reaffirm its
commitment to integrating the gender equality
dimension and the protection of civilians from sexual
and gender-based violence into the mandates of
peacekeeping operations. The connections between
violence against women and the ability of women to
participate in conflict prevention and management, as
well as in peacebuilding and development, must be
better understood. Local populations need a focal point
for reporting instances of sexual violence.
Furthermore, sexual exploitation or abuse by United
Nations troops or United Nations staff is totally
unacceptable.

The European Union supports the United Nations
in its efforts to combat violence against women,
including the work of the Secretary-General's Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Margot
Wallstrom. The European Union also closely
collaborates with the Secretary-General's Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict,
10-69905
Radhika Coomaraswamy, and has recently reiterated its
support for the implementation of the monitoring
mechanism set up by resolutions 1612 (2005) and 1882
(2009) by revising the EU implementation strategy on
children and armed conflict.

I would now like to briefly elaborate on some
recent European Union activities undertaken in
response to resolutions 1820 (2008) and 1888 (2009),
and complementing individual actions by EU member
States.

Fighting all forms of sexual and gender-based
violence against women and girls, including in armed
conflict but not excluding other situations of concern,
is among the key objectives of the EU's human rights
policy in external relations. In July 2010, the European
Union adopted 17 monitoring indicators for its
comprehensive approach on the implementation of
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008). In addition
to over the €300 million set aside for programmes
addressing the needs and rights of women and girls in
conflict-affected and post-conflict situations in over 67
countries, significant new funds will be made available
for civil society projects.

In October of this year, the European Union and
the African Union organized a joint civil society
seminar on women, peace and security in Addis Ababa.
In 2012, we plan to organize a workshop on the
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions on our two continents, and we are currently
looking for ways to support the training of African
peacekeepers and the African Standby Force in human
rights and gender issues and to increase the number of
women in such contingents.

The European Union has recently conducted the
first-ever lessons-learned exercise on mainstreaming
human rights and gender within its Common Security
and Defence Policy missions and operations. It has just
adopted standard training modules on human rights,
child protection and gender to be used as a baseline
reference by all 27 EU member States.

EU crisis management missions, 13 of which are
currently ongoing, all have advisers or focal points on
gender, and many carry out specific actions in the fight
against sexual and gender-based violence.

In closing, the European Union reiterates its
strong support for the work of the United Nations in
combating sexual violence in armed conflict and
10-69905
warmly welcomes the Secretary-General's report and
most particularly the resolution adopted yesterday.

