Mr. Stanislaus (Grenada): In my 12 years at the
United Nations, this is the first time that I avail myself
of the opportunity to address this body. Although I
have spoken many times in other United Nations
forums, I do so today because the item on the Council's
agenda - women, peace and security - is near and
dear to my heart as I approach my fiftieth wedding
anniversary.

I begin with the premise that the family is the
basis of society and that good family life is inextricably
intertwined with and interwoven into good national
life, which by extension can promote good
international life. From time immemorial, much of the
peace and harmony of the human family, especially in
conflict resolution therein, devolves upon the woman
of the house in her natural milieu as peacemaker.

Here lies a glorious opportunity to involve
women in peacemaking, peace-building and
peacekeeping at the highest level, nationally and
internationally. The age-old saying that the hand that
rocks the cradle rules the world remains only a good
adage unless women are brought into the mainstream
of decision-making at the highest political, educational,
social, economic, cultural and other levels. Then, and
only then, will the world give credence and substance
to the ancient Chinese proverb that women hold up half
the sky.

The Fourth World Conference on Women, held in
Beijing in September 1995, drew up the Beijing
Declaration and Programme of Action. It contains 12
subject areas, 6 of which are analysed in the United
Nations publication entitled "The World's Women
2000: Trends and Statistics". This was issued just
before the twenty-third special session of the General
Assembly in June 2000, entitled "Women 2000:
Gender, Equality, Development and Peace for the
Twenty-First Century". The intent was to show the
progress as well as the disparities between women and
men worldwide in health, human rights, political
decision-making, work, education and families.

Due to time constraints, my delegation will touch
briefly on three subject areas, namely, human rights,
political decision-making and work. While progress
has been made, we cannot fail to see that we are still a
long way from attaining the proclaimed goal of
women's rights as human rights, as was discussed in
the Millennium Report, or of equal rights of men and
women affirmed in the Charter, or of everyone, without
discrimination, having the right to equal pay for equal
work, as emphasized in article 23 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights.

Yet, gender imbalance is nowhere more
noticeable than in the workplace, where on average
women earn at least 30 per cent less than men for equal
work. Moreover, in the home, where a woman's
domestic role as spouse and mother is so vital to the
well-being of society, her work is always undervalued
and underpaid. Unpaid domestic work everywhere is
seen as a woman's responsibility.

Is it not incongruous that more than 50 years after
the ratification of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights that the political landscape is still dominated by
men? Yet all international instruments and all national
legislatures enshrine the principle of equality between
men and women. Men have a responsibility therefore
to help remove the patriarchal dominance in society
and to allow the private virtues of women to go public.
Indeed, men of quality should never feel threatened by
women for equality.

Gender equality is predicated upon education of
girls and boys so that they can be empowered
throughout their life in today's globalizing world to
enter the gender mainstream of equal opportunity. The
report of the sixth session of the Commission on the
Status of Women, published on 25 March 2002, tells
how far we are from attaining this goal. Given the
opportunity for education, women and girls do as well
as men and boys. Some even think that women and
girls do better.

In 1916, psychologist George Stratton of the
University of Southern California described what he
considered - what he considered, remember, not what
I consider - the inherent superiority of the female
brain in seeing the whole picture. Writing on feminism
and psychology in Century Magazine, he expressed the
hope that women would dispel masculine illusions
when they took their rightful place in society.

Men, he said, tend to fix on cogs instead of flesh
and blood. Beginning with a generous wonder at
nature, men end up with fascination for the tool, the
scientific instrument. They establish governments to
give order to life and then end up coveting the
functions of government more than life. The masculine
genius for organization, Stratton said, needs women's
sense of the heart of things, not the trappings.

I cannot end without recalling from Greek
mythology the resourcefulness, the common sense and
the power of women. In Lysistrata, a masterpiece of
comedy written in 411 BC, Aristophanes tells of how,
during the silly and unnecessary Peloponnesian war
between the city-state of Athens and Sparta, the women
ended the military madness and exposed the absurdity
and futility of war by seizing, first, the Acropolis,
which contained the Treasury, then refusing to have
intimate relations with the returning men soldiers.
Taken together, their actions of seizure and sex strike
brought peace and development in a century very far
away and removed from the twenty-first century.

Finally, we men serve as the link between home,
where lessons are first taught and learned, and the
wider world, where they are applied in pursuit of peace
and security. An ancient Chinese philosopher captured
the contribution of women to peace and security best
when he said:

"If there is light in the soul, there will be
beauty in the person. If there is beauty in the
person, there will be harmony in the home. If
there is harmony in the home, there will be order
in the nation. If there is order in the nation, there
will be peace in the world."

What a beautiful tribute to womanhood. And on
this score, I want to greet, salute and thank Ms. Angela
King and Ms. Noeleen Heyzer and, of course, Mr.
Guehenno, for their presentations today.

