Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Let me say,
Madam President, that we honoured by your personal
presence here today. In honour of the German presidency
of the Security Council this month, let me also try to
thank you in German: Vielen Dank, Frau Varsitzende.

We align ourselves with the statement to be delivered
later today by the observer of the European Union.

We express deep appreciation to Germany and
France for making the women and peace and security
agenda a priority of their joint presidencies. We would
also like to thank the German presidency for bringing
more light and transparency to this gathering by
opening the curtains and for its tremendous efforts for
better timekeeping.

We also applaud the Secretary-General for his
statement this morning and for his leadership. We
thank him for giving the issue of equal participation
so much prominence in the important Action for
Peacekeeping initiative.

Having listened to other speakers this morning,
we are pleased that we agree that we are no longer
debating why more women should be involved in
peace operations but are specifically discussing the
question of how we can make that happen. Barriers to
female participation differ across missions and across
individual troop-contributing countries (TCCs). But
the issue itself concerns us all.

In the Kingdom of the Netherlands we have just
celebrated the seventy-fifth anniversary of female
participation in the armed forces. In that light, I am
honoured that two female Dutch officers are members
of my delegation today. We acknowledge that we have
made progress in the past 75 years, but we realize that
in the Kingdom of the Netherlands we still struggle to
get the numbers right. That is an issue I have also heard
my colleagues discussing today. In trying to address
the "how" question, I will to focus on three issues:
first, a full analysis of the existing barriers; secondly,
translating our findings into action; and, thirdly,
matching action with training.
On the first point, analysis of the existing barriers,
there was a very good baseline study last year by the
Geneva Centre for the Democratic Control of Armed
Forces. The study details the current barriers that
women face in assuming military and police roles
in United Nations peace operations. That itself was
a positive step, but more needs to be done. We need
to listen better to the real experts - women - when
researching the current obstacles to their participation.
All of us have heard stories of women becoming
dehydrated because they stop drinking fluids in order
to avoid a risky night-time trip to the toilet. That is
unacceptable. We must work together to end those kinds
of situations. The recently launched Elsie Initiative
Fund will allow for additional research into TCC-
and mission-specific barriers. That will enable us to
develop targeted policy and interventions in response.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands is a proud supporter
of the Elsie Initiative Fund, and we encourage other
Member States to follow suit.

That brings me to my second point, translating
research into action. We need to bring down the barriers
to equal participation, both at home and in missions. It
is not rocket science. A lot can be achieved by simple
measures - increasing efforts to recruit more women,
appointing national gender advisers, creating gender-
responsive criteria for deployment and providing
adequate camp accommodation and equipment.
Furthermore, it is not only about the hardware; the
software in our minds, the culture, is also important.
We need to create a culture in which we listen and are
responsive to gender-specific needs. The Secretary-
General is doing that through his uniformed gender-
parity strategy, which we welcome, and we call on
everyone to support it.

My third, and last, point is this - in order to achieve
the necessary change in culture we need proper gender
training throughout the military curriculum, including
predeployment and deployment training itself. We need
to instil a gender-responsive attitude across all mission
pillars and personnel. That applies to both women and
men. We do that in the Kingdom of the Netherlands, for
example, by means of a gender-in-operations course.
It is also about the numbers. To get the numbers right
at the United Nations, we support the female military
officers course. We hope that more countries can do
that as well.
In conclusion, improving our missions'
effectiveness through increased female participation
is crucial for our efforts to modernize United Nations
peacekeeping. Increasing female participation featured
prominently in the Declaration of Shared Commitments
on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, which we
signed last September. Let us redouble our efforts to
make increased female participation a reality. It is time
for us to walk the talk.

May I also say to Major General Lund that we are
inspired both by her presence in the Chamber today and
by the fact that she is a role model for many of us, and
certainly for the military in my country.

