Ms. Linde (Sweden): The adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) in October 2000 was a true milestone. It
reformed the way we see and conduct conflict analysis
and engage in peacekeeping. It was an answer to
generations of women who had been neglected as
peacemakers, negotiators, mediators and parties to
conflicts. Since then, deepened commitments by the
United Nations system and Member States, along with
important local, regional and international initiatives,
have moved the agenda forward, but we still have a long
way to go.

I would like to thank South Africa for
organizing today's debate and for the strong focus
on implementation. As portrayed in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/800), the challenges are
profound. To deliver more sustainable results, we need
leadership that keeps women's rights and participation
at the top ofthe agenda, as well as the implementation of
concrete steps that matter in the field and accountability
to make sure that decisions are acted on. I would like
to elaborate briefly on each of those three components.

First, strong leadership is key to achieving full
integration. As Member States and as an organization,
we in the United Nations must take concrete steps
forward in 2020. We must counter attacks on women's
human rights, including sexual and reproductive
health and rights, and we must defend our multilateral
achievements. Resources need to be committed and
messages need to be clear.

Secondly, with respect to implementation, practical
measures must be taken by national Governments,
multilateral institutions and individual missions. A
gender perspective should influence our work, what
we talk about and our next steps. We need a gender
perspective in conflict analysis and the inclusion of
sex-disaggregated data in all reporting. We welcome
the renewed commitments made by the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) to adopting an integrated gender
perspective in all of its work, and we fully support the
suggestions presented by the Chair of the PBC to the
Security Council today.

Thirdly, with regard to accountability, we need
clearly defined responsibilities to implement the full
women and peace and security agenda. Follow-up
is essential to ensuring that analysis and data reflect
realities on the ground. Member States must have
strategies for women's participation in peace processes
and decision-making bodies. The prevention and
prosecution of conflict-related sexual violence must
be central to peace efforts. I particularly want to stress
the role of civil society. During Sweden's time on the
Security Council, more representatives of civil society
were invited to brief the Council than ever before,
which resulted in more inclusive and better-informed
discussions. Yesterday, in our Multi-stakeholder
Forum on Women, Peace and Security, civil-society
organizations expressed great concern about the fact
that progress on the women and peace and security
agenda is slowing down. They also stressed worries
about evidence of increased hostility towards members
of civil society in this arena, especially women
human rights defenders. Member States, and Security
Council members in particular, should take concrete
steps to implement decisions and include civil-society
representatives as partners. Not the least of these
aspects is civil society's untapped potential for playing
a role in preventing conflict through early warning.

As we speak of the importance of civil society and
strong political leadership, I would like to highlight the
recent developments in the Sudan. As we heard from
Ms. Salah, Sudanese women's strong participation was
critical in the movement for change. We are encouraged

by the emphasis on women's participation by the new
Government. We should all stand ready to support the
Sudanese people as they move forward on that path.

It is impossible not to mention what is happening in
north-east Syria. After years of defending their homes
and our countries against the terrorist sect Islamic
State/Da'esh, the women and men that make up that
region's ethnic and cultural mosaic are now suffering
the consequences of the Turkish military offensive.
We know that women are among those hardest hit
by conflict, but in the fight against Da'esh they have
also been the ones fighting on the front lines. That is
especially true for Kurdish women. We have a moral
obligation to stand up for them in times like these.
After more than eight years of conflict, for which the
Syrian regime bears the overwhelming responsibility,
Syria and the region need peace. Sweden reiterates its
support for the United Nations-led political process, the
only path that can lead to sustainable peace.

Finally, let me express my appreciation for the
specific commitments in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2019/ 800). Many of the recommendations Sweden put
forward after two years as a non-permanent member of
the Security Council are addressed in the report. I am
proud of Sweden's contribution to the women and peace
and security agenda during our time on the Council.
Let me assure the Council that Sweden will continue
to champion these issues in close coordination with
members and other partners.

