Ms. Gonzalez Roman (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka,
Executive Director ofUN-Women; Mr. Chaloka Beyani,
Special Rapporteur on the human rights of internally
displaced persons; and Ms. Suaad Allami, Director of
the Sadr City Women's Centre and Legal Clinic, who
gave us the perspective of civil society.

We would also like to align ourselves with the
statement made by the observer of the European Union.

We would like to thank Argentina for organizing
this debate. We commend you, Madam President, for
focusing this year's open debate on the special situation
of displaced women and refugees.

This year, which marks the highest number of
refugees displaced since the Second World War, we
believe it is more important than ever to recall that half
of them are women and girls and that the extremism
we are witnessing today in certain parts of the world
will perhaps increase those numbers exponentially.
That is reflected in today's presidential statement
(S/PRST/2014/21), which Spain welcomes.

Displacement is in and of itself an exacerbation
of the vulnerability of, and discrimination against,
women and girls who are deprived from a safe family
environment. In the majority of cases, they have to
assume the functions of the head of household, for
which their social and cultural circumstances and
education have not prepared them. Displacement also
increases the vulnerability of women and girls in the
face of threats emanating from trafficking networks,
recruitment by armed groups, forced marriage,
statelessness, prostitution and sexual violence. Forced
disappearances also make it impossible to enjoy one's
basic rights, such as the right to education and the right
to appropriate sanitation.

Throughout recent years we have noted with
satisfaction that the Security Council has been
increasingly proactive and focused when it comes to
women in armed conflict. However, it is important to
bear in mind that the main responsibility for protecting
displaced persons is on the shoulders of the States,
which have an obligation to adopt whatever steps are
needed to prevent the weakening of the basic rights
of displaced persons, mitigate the negative effects of
displacement on the enjoyment of those rights and
investigate and punish the instigators and perpetrators
of crimes, such as recruitment and sexual violence. In
that regard, we once again reiterate the importance of
the Global Summit to End Sexual Violence in Conflict,
held in London in June, and we underscore the need
for implementing its outcome. We believe that it is
vital that, in reviewing the mandates of peacekeeping
operations, we bolster the gender perspective when
it comes to protection, as well as the priorities of the
women and peace and security agenda, as reflected in
the Secretary-General's most recent report (S/2014/693).

We also believe that post-conflict situations
require that we continue to step up vigilance and adopt
the necessary measures so that women's participation
in repairing the country's economic and social fabric
can be guaranteed. The rebuilding stage is the source
of many of the problems that affect women in the areas
of accessing the labour market, education, health care
and decision-making mechanisms. As the Secretary-
General report's notes, 2015 is a unique opportunity
for all United Nations agencies to focus their attention
on empowering women. That should be central to the
post-2015 development agenda and be a key factor
in promoting both bilateral and multilateral aid for
development.

With regard to the opportunity presented by the
2015 review ofresolution 1325 (2000), we should reflect
on the progress achieved in implementing the resolution
and on the challenges that are still before us in the area
of women and peace and security. As to the progress
and achievements, women's peace groups have gained
in strenght, and in some contexts have succeed in
having their concerns included on the agendas of peace
talks. In addition, transitional justice mechanisms are
becoming increasingly effective in responding to war
crimes against women, increasingly including specific
provisions to protect women who testify. We also note
that planning strategies in post-conflict situations are
increasingly recognizing the need for putting women
in decision-making positions. We also think it is an
achievement that increasingly countries now have
national action plans to implement resolution 1325
(2000), based on their specific circumstances. We
see that with Spain, for example. In addition, more
and more civilian and military personnel destined
for peacekeeping operations are being provided the
necessary information to correctly incorporate the
gender perspective in the context of their respective
missions.

Despite that progress, however, there are still many
challenges. Since 1992 fewer than 10 per cent of those
involved in peace negotiations have been women, and
the responses to gender issues in peace agreements
still fall short. Women's participation is also lacking
in disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes. Sexual violence in conflicts continues to
be carried out systematically and with impunity.

There is no doubt we have made progress on the
women and peace and security agenda, but a major
challenge lies before us. We must ensure that women
are definitively recognized as agents of peace, and
protecting their rights needs to be an integral part of
peace processes.

