Mr. Hannesson (Iceland): Let me begin by
thanking the delegation of Ghana for convening this
open debate on Security Council resolution 1325
(2000) on women and peace and security. I would also
like to thank that delegation for providing a concept
paper for this meeting (S/2007/598, annex) which
contributes to a constructive debate. This important
subject deserves our full attention and, more especially,
our concrete action.

Let me also thank the Secretary-General himself
for his words here this morning, as well as Under-
Secretary-General Gue'henno, Ms. Rachel Mayanja,
Ms. Joanne Sandler and Ms. Gina Torry for their
valuable input earlier today. We were indeed very
pleased to hear of the Secretary-General's appointment
of our Danish friend, Ellen Margrethe Loj, as his
Special Representative in Liberia. We congratulate her
most sincerely, and we know that this important
position will be in capable hands.

Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) is
unique. It underscores the central role that women play
in conflict resolution and the need to protect their
rights. It has proved to be an important tool in
promoting the direct and active involvement of women
in conflict prevention, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. It has put gender issues and gender
perspective firmly on the agenda of the Council and is
relevant to all its actions.

Women are critical to the consolidation of peace
and should be part of all peace processes. It is our duty
to ensure that the provisions of resolution 1325 (2000)
are realized at the national, regional and international
levels, and that women can fully and equally
participate at all levels of decision-making with regard
to conflict prevention and peace-building. We must
translate words into action.
Iceland welcomes the comprehensive report of
the Secretary General on women and peace and
security (S/2007/567). The report clearly indicates that
significant progress has been made in many areas
towards implementation of the System-wide Action
Plan on resolution 1325 (2000) for 2005-2007, in
particular in areas such as peacekeeping, peacemaking
and peacebuilding. The report points out, however, that
progress has been uneven in many substantive areas of
the Action Plan and gaps remain in its implementation.
Much therefore remains to be done at the United
Nations level, both at headquarters and in the field.

In this context, we highly appreciate the work on
the 2008-2009 System-wide Action Plan. We agree that
the Action Plan should be a results-oriented monitoring
and reporting tool for strengthened inter-agency
coordination, enhanced accountability and gender
mainstreaming. The United Nations system should
engage Governments, civil society and regional
organizations, such as the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, in its implementation. We
need to share experiences and good practices between
regional organizations.

Iceland fully endorses the important role of the
Peacebuilding Commission in the promotion of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). The
Peacebuilding Commission should integrate a gender
perspective in all phases of its work.

Iceland strongly supports Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) and is fully committed to
implementing it. That includes promoting the rights of
women and girls and mainstreaming gender concerns
in the United Nations system and in our foreign policy.
Iceland is finalizing an action plan in order to intensify
our implementation of resolution 1325 (2000); the
action plan will be finalized in cooperation with civil
society. Emphasis will be on developing a plan which
is both ambitious and achievable at the same time.
Focus will be put on gender mainstreaming and the
participation of women in peacebuilding and
stabilization in post-conflict societies.

Iceland now participates in peacebuilding and
reconstruction in nine places around the world,
including for the United Nations Development Fund
for Women (UNIFEM) in Liberia, Serbia and the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, as well as for
UNICEF in Palestine. In the past few years Iceland has
encouraged women to increase their participation in
07-55957
these assignments, and currently over 40 per cent of
deployed personnel of the Iceland Crisis Response Unit
are women.

Iceland's policy on development cooperation
attaches great importance to women in conflict areas.
Much of Iceland's development cooperation is directed
towards facilitating a smooth transition from conflict
situations with special emphasis on women and their
role in peacebuilding. In this context, I would like to
underline the important role of UNIFEM, and I am
pleased to mention that the Government of Iceland has
decided to double its current contribution to the Fund.
This marks a thirty-fold increase in Iceland's
contributions to UNIFEM. since 2003, an increase
which will bring Iceland amongst the top donors to the
Fund.

Iceland regards the equal participation of women
in peace processes as fundamental for achieving,
maintaining and promoting sustainable peace. All of us
have a clear duty to work towards the full and effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

The United Nations system, Member States and
civil society must therefore consistently work together
to implement the resolution at all levels. We must
translate words into action. For example, ways should
be found of involving women in the Israeli-Palestinian
peace process in a consistent and structured way. Here
I would like to call to the Council's attention that there
already exists a forum of influential women from both
sides, together with international figures in the
International Women's Commission for a Just and
Sustainable Israeli-Palestinian Peace. We would like to
use this opportunity to urge the Quartet to consider
how the peace process can benefit from influential and
effective groups like the International Women's
Commission.

I thank the President for convening this important
meeting. We look forward to further discussions in
order to improve the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000).

