Mr. Tiendrebeogo (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): We should like to express our gratitude to
your delegation, Mr. President, for having organized
this debate on the full-fledged and equal participation
of women in peacekeeping, peacebuilding and security
efforts. I should also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his report (8/2008/622) and Ms. Mayanja
for presenting it this morning. We are just as grateful to
Mr. Le Roy, Ms. Alberdi and Ms. Taylor for their
important contributions.
The regular review of the state of implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) testifies to the interest of the
Security Council and the international community in
this important issue. It is comforting to note that there
has been significant progress since the resolution was
adopted, including the setting up of increasingly
effective legal and institutional frameworks that are the
expression of the constantly growing awareness of the
importance of the contribution that women have made
and could make to peacekeeping and the promotion of
peace. Even better, the need to take into account
women's specific needs before, during and after

conflicts is now part and parcel of strategies and plans
for preventing and emerging from crises and for
reconstruction and peacebuilding. That is to the credit
not only of Member States but of the United Nations -
to whose leadership we should pay tribute - and of
regional and subregional organizations, as well as of
many civil society organizations.

However, significant as that progress is, it cannot
mask the reality i the reality that the results of
women's participation in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding is far from what was expected and that
many challenges, such as sexual violence of all types
and impunity, remain to be met before resolution 1325
(2000) is truly and fully implemented. We are all the
more concerned by this reality because we are but a
few days away from the celebration of the sixtieth
anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights.

It is now recognized that the systematic
involvement of women in negotiation and mediation
efforts, in the elaboration of peace agreements and in
reconstruction and reconciliations strategies is
essential. The Security Council has reaffirmed that on
many occasions. It did so quite recently, on
23 September, on the occasion of its 5979th meeting,
the high-level meeting on mediation as a peaceful way
to settle conflicts.

The involvement of women involves a collective
and shared responsibility.

It is an individual responsibility, for we must rid
ourselves of certain prejudices and other demeaning
concepts regarding the place and role of women in
society. Indeed, it is no secret that the challenge of
socio-cultural inertia in this regard is often one of the
most difficult challenges to take on.
It is a responsibility of States and parties to
conflicts, as they have the primary obligation to ensure
the protection of women and their involvement in the
search for solutions to crises and to mainstream the
concept of women, peace and security and to strive to
ensure its effective implementation. Among other
things, we call for strengthening women's capacities,
especially in the techniques of negotiation and
mediation, as well as strengthening the female
components of military and police contingents in
peacekeeping operations.

It is a responsibility of United Nations bodies and
subregional and regional organizations, which must
further strengthen the use of women's peacemaking
and negotiating talents. That means, inter alia,
enlarging the female component of representatives,
envoys and heads of offices - all key elements of the
good offices of those organizations, without forgetting
an increase in the number of women decision makers at
all levels. To illustrate, the African Union included in
its Constitutive Act the obligation to take gender
equality into account in its programmes and activities,
while the gender aspect is a reality in the composition
of the Commission of the African Union. As to the
Economic Community of West African States, it has
elaborated a plan of action on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).

It is a responsibility of civil society, an
outstanding partner and a relay in the dissemination of
good practices in the promotion of gender issues. In
many crisis situations it has amply proven its ability to
transcend passion and partisan approaches to mobilize
energy for peace.

Finally, it is a responsibility of women
themselves, who must set up national, regional and
international solidarity networks to share experiences
and strengthen their capacities. In that way they will be
in a position to contribute to setting up platforms and
reference frameworks for the participation of women in
peace processes.

My delegation pays tribute to the pertinence of
the recommendations in the Secretary-General's report
regarding accelerating the full implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). Those that address the Security
Council deserve the greatest attention, given the role
this body plays in the maintenance of international
peace and security. We especially invite the Council to
step up its cooperation with Member States and
subregional and regional organizations and to make
more frequent use of the Arria Formula, which will
enable it to better consolidate the foundations of some
of its actions and decisions.

The adoption of resolution 1325 (2000)
represents an important stage in the collective will of
the international community to promote the rights and
interests of women. However, it should not be regarded
as an end in itself. In other words, we should not be
satisfied by simple regular reviews. Only genuine
political will coupled with concrete commitment to
peace will make possible the achievement of the
objectives of resolution 1325 (2000). The United
Nations overall, and the Security Council in particular,
have a central role to play in that regard, which they
must continue to discharge fully.

