Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I thank
you, Sir, for convening this open debate on sexual
violence in conflict. We join others in thanking
Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed for her
briefing. We also thank Ms. Pramila Patten, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, and offer our continued support
to her Office and the Team of Experts on the Rule of
Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict for their important
work in combating those heinous crimes.

As a member of the Group of Friends of Women,
Peace and Security, the United Arab Emirates endorses
the Group's joint statement, delivered earlier by the
representative of Canada.

Ten years have passed since the Security Council
adopted resolution 1820 (2008), thereby recognizing
for the first time that sexual violence is used as a
tactic of war and is therefore a matter of international
peace and security. Since then, subsequent resolutions
have sought to strengthen the United Nations
response aimed at ending those crimes and ensuring
accountability for their perpetrators, but owing to a
lack of implementation, they have sadly fallen short.
It is also impossible to overstate the importance of
gender equality and women's empowerment in efforts
to prevent and respond to such crimes. In fact, as many
here have said today, gender equality and women's
empowerment, which are fundamental principles of
United Arab Emirates foreign policy, are core values
that can prevent violence against women when they are
woven throughout a society. That is one of the many
reasons why the United Arab Emirates stands with the
report (S/2018/250) of the Secretary-General on sexual
violence in conflict, which rightly affirms that women's
physical security is inextricably linked to their political,
social and economic status and rights.

Our region is one in turmoil, under siege by
terrorist groups such as Da'esh that use sexual violence
to terrorize and displace populations. To be under
Da'esh's control is to live with the constant fear of rape
as a weapon of punishment for resisting its sick world
view. The gains made in the struggle against Da'esh
in 2017 were significant, but we must be vigilant
with regard to the continued risk of the trafficking of
women and children who remain under their control.
The Secretary-General's report makes it clear that most
incidents of mass rape continue to be met with mass
impunity. For example, not a single member of Da'esh
has been prosecuted for sexual violence offences to
date. That sends a dangerous message to groups that
use sexual violence as a tactic of terror with the aim
of destroying lives and communities. This is why the
situation of the Rohingya is so alarming. The mass
exodus of the Rohingya community from Myanmar has
created a humanitarian crisis that has rightly captured
the world's attention. The international community
must ensure accountability for these victims - mainly
women and girls, but also men and boys - who
have been unacceptably targeted for their religion
or ethnicity.

Gender equality and women's empowerment
are key tenets of the world view of the United Arab
Emirates. That is why women's protection and
empowerment form one of the three pillars on which
our entire foreign assistance strategy rests. It is by
mainstreaming those ideals in our global engagement
that we can prevent sexual violence in conflict by
creating stable, tolerant and prosperous societies. We
must intensify our efforts to combat impunity for these
crimes and to utilize the tools of the United Nations
and the Security Council more effectively to ensure
accountability. With the support of the United Arab
Emirates, the Team of Experts has carried out its
vital Security Council mandate to strengthen Member
States' capacity to address sexual Violence in conflict
in some of the world's most challenging contexts. The
United Arab Emirates encourages other Member States
to support that work.

The United Arab Emirates believes that smart
foreign policy is inclusive foreign policy, one that puts
the rights of women front and centre and at the heart of
our collective response. The United Arab Emirates will
continue to do all that it can to address those crimes and
promote gender equality and women's empowerment as
critical elements of the peace and security agenda.

