Mr. Tuy (Cambodia): Mr. President, allow me to
express my congratulations to the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of March.

Modern-day slavery and human trafficking affect
virtually every country and constitute one of the major
threats to global peace and security as well as to our
shared economic prosperity. Human trafficking affects
women, children and men, subjecting people to cruel
forced labour and sexual exploitation.

The Royal Government of Cambodia strongly
condemns all instances of slavery and human
trafficking. In line with the United Nations Global
Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons, my
delegation supports a three-pronged approach focusing
on prevention, protection and prosecution.

With respect to prevention, my delegation is of the
view that effective prevention efforts must focus on
curbing conflict while fully addressing its root causes.
As exemplified by the way in which non-State armed
groups operate, connections between armed conflict
and human trafficking are multifaceted. Non-State
armed groups openly advocate for the enslavement
of women and children in the attainment of their
misguided objectives. They actively promote slavery
and human trafficking both as a means to finance their
operations and as a method of warfare.

The primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security rests with the United
Nations and the Security Council. In this context, the
Council must play an active role in addressing conflict
situations by promoting dialogue and peacefully
negotiated solutions based on the United Nations
Charter. It must follow up on the implementation
of its resolutions, providing for clear and realistic
peacekeeping mandates.

Moreover, the Security Council should closely
collaborate with the General Assembly and United
Nations agencies, including through increased
consultations between the Presidents of the General
Assembly and the Security Council. Conflict prevention
is the best policy to protect against human trafficking,
and, where conflict is inevitable, the Security Council
should actively engage in the de-escalation ofhostilities,
with a view to safeguarding vulnerable populations.

The protection of vulnerable persons, particularly
displaced populations and refugees, is of central
importance to the success of global efforts in combating
human trafficking, forced labour and modern slavery by
non-State actors. In this light, the full implementation
of the Palermo Protocols and the New York Declaration

for Refugees and Migrants plays a crucial role in
comprehensively addressing human trafficking.

Moreover, in implementing protective measures,
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development can
mobilize efforts to strengthen protection of the rights
of the most vulnerable populations. In this regard,
Cambodia would like to emphasize the importance of
the full implementation of Sustainable Development
Goal (SDG) 5.2, which focuses on eliminating all
forms of violence against women and girls, including
trafficking; SDG 8.7, which focuses on the eradication
of forced labour, slavery and human trafficking; and
SDG 16.2, which aims to end trafficking and all forms
of violence against children.

The victims of human trafficking, particularly
women and children, have a fundamental right to be
protected in accordance with international law. In
this context, it is necessary to ensure the provision
of medical and psychological services to victims of
sex trafficking and forced labour trafficking, while
ensuring economic support to trafficking victims
through training and job-placement programmes. It is
also important to avoid stigmatization of these victims
as they reintegrate into society.

In this context, my delegation supports the
establishment of the United Nations Voluntary Trust
Fund for Victims of Trafficking in Persons, Especially
Women and Children, and encourages States that are in
a position to do so to contribute to the Fund.

This brings me to the issue of prosecution, which
centrally reinforces preventive and protective efforts
in the fight against human trafficking. The Security
Council, in its resolution 2331 (2016), has recognized
that human trafficking contributes to the spread of
international organized crime, which exacerbates
conflict and fosters insecurity and instability throughout
the world. Moreover, Security Council resolution 2195
(2014) affirms that terrorists benefit from transnational
organized crime, including trafficking in persons.

As the prosecution of the perpetrators of such
crimes is central to the eradication of human trafficking,
my delegation notes the efforts made to establish
an international mechanism focused on gathering
evidence of atrocities committed by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham and other terrorist organizations.
Cambodia welcomes all such initiatives that are carried
out with due respect for the principles and purposes of
the United Nations Charter, including the principles
of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States,
self-determination and non-interference in the internal
affairs of States.

In the light of the importance of international
law-enforcement cooperation in the prosecution of
human trafficking crimes, Cambodia will continue
its longstanding partnership with regional partners,
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and
INTERPOL, among others.

In conclusion, allow me to reiterate that in the fight
against modern slavery and human trafficking, the global
community must ensure the effective implementation
of international obligations. Having ratified the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and the protocols thereto, my delegation believes
that these efforts must be carried out in a coordinated
and comprehensive fashion, with due regard for victims'
rights and full respect for the principles and purposes
of the United Nations Charter.

