Mr. Sajdik (Austria): It is my great honour to
address the Council today on behalf of the Human
Security Network. Our cross-regional network consists
of Chile, Costa Rica, Greece, Ireland, Jordan, Mali,
Norway, Panama, Slovenia, Switzerland, Thailand,
South Africa as an observer, and my own country,
Austria. Women's full enjoyment of all human rights
remains at the core of our group's agenda.

Let me first thank the Secretary-General, his
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Bangura, and Ms. Rhoda Misaka for their
comprehensive statements.

The Human Security Network welcomes recent
progress on the women and peace and security agenda,
including the most recent resolutions 2106 (2013) and
2122 (2013). The Declaration of Commitment to End
Sexual Violence in Conflict issued in September 2013
was also an important landmark, and we look forward
to these commitments being converted into concrete
actions, including through the Global Summit to End
Sexual Violence in Conflict, which is to take place in
June.

We are appreciative of the efforts of Special
Representative Bangura and the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2014/181). Conflict-related sexual violence
is pervasive, although, as the report clearly states, it
is almost universally underreported due to factors
such as stigma, reprisals and the targeting of survivors
and those who support them, including humanitarian
workers, human rights defenders and journalists. We
welcome the progress and commitments made by States
and the work of United Nations Action against Sexual
Violence in Conflict and the Team of Experts on the
Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict.

However, our group is concerned about elements in
the report indicating the systematic and widespread use
of sexual violence as a tool of intimidation and social
control. In addition, the report highlights the continued
use of sexual violence as a means of displacing
populations, as well as the pregnancies resulting from
sexual violence and the plight of children born of rape,
which requires much more attention. We call on all
parties to cease such sexual violence-related violations
and to hold perpetrators to account.

Ceasefire and peace agreements should contain
provisions that stipulate conflict-related sexual violence
as a prohibited act in the definition of a ceasefire, and
amnesty provisions must not be applicable to crimes
of sexual violence. Furthermore, parties to conflict
have to provide remedy and assistance to victims
and survivors of sexual violence, including health-
care services. We also call upon the members of the
Security Council to use all means at their disposal to
address sexual violence in armed conflicts, including
by making referrals to the International Criminal Court
and other relevant actions.

We welcome the recommendations in the report,
including those on steps that can be taken by the Security
Council to reinforce and implement the prevention
framework outlined in resolution 2106 (2013). Let
me also highlight that women's empowerment and
participation are essential to any prevention and
protection response.

Regarding our own behaviour as an organization,
we encourage the Secretary-General and all other
relevant actors to ensure the full implementation of
the zero-tolerance policy against any kind of sexual
exploitation or abuse. According to the report contained
in document A/68/756, concerning allegations of sexual
exploitation and abuse in the United Nations system,
despite a slight increase in 2013 there has been a
general downward trend in the number of allegations of
sexual exploitation and sexual abuse received in recent
years. Nonetheless, one substantiated case is one case
too many and is unacceptable.
Strengthening civil society, including grass-roots
women's organizations and networks that provide
assistance to victims and survivors of sexual violence
in conflict, can enable the restoration of dignity and
respect and provide the necessary skills, treatment and
care to empower individuals to protect themselves and
defend their rights.

To conclude, I should like to reiterate our group's
commitment to promoting and enhancing the role of
women in peace processes. The importance of women's
participation in decision-making in conflict resolution
processes cannot be overstated. We also remain strong
supporters of women protection advisers within the
United Nations peacekeeping and political missions,
and believe that their positions should be financed from
within mission budgets. We must all strive towards
enabling stronger protection for women and girls in
conflict situations while simultaneously addressing
the drivers of sexual violence before it occurs, and the
Human Security Network will continue to contribute to
this shared goal.

