Mr. Samvelian (Armenia): I requested the floor to
reply to the comments made by the representative of
Azerbaijan.

We reject all allegations made against my country. I
regret to note, though, that once again the statement by
Azerbaijan on the important topic of women and peace
and security fell short of addressing the real situation
on the ground related to the violence against women
in that country. Instead, comments by the delegation
concerned were full of allegations, fabrications and
lies against my country. It is well known and properly
documented that it was Azerbaijan that, more than two
decades ago, unleashed a full-scale war against Armenia
and Nagorno Karabakh, with the intention of totally
exterminating its Armenian population. The military
aggression by Azerbaijan, however, had unpredictable
consequences. As a result of that aggression, hundreds
of thousands of ethnic Armenians, the majority women
and children, had to abandon their homes and become
refugees and internally displaced persons. They
suffered unspeakable acts of Violence and State terror
by Azerbaijan.

That aggression continues to this day. Due to
the indiscriminate shelling of Armenian villages by
Azerbaijan's heavy artillery, only last month three
Armenian women - villagers from the bordering
Tavush province of Armenia - were killed. Rather
than delivering false statements and utilizing baseless
propaganda, we would strongly advise Azerbaijani
representatives to concentrate on monitoring cases of
grave human rights violations currently taking place
in their country, particularly the widespread violence
against women observed by United Nations Special
Rapporteurs and other international experts; the
persecution of women human-rights defenders and
activists and women peace advocates; the occurrence
of illegal marriages; gender-related killings of women
and girls; a very high rate of gender selective abortions,
and so on.

We could pose a very relevant question to the
authorities of Azerbaijan. Is it possible to promote the
women and peace and security agenda and achieve
lasting peace in the conflict when these authorities
systematically oppress, jail and attack their own women
human-rights activists and peace advocates?

