Mr. Argiiello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): Let
me begin by thanking the United Kingdom presidency
for having convened this open debate, which reflects
the Security Council's commitment to effectively
follow up and implement resolution 1820 (2008) nearly
a year after its adoption.

There must be a firm response to the continued
use of sexual violence in its various forms against
civilians, in particular women and girls, in conflict and
post-conflict situations. We must put an end to
impunity and protect the victims in all situations where
the United Nations is present.

Consonant with my country's firm commitment to
combat gender-based violence, the Argentine national
congress, in March, adopted a comprehensive
protection law to prevent, punish and eliminate
violence against women wherever they interact with
others. This encompasses sexual violence, including
rape, in all contexts, such as marriage, other
relationships and family situations - both with and
without cohabitation - as well as forced prostitution,
exploitation, slavery, harassment, sexual abuse or
trafficking.

With respect to the training of Argentine troops,
including those participating in United Nations
peacekeeping operations, I wish to emphasize that
throughout the process of selecting personnel for
deployment consideration is given to the Code of
Conduct for peacekeepers, including the provisions
related to gender and sexual exploitation and abuse,
which encompass the provisions and concepts set out
in resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008).

Similarly, those two resolutions underpin the
work of the Argentine centre for joint peacekeeping
training, which for four years has been training troops
for United Nations deployment. I stress that the
national training centre is firmly committed to
international standards of human rights protection, in
particular gender issues in peacekeeping operations, as
well as to the Code of Conduct and measures to
prevent sexual exploitation and abuse. We also stress
full and equal participation of men and women in all
initiatives for peace during all stages of armed conflict,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Implementation of
the two resolutions, the content of United Nations
reports and our own lessons learned are systematically
incorporated into the centre's gender curriculum.

It is part of our training mission to make these
documents and resolutions known; moreover, all staff
know the applicable law and the conduct that the
United Nations expects from its peacekeepers in this
sphere. Specific courses are offered following the
United Nations Standardized Generic Training
Modules. And at present the training institute is
completely updating its entire curriculum in
accordance with the new United Nations training
module, the Core Pre-Deployment Training Materials.

Furthermore, a follow-up system is in place
through interviews and surveys that serve as guide and
support for national policies, and we are planning an
auditing system for monitoring the progress of gender
mainstreaming.

As to the punishment contemplated in the
eventuality of an Argentine military personnel member
deployed in a peacekeeping operation being involved
in a case of sexual violence, disciplinary measures are
applied immediately within the unit deployed in the
theatre of operations. This results in the return to our
country of the person in question and the continuation
of disciplinary action in Argentina. This can involve
very severe punishment, including discharge. We

should also note that as of today, after 51 years of an
uninterrupted Argentine military presence in many
United Nations peacekeeping operations, there has
been no recorded case of sexual violence or abuse in
connection with Argentina's participation in
peacekeeping missions.

We continue to receive reports from the field on
the use of sexual violence as a political or military
weapon in some current conflicts. Sexual violence is
categorically prohibited as a method of war. The
widespread and systematic use of sexual violence is a
grave violation of international law, as enshrined in the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court and
in the Geneva Conventions and their Additional
Protocols. This was prominent in the context of the
first case to be tried before the Court, which leads us to
reflect not only on how widespread this aberrant
practice is in conflict, but also on the importance of
effective penalties in putting an end to impunity and
preventing such situations from recurring in the future.

Bearing in mind these realities, Argentina is
convinced that effective measures must be adopted as a
matter of urgency to prevent and respond to acts of
sexual violence against the civilian population. This
would make a significant contribution to the
maintenance of international peace and security.

Argentina hopes that the decisions that the
Council will adopt in this area will strongly incorporate
two lines of thought: protection for the full human
rights of victims and an end to impunity for the
perpetrators. In that connection, we are grateful for the
conclusions and recommendations of the report of the
Secretary-General, which we support. We hope that the
Council will take specific measures in a future
resolution to ensure that in the renewal of every
peacekeeping mandate these situations be considered
and that effective mechanisms will be put in place to
provide leadership and coherence in the response and
ensure a solid basis for future Council action at all
levels, including information gathering, awareness,
technical analysis of options and best practices.

