Mr. Nishida (Japan): I thank the Secretary-
General, the Executive Director of UN-Women and the
President of the Economic and Social Council for their
insightful briefings. We also welcome the
representative of civil society, and thank her for her
statement.

Japan welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General (S/201l/598*), which demonstrates his clear
commitment on this issue. We are encouraged that
UN-Women, under the strong leadership of
Ms. Bachelet, has been resolutely promoting the
agenda of women and peace and security as one of its
priorities.

Japan applauds the recent decision to award the
Nobel Peace Prize to President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf
and Ms. Leymah Gbowee of Liberia, and
Ms. Tawakkul Karman of Yemen, who are champions
of women's participation in peacebuilding processes. It
is groundbreaking that the announcement of the Prize
clearly mentions resolution 1325 (2000).

As a member of the group of Friends of
Mediation, Japan has consistently advocated the
importance of mediation and conflict prevention. We
welcome the fact that the General Assembly's very first
resolution on mediation, which was adopted this June,
underlined the importance of the participation of
women and the provision of gender expertise in
mediation (see General Assembly resolution 65/283).

In order to prevent the recurrence of conflict and
sustain long-standing peace, the needs of women and
girls must be fully addressed in post-conflict
peacebuilding. To that end, it is essential that women's
full and effective participation be ensured from the
very beginning of conflict prevention and mediation
processes. Japan expects UN-Women, in cooperation
with other partners including the Department of
Political Affairs, to coordinate and strengthen the
efforts of the United Nations system in this area and
provide guidance to regional organizations and
Member States in their efforts in mediation.

The important role of regional organizations,
such as the African Union, the Economic Community
of West African States and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, in conflict prevention has
been widely recognized. In that regard, it is
encouraging, as shown by the Organization of
American States ministerial meeting for the
advancement of women to be held next week in
El Salvador, that regional organizations have taken
steps towards the consistent inclusion of women and
women's rights in their conflict prevention efforts.

The promotion of women's participation in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding is key to the
protection and empowerment of women. The
strengthening of gender expertise and perspectives in
peacekeeping activities and increasing the number of
female peacekeepers remain a challenge. In that regard,
Japan deployed a female military liaison officer to the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste this
year. We also provide gender training to Japanese
personnel before they are deployed to peacekeeping
operations. This year, through the United Nations
Development Programme, Japan is supporting a project
to promote the employment of female police officers
and their training in Afghanistan, which so far has
resulted in the employment of more than 1,200 Afghan
women in local police forces.

There remain large implementation gaps with
regard to resolution 1325 (2000) in all areas, including
prevention, participation, protection and recovery and
relief. The indicators and strategic framework in the
reports of the Secretary-General contribute to
identifying the gaps and addressing those limitations in
a more systematic manner. Japan, for its part, will
continue to do its utmost to close the implementation
gaps before the fifteenth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000), in cooperation with our partners and, in
particular, with women's organizations and civil
society.

