Mr. Dauth (Australia): Mr. President, let me
begin by associating myself fully with the statement
just delivered on behalf of the Pacific Island Forum. At
this stage of the day, I understand, of course, that just
about everything has already been said, and Permanent
Representatives - not including yourself, Sir - have
fled the Chamber and, if they are lucky, they are
pouring their first drink of the day. So, I am sorry to
add to the endless flow of statements, but it really is, of
course, a very important issue.

If I may, let me associate myself with the remarks
I just heard made by my Norwegian colleague about
the need to accelerate our focus on the disgraceful
record of sexual exploitation in too many United
Nations missions. This is a tangential issue in some
ways today, but I do think it is very important indeed,
and I am glad that it has been aired by our colleague,
and I want to associate Australia with it.

We warmly welcome the reaffirmation by leaders
at the summit of their commitment to the full and
effective implementation of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000). Their reaffirmation of the
landmark resolution adopted, as you know, five years
ago demonstrates an increased international awareness
of the gender dimensions of armed conflict and a
recognition of the importance of women's full
involvement - full involvement - in all efforts to
promote peace and security.

Women are often at the forefront of community-
led conflict resolution and peacebuilding but are all too
often excluded from higher-level peace processes. We
have recently seen the significant contribution that
women can make to effective peacebuilding - as
Ambassador Feturi Elisaia of Samoa just pointed
out - in both Bougainville and the Solomon Islands.
We strongly encourage the participation of women in
efforts at all levels to bring about and maintain peace
and security. Australia strongly supports continued
efforts to implement the resolution, and we are pleased
to have contributed financially to the Secretary-
General's study on this issue.

We attach importance to providing continued
training on resolution 1325 (2000) to Australian
Defence Forces personnel. In that regard, we welcome
the Secretary-General's new, comprehensive plan for
reinforcing and integrating women's issues into the
world body's peacekeeping and post-conflict
operations. Greater sensitivity to the interests of
women will also make a vital contribution to the
challenge we face in addressing sexual exploitation and
abuse by peacekeepers - which is not being done
urgently enough. That is an appalling situation and a
blight on a key area of United Nations activity.

Through our aid programme we are continuing to
focus attention on implementing resolution 1325
(2000). We have developed a training module on
conflict analysis and peace, as well as on conflict
impact assessments, which include gender components
for use in our development assistance programmes, and
we are continuing to incorporate the concepts of
resolution 1325 (2000) into those programmes.
Following the violence in the Solomon Islands in 2000,
for example, the Community Peace and Restoration
Fund, whose goal was to contribute to the overall
process of the restoration of peace and development,
provided a critical peace dividend for the entire
population. It enabled the delivery of immediate, direct
and practical assistance to communities throughout the
country and included 95 projects specifically for
women. Under our Solomon Islands programme, we
are also supporting a range of non-governmental
organization activities to support community resilience
and promote inter-community peace. We have also
supported a peacebuilding and women's empowerment
programme, which seeks to promote community-based
trauma counselling initiatives, peacebuilding and
reconciliation between communities. In Sri Lanka we
are funding a number of activities specifically designed
to reduce the scope of conflicts among communities.
Those include a programme to address the impact of
armed conflicts on women. The programme works with
women affected by conflicts in the northern and eastern
districts, as well as displaced Muslims and women in
central Sri Lanka.

We recognize that progress has been made on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and certainly
we welcome the work done to date in that regard.
However, we must continue to ensure the increased
participation of women at all levels and all stages of
peace operations and to work towards the greater
involvement of women in peacebuilding efforts.
Australia reaffirms its commitment to playing its role
in achieving those objectives.

