Ms. Abdelhady-Nasser(Palestine): As we
approach 2020, a year of significant benchmarks and
anniversaries - 75 years since the creation of the
United nations, 25 years since the adoption of the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and 20
years since the adoption ofresolution 1325 (2000) - we
must reflect on progress made and commitments yet
unfulfilled. Despite many strides, there remains a
considerable gap between promises and pledges, and
their faithful implementation.

Informed by the facts, years of research experience
and lessons learned on the indispensable role of women
in all aspects of society, whether political, security,
economic or social, we must invest all possible efforts
in implementation, knowing that it is vital for the
genuine advancement of our nations and for the peace,
stability and prosperity we all seek.

Alongside the rest of the international community,
Palestine continues its efforts to implement resolution
1325 (2000) despite many obstacles, none more fierce
than the 52-year illegal foreign occupation imposed
on the Palestinian people, depriving them of their
most fundamental human rights and affecting every
dimension of life, with women disproportionately
affected. While resolution 1325 (2000) emphasized
the need to ensure the safety of women and girls in
conflict, Palestinian women continue to be exposed to
all forms of violence and human rights violations under
occupation, measures of colonization, dispossession,
collective punishment and blockade being the most
virulent. Daily acts of violence gravely impact women
and girls, impairing their rights, lives and livelihoods
in countless devastating ways.

Since the start of the occupation, an estimated
10,000 Palestinian women have been arrested and/or
detained under Israeli military orders. As of September
2019, 43 women remained among the thousands of
Palestinians imprisoned or detained by the occupying
Power. The majority of women prisoners report being
subjected to some form of ill treatment and even
torture, including sexual, physical and psychological
harassment, intimidation and assault. Palestinian
women continue to be targeted by the occupying forces
and extremist settlers, who continue to cause death
and injury to our civilians, destroying homes and other
properties and terrorizing Palestinian families.

Peaceful women demonstrators in the weekly
protests of the Great March of Return in the Gaza Strip
also continue to be targeted by the occupying forces.
Of the more than 300 Palestinians killed and more
than 30,000 injured by the Israeli occupying forces,
one in four have been women or children. We call once
more on the international community, and particularly
the Security Council, to assume its obligations to
bring an end to these violations and this prolonged
conflict, underscoring, inter alia, the clear provisions
of resolution 1325 (2000) on the responsibilities for
resolving and preventing conflicts.

Despite that dismal backdrop, Palestinian women's
resilience and resourcefulness have also been well
documented, underscoring their capacity and the pivotal
roles they play, not only in the daily functioning of our
society, but also in the long-running building of our
nation and the struggle for freedom and ajust, peaceful
solution to the conflict. Their many contributions
must be recognized, along with specific initiatives
undertaken by women civil society groups, leaders and
activists to implement resolution 1325 (2000).

At the same time, women continue to mobilize
to address the challenges posed by gender inequality,
gender-based domestic violence, patriarchal societal
norms and the need for legal reforms. As shown in
recent protests by Palestinian women, while demanding
liberation from occupation, they are also demanding
liberation from patriarchy, racism and sexism, seeking
full justice and equality.

Serious Government efforts are also ongoing to
reform and repeal laws that discriminate against women.
The State of Palestine is committed to empowering
women and girls and implementing resolution 1325
(2000), and we remain committed to making such
strides hand in hand with the rest of the international
community, imploring all , including the Security
Council, to uphold their respective obligations.

