Ms. Bolafios Perez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
1 would like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this open debate on conflict-related sexual violence, a
subject that my country has been very active on, based
on our firm conviction that we must keep fighting
violence against women and girls in every form. I would
also like to thank Ms. Zainab Bangura, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, for her briefing, and Ms. Hamsatu
Allamin, the representative of the NGO Working Group
on Women, Peace and Security, speaking on behalf of
civil society.

Sexual violence is a deplorable phenomenon,
related to insecurity, to incomplete disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes, and to
the impunity that is associated with weak rule-of-
law institutions. We are concerned about the recent
cases of sexual slavery, forced marriage and rape by
extremist groups that demonstrate that sexual Violence
has become a terrorist tactic. Every new report from
the Secretary-General describes horrendous situations
created by offenders, especially those systematic
Violators identified in the annex to his most recent
report (S/2015/203).
The United Nations has adopted specific policies
in this area, including creating the office of Special
Representative Bangura, implementing provisions
for monitoring, analysis and briefings on reports,
and deploying women protection advisers in some
peacekeeping operations. Despite those achievements,
however, the problem persists, as we have recently
observed, sadly, in Nigeria, Iraq, South Sudan, Darfur,
Syria, Mali, the Central African Republic and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, to name only a few.

We should not rest until we see the special needs
of women and girls on the ground receive the special
attention they deserve. We should improve our
collection of data disaggregated by gender and age, and
ensure gender mainstreaming in all mission activities
in the field, particularly in the context of humanitarian
assistance and care for displaced persons. The chief
challenge for Member States, United Nations and
humanitarian actors is the imperative of ensuring and
improving a protective environment. We reiterate that
it is the responsibility of Member States to protect
their own populations, particularly women and girls,
the most vulnerable, and we urge everyone to continue
making their worthy contributions to dealing with the
challenges presented by reality.

The Council should insist that States in conflict
or post-conflict situations adopt codes of conduct
and action plans for their military forces and work on
collecting and preserving evidence, instituting criminal
prosecutions and protecting the Victims, witnesses and
even justice officials themselves, as well as achieving
a genuine zero-tolerance policy. At the same time,
it is essential that they involve non-governmental
organizations and women's organizations dealing with
this issue in order to obtain the necessary support.

We reiterate that protecting the human rights of
women and girls is not negotiable. We must pool our
efforts if we are to ensure true empowerment and the
effective implementation of the activities that can help
us achieve full respect for international humanitarian
and human-rights law. We also stress how important it
is that gender equality and the empowerment of women
occupy a central place on the post-2015 development
agenda and that this goal should emphasize the creation
of peaceful societies and institutions, both of which are
fundamental to fulfilling our commitments regarding
women and peace and security.

Guatemala has taken very concrete action to
address sexual Violence and strengthen its own national
institutions. In recent years we have enacted laws
prohibiting femicide and other forms of violence against
women, as well as sexual Violence, exploitation and
trafficking, enabling us to reform the characterization of
various crimes in our penal code. In a measure designed
to improve the access of women Victims of violence to
justice, we have established several programmes in the
executive branch of the judiciary aimed at eliminating
impunity as it affects women.

Combating impunity must continue to be a
fundamental aspect of our efforts not just to respond to
sexual violence but also to prevent it. In that regard, we
support the policy on gender-based and sexual violence
crimes established by Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court. We must make
better and more consistent use of the tools available
to the Council in order to bring to justice those who
commit or order sexual violence, or who tolerate it
by not preventing or punishing it, in accordance with
responsibility as it is defined in international criminal
law. We should also redouble our efforts to strengthen
national judicial capacities and the framework of
international justice, including by referring those
responsible to the International Criminal Court, and we
support intensifying dialogue with the Court.

The Court's 2012 conviction of Thomas Lubanga
Dyilo and the referral to it in 2013 of the case
concerning Bosco Ntaganda have sent a clear message
about the legal consequences of child recruitment,
which is considered a war crime. We welcomed the
announcement that the trial in the Ntaganda case will
be held in Bunia, since that is likely to have a major
impact on the affected communities and their victims,
showing that justice is being done and thus helping
them to close that horrific chapter in their lives.

