Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): At the outset, allow
me to warmly thank the briefers for their very important
contributions this morning.

The scourge of conflict-related sexual violence
continues unabated. Non-State armed actors and
extremist groups have been primarily responsible for
these egregious crimes, which are often used as a tactic
to terrorize civilian populations and as a method of
warfare. While women and girls are the primary targets
of this type ofviolence, men and boys are also affected.
The women, peace and security agenda should guide
our actions in response. As we deal with multifaceted
challenges such as those posed by groups like Daesh,
the international community should attach high priority
to fighting sexual Violence. One meaningful step the
Council could take would be to consistently use conflict-
related sexual violence as a criterion for the imposition
of targeted sanctions. Member States can also play an
important role by holding terrorist fighters to account
for the crimes they committed abroad, especially when
those crimes involve sexual violence.

The surge in conflict-related sexual violence is
also a direct challenge to the authority of international
humanitarian law. Liechtenstein strongly supports efforts
to enhance compliance with international humanitarian
law, in particular through improved monitoring. In that
regard, we have high hopes for the joint initiative of
Switzerland and the International Committee of the
Red Cross, which is aimed at strengthening compliance
mechanisms. That should also include greater efforts
to ensure effective accountability at the national level,
as required under the Geneva Conventions. We were
pleased to hear this morning that there has been some
progress in that regard, as reported by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.

National ownership and leadership are key to
successfully tackling the challenge posed by conflict-
related sexual violence. I would like to commend
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Bangura, United Nations Action against Sexual
Violence in Conflict and the Team of Experts on the
Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict for their
efforts. During the past few years, they have had a
significant impact in improving the knowledge and
capacity of key players in the fields of security, justice
and conflict resolution, both domestically and within
United Nations field missions. It is crucial to address
this issue through a comprehensive effort and to hear
the voices of all concerned, including women and
survivors.

Fighting impunity is an essential component of our
response to conflict-related sexual violence. While the
primary responsibility in this regard lies with States,
the Security Council and the International Criminal
Court (ICC) can play important complementary roles.
Nearly every case currently before the Court addresses
sexual Violence. The ICC Prosecutor pursues sexual and
gender-based crimes as a matter of priority. In addition
to providing justice to the victims of sexual violence,
ICC investigations and prosecutions can also deter the
commission of future crimes, as has been confirmed by
recent research.

But, of course, the ICC's impact is limited to
situations within its jurisdiction. It is the Security
Council's responsibility to ensure that appropriate
situations involving sexual violence are referred to
the Court. The Council's role does not end with the
referral, however. As States parties to the Rome Statute
have stressed time and again, consistent follow-up
to ICC referrals is essential to their success, and the
Council's track record in this respect is mixed at best.
We therefore call on the Council to match its stated
commitment to the survivors of conflict-related sexual
violence with appropriate action. Such action needs to
take place at all levels, but it needs to include action
to ensure State cooperation with ICC investigations
requested by the Council.

