Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): On behalf of the
Nigerian delegation, I would like to commend the
United States presidency of the Security Council for
having initiated this open debate on women and peace
and security, with a focus on sexual violence in
situations of armed conflict.

Let me reiterate my delegation's full appreciation
of the concern raised in the concept paper on the
endemic nature of sexual Violence against women in
situations of armed conflict, in particular the use of
rape as a weapon of war.

My delegation Views violent sexual acts such as
rape, sexual assault, sexual slavery, forced marriages
and forced prostitution are crimes against humanity.
For us, these crimes are as despicable as they are
condemnable, and it does not matter whether they are
committed in time of peace or in time of war. Such
crimes affect not only the victims, but also families and
entire communities. They traumatize people and
degrade lives, leaving behind stigma, humiliation and
social exclusion.

We are equally worried that eight years after the
adoption of landmark Security Council resolution 1325
(2000), which both serves as an action framework and
reinforces other existing mechanisms, such as the
Convention on the Elimination on All Forms of
Discrimination against Women and the Beijing
Declaration, progress towards its implementation has
been slow and uneven.
Indeed, the objectives of the resolution, including
the need to enhance women's participation in decision-
making, integrating gender perspectives into
peacekeeping operations, protecting women from
gender-based violence and mainstreaming gender into
United Nations programme mechanisms, remain
largely unfulfilled. The Nigerian delegation therefore
welcomes this new milestone resolution, to be adopted
later, as a follow-up to resolution 1325 (2000).

However, similar to resolution 1325 (2000), the
critical challenge is how to ensure its steady and
widespread implementation, particularly in conflict and
post-conflict areas.

In Africa, the most significant achievements
under resolution 1325 (2000) have taken place in post-
conflict environments where women now enjoy
considerably enhanced role in decision-making.
Strengthened by the African Union's 2005 Protocol on
the Rights of Women and the 2004 Heads of States
Solemn Declaration on Gender Equity in Africa, a
number of countries have scaled up women's
participation in politics and decision-making.

Through specific measures such as a gender
quota and a minimum threshold, some countries have
accelerated the integration of women into national
decision-making processes. Increasingly, women are
also being included in national and continental peace
and security initiatives.

Nigeria has signed and ratified the Protocol on
the Rights of Women in Africa. It has also taken
special measures to guarantee the participation of
women in governance and decision-making. At both
the federal and State levels, efforts are being made to
outlaw discriminatory customary or traditional
practices that are harmful to the physical and mental
health of women and girls.

The federal Government is also working closely
with traditional rulers and non-governmental and faith-
based organizations to change long-held attitudes and
negative perceptions about women and to inculcate in
young men respect for the fundamental rights of
women and girls. School curricula and public
enlightenment campaigns are also focusing on positive
gender values, including the promotion of gender
equality in all spheres.

The cumulative effect of those initiatives has led
to a significant increase in the literacy levels of women
and girls and in the number of women pursuing careers
in male-dominated occupations. The country's national
health policies and plans have also become more
gender-sensitive, and, in the case of HIV/AIDS and
other infectious diseases, due consideration of the
special needs of women have become standard policy
objectives. Nigeria has also made remarkable progress
in the implementation of the Millennium Development
Goals as they relate to women and children.

Notwithstanding these modest efforts, the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in Africa's
conflict environments remains fitful. The most critical
challenge, as we see it, is the concrete implementation
of special measures to protect women and children
against sexual violence and the prosecution of those
responsible for large-scale violations of women's
rights.

Another important challenge is how to
institutionalize gender-sensitive policies through the
domestic implementation of relevant international
conventions and mechanisms, such as the Convention
on the Elimination on All Forms of Discrimination
against Women and the Beijing Platform for Action to
prevent violence against women.

In addition, the political will necessary for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) at the
national and regional levels is not evident in many
cases. The fact that there is no requirement in place to
ensure the universal observance of relevant
conventions and principles has created further room for
inconsistency among States.

My delegation considers it imperative that these
challenges be seen as constituting lessons learned that
should guide the United Nations as it seeks to put an
end to this unconscionable aspect of armed conflict. To
meet these challenges, the international community
must have a clear understanding of the
multidimensional nature of the problem to enable it to
take remedial action, as appropriate.

Our responsibilities must include preventing
sexual violence against women, providing protection
for them, assisting and caring for the children born of
rape, including those who are victimized by the culture
of impunity. Indeed, it is our responsibility to comfort
and heal the communities savaged by these crimes.

More importantly, we must strengthen punitive
measures so that perpetrators and those responsible for

08-3908]
breaches are brought to justice. To enhance such
measures, there is a need for greater participation by
women in the civil and military components of
multilateral peace support operations.

We would also like to see gender sensitive
training imparted to male civil and military personnel
to foster the awareness of gender issues. The need to
integrate gender perspectives and training into
peacekeeping in Africa is critical, considering that well
over 80 per cent of United Nations peacekeepers are
currently deployed in Africa.

I have elaborated on some of the challenges we
face in protecting women from sexual violence in
situations of conflict. There are more. For instance, we
also need to strengthen dissemination, sensitization and
monitoring mechanisms in conflict zones. Conflict
monitoring and early warning systems are also needed
to help avert the prevalence of sexual violence during
and after conflicts. There is also a need to ensure
effective monitoring of the implementation of
humanitarian assistance in camps where women have
been known to be especially vulnerable.

Health and education programmes should be
developed to deal with the effects of sexual violence,
such as HIV/AIDS and psychological trauma.
Additionally, it is necessary to coordinate the efforts of
the relevant agencies and bodies involved in these
efforts by identifying the various actors, programmes
and activities relative to resolution 1325 (2000) in
Africa.

It is also important to make a clear commitment
to move the implementation of the resolution forward.
In this regard, we support the call for the Secretary-
General to periodically report to the Security Council
on the use of sexual violence against women in
situations of armed conflict. We also invite the
Secretary-General to utilize existing regional and
subregional resources such as the Economic
Community of West African States early warning
systems and security architecture to strengthen the
protection of women.

We also call on the United Nations to take a more
strategic View of this problem, with clear, action-
oriented commitments to ensure measurable
improvements in the lives of victims.

The challenges we have outlined thus far are
daunting, but they are well within our capacity to
address. We can prevent sexual violence and protect
victims because we all have a good idea what the
problems are, and their physical and social costs.

My delegation believes that, by working together,
we can also make perpetrators account for their
misdeeds. Today's discussion is, therefore, a welcome
first step.

Once again, we thank the United States
delegation for initiating this dialogue and for laying
before us a very helpful draft resolution. My delegation
can associate itself with the draft resolution, and we
expect others to do the same.

