Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): It is great to see
you again, Madam, and to see you as the President of
the Council for the month of April. We appreciate your
convening of this important debate.

While we address the issue of sexual violence
committed by States and non-State actors in conflicts
today, we have a new disturbing trend to discuss,
namely, the use of sexual Violence by extremist groups
as a tactic of war. The report of the Secretary-General
on conflict-related sexual Violence (S/2015/203) alerts
us to the fact that sexual violence is not incidental,
but integrally linked with the strategic objectives of
extremist groups. Exploiting sexual violence to terrorize
and displace people should never be acceptable. Against
that backdrop, my delegation would like to stress the
following points.

First, we would like to stress the critical role of
each Member State. A sovereign State should be the
first to act to protect the most vulnerable people under
its jurisdiction. The vast majority of cases of sexual
violence are perpetrated by non-State actors; is is
therefore crucial that the international community
induce non-State actors to abstain from sexual
violence in compliance with the norms of international
humanitarian law. A firm stance against sexual
Violence will enhance the legitimacy of the State that
discharges the primary responsibility for the protection
of its people.

Secondly, we support the Council's full integration
of conflict-related sexual violence elements into the
work of its relevant sanctions committees as part of the
designation criteria for targeted sanctions. In order to
facilitate the full implementation of resolutions related
to women and peace and security, we also support the
accelerated deployment of gender advisers and the
integration of Department of Peacekeeping Operations/
Department of Field Support training materials into
missions' pre-deployment training.

Thirdly, multidimensional programmes to assist
national authorities in seeking accountability should
be put to full use. The Team of Experts on the Rule
of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict mandated by
resolution 1888 (2009), and the Justice Rapid Response
mechanism, among others, need to be utilized further.

Last but not least, we believe that the myth that
sexual Violence is an inherent, unfortunate aspect of
conflict should be dispelled. Such perceptions have
allowed what we are witnessing to persist and even
worsen. Promoting gender equality and empowering
women will be the most effective strategy in the
prevention of such crimes and the protection of women
in conflict. Ushering in the fifteenth anniversary of the
adoption of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000),
we look forward to another milestone in our collective
effort towards progress.

