Ms. Medina-Carrasco (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I should like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council and to thank you for
organizing this important debate on a most important
issue.

We should like our statement to serve as a
reflection on this issue. We are concerned at the tone of
a number of statements, and we should like our
delegation's statement on behalf of the Government of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to be properly
understood.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela is
respectful of the norms of international law and the
commitments undertaken in that context. Violations of
women's human rights, given their many social,
economic and political implications, undermine human
coexistence and constitute serious crimes that
compromise the dignity of women, as established in
various instruments of international law. The
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reaffirms its clear
and firm commitment to promoting and respecting
women's human rights and its support for the
elimination of all forms of violence against women,
including sexual violence.

Venezuela believes that all relevant United
Nations human rights entities should address the
problems experienced by women in situations of armed
conflict. We draw attention to the role that should be
played by the Human Rights Council in that regard.

We express our concern, however, at the fact that
the Security Council continues to address General
Assembly agenda items, which are outside the scope of
its purview. That does not contribute to the adequate
and balanced consideration of such items.

With regard to peacekeeping operations, we
believe that the Security Council cannot be both judge
and party. We are concerned at the possibility that,
under article 16 of the Rome Statute, the Council could
indefinitely stall an investigation or proceedings being
conducted by the International Criminal Court in this
area, particularly when agents or officials of a
permanent Council member are involved. We are
referring in particular to the Council member that
denies the Court's competence and demands that
countries into which it makes military incursions grant
diplomatic immunity to its agents and its military and
security personnel. That situation strongly promotes
impunity for serious crimes against women and
children. This is an aspect that should be of concern to
all United Nations Member States.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela fully
supports all efforts made within the General Assembly,
its funds and its programmes to ensure the
comprehensive consideration of the advancement of
women and their genuine empowerment in the context
of an egalitarian and just society that respects their
rights.

