Mr. Tavola (Fiji): I thank you, Mr. President, for
the privilege to be here and for the warmth of the
welcome. I am honoured to address the Security
Council on behalf of the members of the Pacific Islands
Forum on the subject of women and peace and security.
In doing so, I speak on behalf of the Forum countries
that are Members of the United Nations - Australia,
Fiji, Kiribati, the Marshall Islands, the Federated States
of Micronesia, Nauru, New Zealand, Palau, Papua New
Guinea, Samoa, the Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu
and Vanuatu.

I am certainly very grateful for the briefings
given earlier this morning by Mr. Guehenno and
Ms. Smythe.

The Pacific Islands Forum is pleased that the
issue of women and peace and security is once again on
the Security Council's agenda, and we are pleased to
again intervene as a group on that important item, thus
underlining its significance to our members. The
debate in the Security Council three years ago, leading
to resolution 1325 (2000), was a milestone. The
resolution signalled that, if we are committed to
conflict prevention and resolution, we must be serious
about the gender perspectives of conflict - both the
impact of conflict on women and the contributions of
women to the prevention, resolution and peace-
building processes.

Our own experience in the Pacific has certainly
highlighted for us the importance of implementing the
principles and the framework encapsulated in
resolution 1325 (2000). The recent work of the United
Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) on
women, peace and security in Papua New Guinea, the
Solomon Islands, Fiji and Vanuatu highlighted the
scope of the impact of conflict on women and the
critical role played by women in promoting peace in
our region. On that latter point, our experience has
been that the contributions and leadership of women in
both traditional and contemporary settings are critical
to ensuring meaningful and sustainable peace. In Papua
New Guinea, women played a pivotal role in the very
early and fragile stages of the Bougainville peace
process, and they continue to play an active role in its
ongoing consolidation. Similarly, in the Solomon
Islands, women played a significant role through the
ecumenical church movement in brokering peace in
their country, and they remain centrally engaged.

I now turn to the work of the Organization.
Resolution 1325 (2000) encapsulated the concept that
gender perspectives must be mainstreamed into the
work of the United Nations - that is, that they must be
at the core of the Organization's work. Today's debate
is an important opportunity to examine how far we
have come in honouring that commitment.

There has certainly been some good news. One
particular highlight in the past year was the agreement
to establish a gender adviser post in the Peacekeeping
Best Practices Unit of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations. That is an excellent outcome, which we
very much hope will assist in the explicit integration of
gender perspectives into all aspects of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. We should like to take this
opportunity to welcome the appointment of an interim
Gender Adviser in the Department, and we hope that
the permanent position of Senior Gender Adviser will
be filled shortly. We will look forward to early
feedback as the position develops.

We are pleased also that UNIFEM's gender
conflict situation analysis project is now under way.
We are particularly pleased that UNIFEM. is
incorporating a Pacific perspective into that work by
undertaking one of its four pilot studies in the Solomon
Islands.

Elsewhere, the launch of the gender action plan
of the Department for Disarmament Affairs is to be
congratulated, and we would like to encourage other
Departments to follow that successful example. We
also welcome UNIFEM's work to build a
comprehensive web-site portal, which will pull
together the diverse material available on women,
peace and security for use in work around the globe.

While the initiatives to which I referred are a
good start, we are still some distance from where we
need to be. In terms of future work, we would like to
emphasize four areas.

First, while a lot of positive work has been done
on improving the attention paid to these issues in the
Security Council, we would like the Council to pay
special attention to ensuring that its mandates focus
expressly on gender perspectives and that necessary
resources are made available to ensure that those
mandates are fulfilled. Only 15 per cent - more
precisely, 14.7 per cent, as we heard this morning - of
resolutions submitted to the Security Council in the
past year made any reference to gender. We hope that
in future all Security Council resolutions will do so.
We hope in particular that, in considering its mandates,
the Council will pay special attention to the importance
of ensuring that women are involved in all aspects of
decision-making processes with respect to conflict,
including formal negotiations. As I stated earlier, our
own experience is that the contribution of women is
fundamental to the resolution of conflict.
Unfortunately, however, all too often those with the
most information and the most extensive networks are
not allowed a seat at the negotiating table.

Secondly, we would encourage the Security
Council to include gender advisers or specialists in its
missions as a matter of course. We also hope that the
reports from the missions, which until now have been
silent on gender issues, will in future include specific
feedback on the gender issues covered in the missions.

Thirdly, we would stress that the pressure to
mainstream a gender perspective into peacekeeping
operations must be maintained. We remain firmly of
the view that gender sensitivity, and the inclusion of
women, are critical elements of successful
peacekeeping operations. We hope in particular that
more work can be done on gender-perspective training
for United Nations peacekeepers, and we would like to
highlight the importance of the compulsory gender-
training module for all personnel about to deploy.

For our region's part, I am happy to report that a
number of our members stress the importance of
deploying women to peacekeeping operations. With
respect to my own country, Fiji, there is a strong
emphasis on the deployment of women in overseas
peace and security operations. Women from Fiji have
served in Cambodia and Croatia, and are currently
serving in Kosovo and Solomon Islands.

Fourthly and finally, with respect to leadership
and representation, we would repeat our call for the
Secretary-General to appoint more women as special
representatives, especially in matters relating to
peacekeeping, peace-building and preventive
diplomacy. As ever, the United Nations needs to realize
its own goals and lead by example.

