Mr. Qassem Agha (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): The Syrian Government has worked hard
to strengthen its cooperation and coordination with the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, so that the
Special Representative can successfully carry out her
noble work, correct factual information, and refute
all allegations by media propaganda supporting the
Saudi-Qatari terrorist aggression against my country.
This aggression continues to cause Syrian bloodshed
as a result of unilateral measures that run counter to
the basic rules of international law and are adopted by
some members of the Council and beyond against the
Syrian Government for purely political purposes.

The Syrian Government hosted the former Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in 2015. We
provided her with access to all facilities, including
corrections and rehabilitation centres. We also gave her
the opportunity to meet with many women prisoners
who had committed the crimes of terrorism, theft and
murder, in violation of Syrian law, so that she could
fully carry out her mandate.

We have read with interest the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/250), introduced by
Ms. Pramila Patten. We have noticed an improvement
in the approach ofthe report to Syrian women suffering
from sexual violence. The report refers to the fruitful
cooperation between the Syrian Government and the
Office of the Special Representative, especially with
respect to enhancing shelter facilities and transportation
services in rural areas. In 2017 we established a family
protection centre, in cooperation and coordination
with the Ministry of Social Affairs and Labour and the
Syrian Commission for Family Affairs and Population,
in order to enhance our response to the victims of sexual
violence and provide them with care and psychological
support. In that context, allow us to provide the
following observations.

First, the Government of my country completely
rejects the allegations in the report that the Syrian

Government practices sexual violence. We are surprised
that the Special Representative would rely on fabricated
reports prepared by the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Those Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011. The
Mechanism relies on information gathered from open
sources as well as armed and terrorist groups, notably
the so-called White Helmets, and does not verify the
sources of that information or its credibility.

Ms. Patten should have relied on her Office and
coordinated with the Syrian Government to carrying
out her own investigations in that regard, instead of
relying on those fabricated reports. We find it strange
that the Special Representative would go beyond her
mandate on conflict-related sexual violence and speak
in her very brief report on the participation of Syrian
women in political life. She also promoted General
Assembly resolution 71/248, which was not adopted by
consensus. That constitutes in and of itself an egregious
departure from her mandate.

Secondly, the report does not discuss the suffering
of Syrian women and girls in refugee camps in
neighbouring countries, and this is an essential matter.
In that regard, allow us to express our deep concern
and pain over the ongoing instances of rape of women
and children and the phenomenon of human trafficking,
sexual harassment and organ trafficking in Turkish
camps, and forced marriage in Jordanian camps, and
the sexual exploitation of hundreds of Syrian women by
humanitarian workers from international organizations
working in those camps. This is happening before the
eyes of the entire world.

Thirdly, the report completely ignores the suffering
of Syrian women in the occupied Syrian Golan and the
Palestinian occupied territories. It also fails to describe
the suffering of Syrian women subjected to the worst
violations ofhuman rights and marginalization policies.
The Israeli occupation authorities continue to prevent
Syrian mothers in the occupied Golan from visiting their
children and relatives in Syria. In addition, the Israeli
occupation provides endless support to the terrorists of
the Al-Nusra Front, which practices the worst forms of
sexual violence in areas under its control.

In conclusion, I would like to underscore that Syria
remains committed to supporting international efforts
to end all forms of sexual violence, punishing their
perpetrators and instigators and breaking the silence
and unjustified disregard.

