Nana Effah-Apenteng (Ghana): I wish to thank
you, Sir, for taking the initiative in organizing this
debate on women and peace and security in pursuit of
the objectives of Council resolution 1325 (2000). Let
me join the preceding speaker in thanking the Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women, the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, the Executive Director of
the United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM) and the Assistant Secretary-General,
Peacebuilding Support Office for their respective
briefings. We also wish to thank the Secretary-General
for his report on this agenda item (S/2006/770), which
not only covers the extensive efforts made to
implement the resolution but also illuminates the way
forward.

On 31 October 2000, when the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 1325 (2000) on
women and peace and security, it provided a
groundbreaking mandate, aimed at achieving the full
and equal participation of women in all peace and
security initiatives, along with the mainstreaming of
gender issues. The resolution also outlined the range of
actions required to achieve that objective.

As we mark the sixth anniversary of the
groundbreaking resolution, it is appropriate that we
take stock of the implementation of the resolution to
assess its achievements, examine good practices and
lessons learned, identify challenges and gaps and take
remedial measures. On balance, we are of the view that
we have merely paid lip service to the aspirations
underpinning that epoch-making resolution and that its
implementation has been inconsistent, giving mixed
and varying results. That is especially true in most
developing countries, including my own, Ghana.
The way forward is within our grasp. The
Secretary-General in his annual report to the Council
has adequately responded to these challenges by
putting forward in a number of key priority areas
several concrete recommendations which merit our
consideration. They include: vigorous engagement with
Member States, development of an effective
accountability, monitoring and reporting system,
enhanced coordination across the United Nations
system, and effective as well as adequate resource
allocation.

The ultimate purpose of gender mainstreaming is
to eradicate all the factors that reinforce the
vulnerability of women in society. To that end, we need
to change our mindset and to be more determined,
especially at the national level, about making optimal
use of existing structures and creating new ones where
necessary.

In that regard, I would like to comment briefly on
some of the proposals that my delegation believes are
key in addressing our concerns. First and foremost, we
must take seriously implementation at the national
level. In designing programmes for our women, we
must take into account the high prevalence of illiteracy,
which places them outside the mainstream and
therefore out of reach of most programmes. Indeed, the
overall implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) has
been ad hoc and haphazard at the national level. To
date, only a few Governments have developed national
action plans for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), most of them, ironically, in the developed
world in countries that are neither conflict-ridden nor
post-conflict.

It is easy to call on the United Nations and the
international community to act, but as Member States
we must acknowledge our own role and heed to the call
to implement resolution 1325 (2005). Achieving the
goals we have set for ourselves simply requires a
concerted response to accountability, at the national
level. There should be better cooperation and
coordination between the relevant public institutions
that deal with peacekeeping and women's affairs,
which in my country would be the Ministries of
Women's Affairs, Foreign Affairs, Internal Affairs and
Defence.

Troop-contributing countries should mainstream
gender issues in their recruitment, training and
development, including in United Nations
peacekeeping operations. In that respect, consideration
should be given to the particular needs of conflict-
ridden or post-conflict countries in order to translate
the commitments made into concrete measures that will
improve the situation of women. Member States and
their partners must continue to provide any necessary
financial support for the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000).

An effective and robust accountability,
monitoring and reporting system should be developed.
However, without timely and clearly earmarked
resources, it may not move beyond the drawing table.
It is also of cardinal importance that those drawing up
national action plans provide for women at the
grassroots level or in communities to be encouraged to
play a positive role in partnership with civil society.

At the global level, in the current climate of
United Nations reform, the time is propitious to
thoroughly examine and strengthen intergovernmental
oversight and to provide a top layer of oversight to
review implementation by both national and United
Nations entities. Further, intergovernmental oversight
is woefully inadequate. The only mechanism developed
by the Security Council to track implementation has
been the annual open debate and the Arria formula
meeting on women, peace and security. The Council
should play a more proactive role by setting up a
mechanism for a more systematic, effective and
coordinated implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
in its work, by designating a Security Council member
to serve as a focal point and an expert working group
on women, peace and security consisting of Council
members.

It is our view that wholly missing from the
recommendations of the Secretary-General is action at
the regional level. We recognize that in some
developed countries, efforts have been made to
implement resolution 1325 (2000), but again,
ironically, not much has been done in the developing
world. Given the history of conflicts in West Africa, a
region like ours would benefit from such an
undertaking.

The main instrument for implementing resolution
1325 (2000) at the United Nations system level is the
Secretary-General's United Nations System-wide
Action Plan developed by the Inter-Agency Task Force
on Women, Peace and Security. However, its
shortcomings have detracted from its overall purpose,
thereby making it ineffective in accurately tracking
progress, as clearly articulated in the report of the
Secretary-General. It is also not encouraging to read
that a third of the entities within the United Nations
failed to respond to the questionnaire on the issue,
which may be interpreted as a lack of commitment on
the part of those bodies.

We fully support the call of the Secretary-General
for the System-Wide Action Plan to be revised - and
renewed beyond 2007 - in order to remedy its
shortcomings and make it more supportive of the ideals
and goals of resolution 1325 (2000).

The recently established Peacebuilding
Commission has an important role to play in this and
we must ensure that our core commitment to gender
equality, in line with resolution 1325 (2000), is fully
integrated in its work. We expect, in that connection, to
be more proactive. The Inter-Agency Task Force could
be replicated at the country level where that aspect of
their work could be enhanced.

Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) holds us
all to a new standard of accountability both during and
after conflict. What we should do is to reinforce the
political momentum and start more conscious
initiatives and activities to intensify the
implementation of the resolution. This is the surest way
to translate gender equality commitment into reality.

