Ms. King (Australia): Australia welcomes the
focus of this open debate on women's participation and
role in conflict prevention and mediation. We thank
you very much, Madam President, for convening it.

Although the number of conflicts worldwide has
fallen since the 1990s, the proportion of civilian
casualties has increased dramatically. The toll in terms
of human suffering, economic loss and wasted
development opportunities has been enormous.

Women and girls are much more vulnerable to the
impacts of violent conflict than men, due to the
breakdown of social and legal systems when violence
occurs and because of inherent gender inequalities.
Women frequently bear the brunt of the devastating
consequences of armed violence, including sexual
violence. But women are not just victims. They are
often the key to preventing conflict and violence from
emerging, to resolving conflict and to rebuilding
societies once guns fall silent.

The Council has consistently recognized the
significance of women in preventing, managing and
resolving conflict, including as recently as through two
important recent resolutions, resolution 2014 (2011) on
Yemen and resolution 2009 (2011) on Libya. We
welcome that fact. The reality, though, is that women
are still largely excluded from the processes that can
lead to conflict or make peace. Women represent less
than 8 per cent of peace process participants and fewer
than 3 per cent of signatories to recent peace
agreements. Even when women are included in
negotiations, they are rarely present from the start.
That means that many defining decisions are made
long before women get to the table.

Women have much to contribute to peace. As the
Secretary-General has rightly observed, women are
crucial partners in shoring up the three pillars of lasting
peace - economic recovery, social cohesion and
political legitimacy. It is not possible to create a
legitimate and durable post-conflict political system
that does not include the full and equal participation of
women in decision-making. The role of women in
economic development must be recognized in order to
grow a post-conflict economy. Women, after all, are
most likely to be providing direct support to children
and extended kinship networks. Bringing the voice of
women to the forefront of conflict prevention and
mediation work will therefore help build more resilient
communities and a more sustainable peace. That is key
to the Security Council's work.
Of course, when we talk about conflict prevention
we are talking not just about involving women in
preventive diplomacy. We also speak of the much
broader agenda of ensuring that drivers of conflict do
not have the chance to surface. Democratic institutions,
the rule of law and economic development are
foundations of peaceful societies. We cannot expect
such societies to flourish without embracing the role
that women play in shaping them.

Recent years have seen several institutional
developments to better integrate these matters into the
work of the Security Council and the United Nations.
The establishment of UN-Women was a landmark
development. We welcome its initial work to take
forward the implementation of all the resolutions on
women and peace and security. But more can be done.
We encourage the Security Council to receive regular
briefings from Michelle Bachelet, Under-Secretary-
General and Executive Director of UN-Women, and
Margot Wallstrom, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict. We
welcome the reference in today's presidential statement
(S/PRST/2011/20) to briefings by Ms. Bachelet. We
hope that both she and Ms. Wallstrom can brief the
Security Council at their initiative and when they
regard elements of the women and peace and security
agenda as being relevant to country-specific Security
Council deliberations.

We also encourage the United Nations to include
relevant elements of the women and peace and security
agenda in all country- and mandate-specific reports to
be considered by the Security Council. It is essential to
ensure that the Council takes decisions that are
informed by the work and wishes of a community's
women.

As the Secretary-General's report (S/2011/598*)
highlights, concerted efforts are needed at all levels, in
particular among those responsible for technical and
financial support to national peace processes.

In our own Asia-Pacific region we have seen
great improvements in women's capacity to engage in
peace processes that affect them. That is also a key
focus of our own aid programme in the region. In
Indonesia and Nepal, we have supported women
mediators, negotiators and advisers to identify and
implement strategies for improving women's
participation in peace processes. That important work
continues to document best practices related to women
and peacemaking in the Asia-Pacific region. The
United Nations Development Programme network of
peace advocates, N-PEACE, is also undertaking
important work in Timor-Leste, Sri Lanka, Indonesia
and Nepal. Earlier this month, N-PEACE launched an
interactive internet portal to connect peace advocates
within and across countries with experts in the field.
That facilitates the sharing of strategies to promote
gender equality and women's empowerment in conflict
and post-conflict situations.

At the grass-roots level, we have witnessed the
mobilization by women in the Pacific to ensure their
voice is heard. For example, FemLINKPacific leads a
community and media policy network on women,
peace and security in Fiji, Solomon Islands, Tonga and
Bougainville in Papua New Guinea. Through the
production of a wide range of media initiatives, they
are empowering women across the Pacific to engage
with decision makers at all levels on issues that affect
them.

Women are particularly vulnerable to the effects
of conflict but can be powerful in ending it and are
central to rebuilding a society after conflict. They
should be given the opportunity to shape their own
future, as we have heard numerous times today. Peace
negotiations not only shape the post-conflict political
landscape directly, through agreements on justice,
power-sharing and constitutional issues, but also
indirectly, by lending legitimacy to those represented at
the peace table. A properly integrated role for women
enhances the prospects of a durable and lasting peace.
Clearly this debate has underscored remaining gaps
and challenges. We now have a collective
responsibility to translate this debate into further
action.

