Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me, at the outset, to thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this open debate early on in the
French presidency of the Security Council focusing on
the crime of human trafficking, which is intrinsically
linked to sexual violence, particularly that perpetrated
by terrorists and armed groups.

I should like also to thank the Secretary-General
and Ms. Zainab Bangura for their briefings on the annual
report on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2016/361).
This year's report has particular importance, as it is
the first report to be issued following the adoption by
the Security Council of resolution 2242 (2015), which
recognizes sexual violence as a tactic of war and terror,
as well as the inseparability of the strategies for dispute
settlement and the combat against terrorism from
efforts to protect and empower women and girls and
combat sexual violence in armed conflict.

Today's meeting also has particular importance
because of the inaugural commemoration by the
General Assembly on 19 June of the International Day
for the Elimination of Sexual Violence in Conflict.

Egypt co-sponsored resolution 2242 (2015) on the
basis of its conviction that the settlement of disputes
cannot be separated from efforts to protect and
empower women and girls and eliminate conflict-
related sexual violence. I would like in this context the
stress the following.

Egypt has supported the efforts made to include
women at all levels of efforts to achieve peace and
security since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000)
and the agenda on women and peace and security. This
is reflected in the many efforts made at the national
and regional levels. The national women's council of
Egypt developed a national policy to follow up the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000); Egypt is one of 17 African States that have
developed similar national plans. Egypt, in the 15 years
since the adoption of the resolution, has organized a
number of relevant activities, including two regional
workshops in cooperation with the United Nations and
the League of Arab States.

Egypt also attaches particular importance to issues
related to training and capacity-building. The Cairo
regional training centre has held seven workshops,
two of them to train the trainers, as well as a workshop
dedicated to training personnel and exchanging
experiences on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) from 2013 to 2015. This will be complemented
by the convening of five additional training courses
in the same field until June 2016. We stress our
commitment to the initiative of the Secretary-General
not to be lenient with regard to sexual crimes, and we
will continue to cooperate with the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Security Council to
eliminate all forms of violence against women in the
context of peacekeeping operations.
Egypt stresses the importance of limiting the
report of the Secretary-General on conflict-related
sexual violence to the nature and the mandate given
it under the Security Council resolutions establishing
this mandate. It was noted this year that the report of
the Secretary-General focuses on issues that are outside
the context of these mandates. In the same context,
Egypt believes it important for future reports of the
Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual violence
to focus only on conflict-affected regions and not
touch upon controversial ideas that are not agreed on
internationally, so that we can implement the letter and
the spirit of resolution 1325 (2000).

Egypt attaches great importance to unity of purpose
and believes that we should not touch upon issues that
would fragment our focus on core issues related to
sexual violence in armed conflict. Egypt believes that
this issue should be included in every United Nations
mandate. In that regard, we must provide human and
material resources for the implementation of such
mandates. Egypt appreciates the role played by the
Peacebuilding Fund in promoting programmes on
women's empowerment.

We believe that it is extremely important to discuss
the women and peace and security agenda from the
perspective of women under foreign occupation, in
particular with regard to the status of Palestinian women.

Egypt emphasizes the importance of States raising
awareness of sexual violence as a tactic of terror and
to recognize officially that victims of sexual violence
are victims of terrorism, so that we can develop
counter-narratives and strategies against terrorism and
compensate victims. We must not forget the important
and vital role played by religious leaders in turning the
stigma endured by victims against perpetrators in order
to ensure that terrorism and extremism do not have the
upper hand in the intellectual battle, including attempts
by extremists to justify rape via religion.

With regard to human trafficking, I would
like to note the conclusions drawn by the Special
Representative today. Egypt was among the first States
to join the Belarus initiative of the Group of Friends
United against Human Trafficking. Egypt also supports
the Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in
Persons, including the meeting to be held in October
2017. Various reports and studies have also shown that
there is a very close link between human trafficking
and terrorism. Egypt therefore calls for concerted
international efforts in support of the Plan of Action
and the valuable efforts made by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime to ensure that the actions of
the various United Nations bodies will not be duplicated
or fragmentary.

In conclusion, Egypt expresses its full commitment
to the development and implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda during its membership of
the Security Council. Egypt looks forward to continued
cooperation and full coordination with Ms. Bangura
and her Office on various issues under her mandate.

I would be remiss ifI were to fail to thank you,
Mr. President, for your kind words to the Egyptian
presidency of the Council. In return, I wish you
Godspeed and success during your own presidency.

