Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank the
Jordanian presidency for convening today's important
debate on sexual Violence in conflict, which represents
a long-standing and urgent priority for France. I also
thank Ms. Bangura and Ms. Allamin for their briefings
and for their exemplary activities.

Exactly one year and one day ago, on 14 April 2014,
276 highschool girls were kidnapped by Boko Haram
in Chibok, Nigeria. We still have had no word on those
young girls, who, like other women and girls abducted
by that terrorist group, have been subjected to sexual
violence and forced marriage and reduced to slavery,
assuming that they have not been sold outright. The
plight of those young Nigerians is unfortunately shared
by thousands of other young girls, women and children.

The widespread sexual Violence being perpetrated
by extremist non-State groups is a daily assault on our
most basic values. In the Middle East and in Africa,
it has become the signature of extremist and terrorist
armed groups that seek to dehumanize targeted,
terrified communities. Daesh, for instance, has aimed
its sexual violence against women and girls on the
basis of their ethnicity, their sexual orientation or their
influence within their communities. In August 2014,
during the attacks in Sinjar in northern Iraq, hundreds
of Yazidi women were abducted and sold in Syria as
sexual slaves. I welcome the opportunity to applaud
Iraqi parliamentarian Vian Dakhil for her unforgettable
and moving testimony (see S.PV 7419) before this body
at last month's open debate on persecuted minorities
in the Middle East, which was convened by the French
presidency. Some 2,500 women and children from the
Yazidi, Christian, Kurd and Shabak minorities are
currently being held by Daesh in northern Iraq, and that
figure does not include all the women and girls who
have not been identified owing to the lack of statistics
that accurately reflect the reality on the ground. Still,
in order to condemn such savagery and act to stop it, we
must have reliable and exact data on the fate of those
women and children.

Given their scale and character, the acts of sexual
Violence committed by extremist groups demand a
specific response. First of all, the Security Council
should support the recommendation of the Secretary-
General and his Special Representative calling for
sexual violence to be categorized as a terror tactic and
not merely a tactic of war, pursuant to resolution 1820
(2008).

Secondly, we must ensure effective follow-up to
the addition to the Secretary-General's blacklist of
13 conflict parties accused of sexual Violence, including
Daesh and Boko Haram. States must do their utmost to
end such acts of violence and bring the perpetrators, who
until now have enjoyed virtually complete impunity, to
justice. France therefore calls on all concerned States
to ensure that justice at both the international and the
national levels is able to proceed and to cooperate with
United Nations investigation mechanisms seeking to
force the perpetrators to answer for their acts.

Furthermore, once sexual Violence has been
categorized as a terror tactic, that new reality should
be reflected in the sanctions regime against Al Qaeda.
Finally, in general terms, we should pay particular
attention, within the framework of the Coalition against
terrorism and the fight against terrorism, to the risks
of imminent sexual Violence wherever communities,
minorities and children are concerned.

Acts of sexual Violence committed by violent
extremist groups, however barbaric, should not let us
forget those committed by other actors. I would like
first to address the responsibility of State actors. True,
there has been notable progress in certain countries. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo, for example, has
improved access to reparations for the Victims of sexual
Violence and has allowed the prosecution of members of
the national security forces. With French technical and
financial assistance, the Central African authorities are
in the process of setting up a rapid response unit and
a special criminal tribunal to investigate human-rights
violations, including sexual violence.

But such efforts are not enough. Sexual violence
continues to be committed by State security forces in
the Sudan, South Sudan, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Syria. Syrian women are the targets of
such violence in detention centres or at the hands of
the Syrian intelligence services. The responsibility of
States is also essential for countries involved in peace
processes. The integration ofthe issue of sexual violence
into the Mali and the Central African Republic peace
accords was a first step. In order not to undermine the
credibility of those processes, we must now ensure that
such provisions are effectively implemented and that
individuals implicated in acts of sexual violence are not
inadvertently freed.

I would now like to mention those actors implicated
in such crimes in refugee centres or camps for displaced
persons, where women are particularly exposed. The
fear of rape is currently one of the main reasons for
the flight of Syrian refugee women to neighbouring
countries. It is therefore all the more critical to
ensure that women have access to security and basic
medical assistance in those centres. France has
delivered psychological and medical support through
non-governmental organizations to the Victims of
sexual Violence in the Za'atari refugee camp in Jordan
and to internally displaced women in Syria, as well as
to Syrian refugee women in Lebanon. We call on other
States to join us in providing access to medical services
to the victims of sexual violence.

Finally, I would like to recall the matter of sexual
violence perpetrated by United Nations staff or by
Blue Helmets. At the end of March, the Secretary-
General published a report entitled "Special measures
for protection from sexual exploitation and sexual
abuse" (A/69/779), which confirms that a number of
peacekeeping operations employ individuals suspected
of having committed acts of sexual violence or sexual
abuse, even against minors. I have already said, and I
repeat, that we must be especially vigilant and apply
zero tolerance on this matter if we wish the United
Nations to retain its credibility and serve as a model.
In that context, I welcome the Secretary-General's
recommendation to make predeployment gender-
sensitivity training for peacekeepers a requirement
across the board.

In light ofthe variety ofactors responsible for sexual
violence, both within and outside the United Nations,
the solutions are well known. To mention only a few,
we need to strengthen security in and around camps
for refugees and internally displaced persons; increase
the participation of women in peacekeeping operations,
peace negotiations and the fight against terrorism and
violent extremism; and guarantee financing via the
United Nations general budget for women protection
advisors.

The high-level review ofresolution 1325 (2000) this
coming October will be an opportunity for the United
Nations and States to deliver on their commitments
on those different points. The review should be an
opportunity for everyone to ensure the greatest possible
mobilization of our will, our action and our resources.
The fight against sexual violence in conflict must be
waged every day by the United Nations and by each and
every one of us. The Council may rest assured of the
firm commitment of France to the fight.

