Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the outset, we would like to thank you,
Madam, for convening today's meeting and express our
gratitude to the guest briefers for their participation in
it and their assessment of the current situation in the
fight against sexual violence in armed conflict.

Separately, we recognize the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, whose
actions have brought about considerable progress in
work in this area.

We have carefully studied the report prepared for
today's meeting (S/2015/203), which attests to the great
amount of work done by the Special Representative
in the past year. Unfortunately, the problem of sexual
Violence remains relevant, particularly in individual
conflict situations where such crimes are widespread.
Such situations require attention from the Security
Council. At the same time, we support the activities of
a range of other bodies of the United Nations system
that, within their remit, are engaged in the subject of
sexual Violence in broader terms. The Security Council
should not duplicate these efforts.

We note the report's definition of conflict-related
sexual Violence. As such, the report departs from the
terminology of the Security Council resolution on
this issue, beginning with resolution 1820 (2008), and
diverges from the very language of today's debate on
sexual violence in conflict. Such attempts to revise
previously agreed language and in general to broaden
our approach to the subject are of concern to us.

Issues related to the struggle against sexual
Violence in armed conflict should be seen as one
component of the entire range of measures to achieve
conflict resolution and post-conflict recovery. Women
and children frequently fall victim of war crimes and
crimes against humanity, including the indiscriminate
or excessive use of force. They suffer from terrorist acts
and become refugees and internally displaced persons.
As a result, any discussion of the women and peace
and security agenda in the Security Council must be
comprehensive and include such issues as countering
sexual Violence as a way of fighting other forms of
crime against women, as provided for in resolution 1325
(2000). The perpetrators of such crimes must, after due
investigation in accordance with the requirements of
international law and national legislation, be brought
to justice.
The section of the Secretary-General's report on
the problem of sexual violence in the context of violent
extremism is crucial. The danger of this scourge has
become increasingly serious. A year ago, we were
witness to the tragedy in the Nigerian city of Chibok,
where terrorists from the Boko Haram group kidnapped
276 school girls. Many of these girls have yet to be
found. Regrettably, this example is not unique. Such
crimes must be stopped.

Sexual violence in armed conflict cannot be
fought without the active involvement of national
authorities in the process. There is a reason why the
Secretary-General's report focuses in particular on the
need for national involvement and the assumption of
leadership roles and responsibilities by States. Contacts
with non-State armed groups must be carried out in
accordance with Security Council resolutions and
other regulatory instruments of the United Nations.
We appreciate the approach of the authors of the
report, who have specifically addressed a considerable
portion of the recommendations in the fight against
sexual violence to national Governments. Gains in the
Secretariat in this area, such as the guidance note on
reparations for conflict-related sexual Violence, serve
as frameworks for States to use, taking into account
their national specifics and legislation.

With respect to the matrix of early warning
indicators of sexual violence, we are cautious with
respect to such indicators, particularly since sexual
violence in and of itself is far from always being a
source of emerging armed conflict. On balance, we
believe that the recommendations of the report should
focus on approaches that have been worked out and
approved within the United Nations and not on those
that advance other initiatives or instruments elaborated
by a limited number of participants without the support
of decisions taken by United Nations bodies.

