Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
area gratefu for the convening of today's meeting.
We also thank Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed and Ms. Bineta Diop, African Union
Special Envoy for Women, Peace and Security, for
their important briefings. Similarly, we welcome you,
Madam Minister, and thank you for your valuable
testimony and proposals on the importantjoint mission,
which underscores the commitment of your country,
Sweden, to the women and peace and security agenda.

Peru remains deeply concerned about the critical
situation in the Sahel region, where women and girls in
particular are affected by food insecurity, poverty, armed
conflict, violent extremism, gender discrimination and
sexual violence. It is estimated that one in 10 women
between the ages of 15 and 49 has been the victim of
sexual violence in Mali. Women and children in the
Niger account for the majority of refugees and internally
displaced persons. Throughout the subregion there is an
increase in the number of women and girls recruited by
terrorists and violent extremist groups. That situation
requires a comprehensive and coordinated strategy
that addresses its root causes, promoting, among other
things, women's empowerment, gender equality and
access to justice.

Peru is convinced that the participation of women
in political life and decision-making is crucial for
conflict resolution, peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
We must promote greater participation by women in
the processes and mechanisms for implementing peace
and reconciliation agreements. At the same time, their
empowerment must be promoted through education
and the creation of employment opportunities, as
well as when it comes to access to justice and the
fight against impunity for the crimes of which they
are victims. Victims must have confidence in their
national institutions and those responsible for violence
must be held accountable. Women and girls who are
victims of sexual violence are often stigmatized and
ostracized in their communities. They must be able to
count on programmes to promote their rehabilitation
and reintegration.

It is essential that the Council remain united with
regard to the gradual development and implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda. That
is because the evidence shows that the protection of
women and girls during conflict, and, ultimately,
their empowerment, has a direct impact on sustaining
peace. In that regard, we underscore the importance
of promoting work among the various women's
organizations and the informal group of experts on
women and peace and security, which Peru has the
honour to co-chair with Sweden.

We also believe that it is necessary for the Security
Council to collaborate with and promote the work of
the regional mechanisms involved in the quest for
solutions to the crisis in the Sahel, such as the African
Union, the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and
the Economic Community of West African States. We
believe that is important to take into account the gender
perspective when implementing the activities of the
Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel. Similarly, with regard to
the reform of peacekeeping operations, Blue Helmets
must receive adequate training on protecting the human
rights of women and girls.

We welcome the priority that the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel accords to such issues,
with the support of the African Union, with a view to
strengthening governance, security and development in
the region. We emphasize the importance of providing
it with adequate resources.

In conclusion, we wish to stress that the joint
visits by the United Nations and the African Union are
important tools for coordinating efforts in the quest
for peace and stability in the region. We welcome the
recent visit by Ms. Amina Mohammed and Ms. Bineta
Diop and encourage more such visits in future.

