Mr. Khan (Indonesia): Allow me to begin by
commending the President's work on convening today's
debate on the issue of sexual violence in conflict. This
timely debate highlights the urgent need to address the
various forms of violence perpetrated against women
and girls. Despite all the achievements and progress
that have been made in promoting the protection and
rights of women, such violence persists all over the
world. Indonesia also wishes to thank the Secretary-
General for his report on sexual violence in conflict
(S/2013/l49), which is a valuable starting point for our
deliberations today on improving ways to eliminate
and prevent violence against women, particularly in
conflict situations.

At the outset, Indonesia associates itself with the
statement delivered by the representative of Viet Nam
on behalf of the member countries of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations.

Indonesia notes with deep concern the use of
sexual violence as a tactic of war and one that worsens
its consequences, as highlighted in the Secretary-
General's report. Against that backdrop, Indonesia
condemns all forms of violence against women and
girls in armed conflicts, particularly sexual violence,
which, as the report states, predominantly affects
women and girls but can also affect men and boys.
We wish to reaffirm our support for resolution 1325
(2000), the first to specifically address the impact of
war on women and women's contributions to conflict
resolution and sustainable peace. The follow-up Security
Council resolutions on women, peace and security also
constitute a milestone for protection and empowerment
measures for women in the special situation of conflict.

Indonesia commends the adoption of the agreed
conclusions of the fifty-seventh session of the
Commission on the Status of Women (CSW), last month,
as a manifestation of the intergovernmental efforts
that have been made by countries under the United
Nations framework. The agreement reached on the
agreed conclusions is a step forward in strengthening
countries' commitment to tackling violence against
women and girls.

The CSW conclusions send a clear and strong
message: violence against women and girls committed
in armed conflict and post-conflict situations is strongly
condemned; sexual and gender-based violence, which
affects victims, families, communities and societies,
is recognized; and effective accountability and redress
measures, as well remedies, are required.

At the national level, Indonesia's national action
plan on human rights serves as a strong platform for our
commitment to eliminate and prevent violence against
women. The process of drafting a presidential decree is
ongoing, as a legal basis to formulate a national action
plan on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
When completed, the action plan, among things, will
cover all phases ofthe peace process - from prevention
to ending conflict to recovery from social conflict.

Indonesia wishes to highlight some of the main
challenges in our efforts to eliminate and further

prevent violence against women, including sexual
violence: first, insufficient gender-sensitive policies;
secondly, inadequate implementation of legal and
policy frameworks; thirdly, inadequate data collection,
analysis and research; fourthly, the lack of financial
and human resources and insufficient allocation of
such resources; and, fifthly, the lack of comprehensive,
consistent, sustained, transparent and adequately
monitored and evaluated efforts.

Those gaps have yet to be bridged by States as the
bearers of the primary responsibility in addressing the
issue ofviolence against women and its impact, in order
to translate commitments into practical approaches and
actions on the ground, to fashion more compassionate
responses for victims, to pursue more aggressive
prosecutions of perpetrators and to create more secure
communities and environments.

With its multifold economic, social and cultural
consequences, sexual violence in conflict hampers not
only women and men victims, but also their families
and communities. Therefore, Indonesia supports the
six-point priority agenda established by the former
and current Special Representatives of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.

To conclude, Indonesia would like to reiterate the
importance of the international community, including
the United Nations, as the key stakeholder, joining
hands and providing support for States to address the
remaining gaps and tackle the gravity of the situation.
Indonesia also urges all parties to conflict to comply
with international humanitarian and human rights law.

