Archbishop Auza: My delegation wishes to thank
the Angolan presidency for convening this particularly
important open debate on the role of women in conflict
prevention and resolution in Africa.

Women are drivers of development and the
flourishing of human talent in multiple fields. The
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) cannot be achieved without
the contribution of women. Sustainable Development
Goal 16 aims to promote peaceful and inclusive societies
for sustainable development. In many countries in
Africa, in particular in the Great Lakes region, peaceful
and inclusive societies are still a distant dream. Women
can greatly contribute to their realization.

In that regard, the Holy See expresses its appreciation
for the initiatives promoted by the Security Council and
by Governments to raise awareness and arrive at a fuller
recognition of the vital role of women in preventive
diplomacy, mediation, peacekeeping missions and
peacebuilding processes. That recognition, however,
must be fully translated into action in order to unleash
skills and capacities that allow women to bring order
out of chaos, community out of division and peace out
of conflict. Their special gift in educating people to
be more receptive and sensitive to the needs of others
around them and beyond is crucial in conflict resolution
and in fostering post-conflict reconciliation.

My delegation wishes to pay special homage to the
women who have had profound and lasting effects on
the lives of millions of people and on the development
of nations through their selfless and long-term work
in education, health care and the formation of values
among the young. Those women, even in the most
difficult circumstances, distinguish themselves for
their bravery, constancy and dedication. Women and
girls who have become victims of rape and other
forms of violence during conflicts find security and
understanding in the institutions run by those women,
more often than not by religious women.

Their spirit of sacrifice for the good of others
brings death to some of them. My delegation feels
duty-bound at this moment to remember with gratitude
and sorrow the four sisters from the Missionaries of
Charity - Sister Anselm from India, Sister Marguerite
and Sister Reginette from Rwanda and Sister Judith
from Kenya - who were massacred by cowardly
fundamentalists on 4 March in Aden, Yemen. They
devoted their lives to the poor and elderly women, a
dozen of whom were also killed with them. The same
terrorists kidnapped an Indian priest from the same
institution, and they have claimed to have crucified
him on Good Friday. Pope Francis has prayed that this
pointless slaughter will awaken consciences, lead to
a change of heart and inspire all parties to lay down
their arms and take up the path of dialogue. No greater
sacrifice can be made for peace and reconciliation than
to lay down one's life for it.

The Holy See has been very attentive to the inspiring
work of women in Africa in all fields. Education has
been key to that empowerment. If women are to become
prime drivers of sustainable development and peaceful
societies, ensuring that all girls and women have access
to education is indispensable. Improving access to
education for women will not only redound to the fuller
realization of their potential and greater professional
opportunities, it is also key to better educated future
generations that are capable of ushering in and
maintaining just and peaceful societies. I am proud to
say that the Catholic Church, especially in sub-Saharan
Africa, is the leading provider of quality education for
all, ensuring to the best of its abilities that no woman
or girl would be left unschooled and preparing them
to become dignified agents of their own personal
flourishing and active protagonists in building strong
families and peaceful communities.

Sadly, for far too many women, there is still a steep
uphill battle and struggle to emancipate themselves from
situations of marginalization, violence, abandonment
and exclusion. The world today continues to be
confronted with various old and new forms of violence
directed against women and girls, in particular the use
of rape as a weapon of war during conflicts, abuses in
refugee camps, the trafficking of women and girls for
sexual exploitation, forced abortion, forced conversion
and forced marriage. Instead of being eradicated, some
of those acts of violence have emerged in even crueller
forms, constituting some of the most horrendous
violations of human rights.

The obligation to put an end to those barbaric acts
against women and girls is incumbent upon every one
of us, upon every Government and, in a particular way,
upon the Security Council.

