Mr. Lee Taeho (Republic of Korea): I would like
to extend my deepest condolences, on behalf of the
Government of the Republic of Korea, to the victims of
the recent terrorist attacks in Sri Lanka, which Korea
condemns in the strongest terms. At the same time, my
Government would like to express a sense of solidarity
with the victims' families and the Sri Lankan people at
this difficult time.

I would like to express my sincere appreciation
to you, Mr. President, for the initiative you have
taken to convene today's open debate. I also extend
my appreciation to the briefers for their presentations
and testimonies, which have taken us to the heart of
the harsh realities on the ground. This year marks the
tenth anniversary of the establishment of the mandate
of the Special Representative and, with the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000)
fast approaching next year, today's meeting could not
be more relevant.

One of the foremost achievements we have made
over the years, in my view, is that we increasingly
recognize that sustaining peace is inextricably linked
with gender equality and women's leadership. More
importantly, this recognition is steadily transforming
into global norms and being mainstreamed in our
societies. However, much still needs to be done. In this
regard, I would like to highlight some points on this
important topic.

First, we must renew our commitments on the
importance of the prevention of conflicts. Responding
to conflict-related sexual violence is important, but
it is more important to make efforts to stop it from
happening in the first place. Enhancing women's roles
and leadership across the entire continuum of conflict
should be one of the most effective ways to prevent
sexual violence. Obviously, it is through women's
participation and empowerment that this could be
achieved. In recognition of this, my Government places
great emphasis on increasing women's participation in
peacekeeping operations. As of 2019, we have filled
approximately 17 per cent of our peacekeeping staff
officer and observer positions with women, exceeding
the previous United Nations target of 15 per cent. We
are seeking to do more, aiming to reach the new target
of 25 per cent over the next 10 years, by 2028.

Secondly, we should not forget that resolution
1325 (2000) is fundamentally a human rights mandate.
Sexual violence should never be a tactic of war and
should be seen through the lens of a survivor-centred
approach. Focusing on survivors' needs and demands
is indeed a prerequisite for a more holistic approach to
protecting individuals from sexual violence in conflict
and preventing the survivors of sexual violence from
being further victimized and stigmatized.

As a key pillar of Korea's new Action with Women
and Peace initiative, launched last year, Korea is
supporting projects that address the needs of women
and girls in conflict and post-conflict situations in
certain countries in Asia and Africa through the United
Nations Population Fund and UNICEF. Korea will
contribute a further $8 million by 2020 to support these
projects. A survivor-centred approach will be at the
centre of all these activities.

Thirdly, we should engage all key actors and
stakeholders, including civil society. Every actor has a
vital role to play in implementing the women and peace
and security agenda. As such, they need to shoulder
and fulfil their respective commitments so that their
engagement will eventually contribute to ending
impunity of conflict-related sexual violence.

My Government is working closely with experts
and civil society both at home and on the ground in
target countries on the implementation of its Action with
Women and Peace initiative. As part of this initiative,
we plan to convene the first annual international
conference on Action with Women and Peace this
coming July in Seoul. I look forward to it proving to
be an excellent platform for various actors to discuss
issues of critical importance on the women and peace
and security agenda.

Combating conflict-related sexual violence and
addressing the women and peace and security agenda
is very close to the hearts of Koreans. The Republic of
Korea is still engaging in efforts to support and help
recover the honour and dignity of so-called comfort
women victimized during the Second World War. Many
of them are passing away without having their lifelong
agony fully addressed. We believe it is crucial to ensure
that lessons are learned from their painful experiences.

The instruments, strategies and political
commitments are in place; now it is time to translate
them into action. On this meaningful occasion, I
would like to reaffirm the Republic of Korea's full
commitment to engaging in international efforts to
advance the women, peace and security agenda.

