Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate you, Madam, on your successful
presidency of the Council. I would like to thank you
also for providing us with an opportunity to participate
in this important session. I would like to thank the
Executive Director of the United Nations Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
and the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, the Special Rapporteur on the human rights
of internally displaced persons, and Ms. Suaad Allami
from the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and
Security for their valuable contributions and briefings.

The attention focused on the women and peace
and security agenda by the Security Council and the
international community since the adoption of the
historic resolution 1325 (2000) has contributed to
shedding light on the impact of conflicts on women
and girls and on women's important role in resolving
conflicts, building consensus and facilitating stability,
democracy, prosperity, conciliation and post-conflict
peacebuilding. Hence, we look forward to the high-
level review on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) to be held in 2015. We believe that review will
provide an opportunity to focus on best practices and
deal with existing challenges and concerns, particularly
that women and girls, including female refugees and
internally displaced persons (IDPs), are still the ones
most affected by armed conflicts.

Since women and children represent the greatest
proportion of IDPs and refugees due to the terrorism
and conflicts that continue to prevail in the world, not
only do they face enormous difficulties, but they also
suffer from discrimination, violence and human rights
violations. That would not happen if more attention
were paid to the strict enforcement of international laws
to protect women during armed conflicts, and which
call upon all warring parties to take measures to protect
women and girls from violence, including gender-based
violence, in a cases of armed conflicts.

Since sexual violence in armed conflict is an
urgent humanitarian issue, we would like to commend
the joint UN-Women/Justice Rapid Response training,
roster management, and deployment mechanism on
sexual and gender-based violence. That mechanism
provides support to the international community in the
achievement of justice and accountability for sexual and
gender-based violence in cases of conflict. We share
the Secretary-General's concern over the emerging and
continued patterns of violence against women and girls
in armed conflict and post-conflict situations.

We regret that in many parts of the world, particularly
in our Arab region, the problem of displacement is a
major problem due to conflict and terrorism. That is
clear in the figures included in the relevant reports.
There were 51.2 million victims of forced displacement
at the end of 2013, representing an increase of6 million
over the figure reported in 2012. Qatar has provided
humanitarian assistance commensurate with the
immense humanitarian impact of that crisis, especially
on women and children.
In conclusion, we would like to highlight the need
for humanitarian agencies to have access to those
affected and for the provisions of international law and
relevant Security Council resolutions on humanitarian
issues to be implemented and to hold the perpetrators of
serious violations accountable.

