Mr. Butagira (Uganda): Mr. President, let me
join other speakers in thanking you for having
convened this important debate.

Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) was a
landmark resolution on women, peace and security.
Yet, sadly, not much has been done to implement it, in
particular in terms of elaborating reporting and
monitoring mechanisms.

Women have suffered a great deal in armed
conflict. They have been victims of rape and related
violence. They have even suffered at the hands of some
peacekeepers, who, ironically, were supposed to be
protecting them. Very often they also find themselves
the sole breadwinners if their husbands have left to
fight or have died in the fighting. Yet their role in
conflict resolution is minimal, if not non-existent. It is
therefore important to mainstream a gender perspective
in the work of institutions such as the recently created
Peacebuilding Commission. The role of women also
should be emphasized in peacekeeping missions.

The question also arises of involving women, to
the extent possible, in peace negotiations. Usually it is
up to the parties to the conflict to constitute their
delegations. We can only say that it is advisable that
they include women in their delegations. If they are not
direct participants, they can certainly be observers. My
delegation calls on the Security Council and the
Secretary-General to take steps to realize this proposal.

Staffing positions in relevant institutions dealing
with peacekeeping and peacebuilding should also
incorporate a gender perspective. This is not
necessarily to say that there should be affirmative
action, but I believe that there is a pool of women well
qualified to be considered on their merits.

I would like now to touch on the issue of gender-
based violence against women and the issue of
impunity. There should be zero tolerance for impunity.
In that regard, I would draw the attention of the
Council to the atrocities committed against women by
the so-called Lord's Resistance Army in northern
Uganda. Uganda is a partner with the International
Criminal Court (ICC) in making sure that the
perpetrators of those crimes are made to answer for
their heinous actions.

But all are also aware that there are ongoing
peace talks in Juba, in southern Sudan, between the
Government of Uganda and the Lord's Resistance
Army, aimed at finding a peaceful solution to the long-
running conflict. Despite some obstacles, progress has
been made, and the Ugandan Government is
determined that the talks will succeed. In the event of a
comprehensive agreement being reached, the
Government of Uganda has offered amnesty to the
indicted leaders of the Lord's Resistance Army. We
have to balance the need for justice with the
imperatives of peace and stability in northern Uganda.
I must make it clear, though, that we are not condoning
impunity. There are traditional ways of punishing
perpetrators, while at the same time achieving justice
and reconciliation, including the provision of
reparations to the victims.
The Government of Uganda has appointed a team
of lawyers to study this Acholi tradition and to make
sure no impunity is condoned. The Government will
make sure that the traditional system is consistent with
international standards for dealing with impunity. In
this direction, we are walking in step with the
International Criminal Court.

