Ms. Kadare (Albania): I would like to thank the
Uruguayan presidency for convening this open debate
to raise awareness of the acute issue of conflict-related
sexual violence. I also wish to thank the briefers for
their informative and powerful interventions, and
most particularly Ms. Mina Jaf for sharing with us the
perspective of civil society.

Albania aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union, and I wish to
add the following remarks in my national capacity.

Over the past decade, the Security Council has amply
identified the scourge of sexual violence in conflict
as a devastating tactic of war and terrorism and has
recognized it as an issue that affects international peace
and security. Today we have a better understanding of
the scope and roots of the problem than ever before. In
terms of international legal and normative instruments,
we have the tools required to take significant action,
including seven Security Council resolutions.

In September 2013, 144 countries, including
Albania, co-signed the historic Declaration of
Commitment to End Sexual Violence in Conflict, thus
marking an unprecedented level of momentum and
political will.

Yet the shocking and unacceptable reality is that
despite our collective efforts and despite international
awareness and outrage, conflict-related sexual violence
continues unabated and largely unpunished. The real
challenge facing us is how to convert our political
will into action on the ground; how to implement our
objectives in real conflicts, thus effecting change in
the lives of millions of vulnerable children, men and
women. The challenges to effectively combating this
crime are multiple: lack of accountability for the
perpetrators, weak Government response, insufficient
reporting of the facts, poor monitoring and inadequate
support services for the victims, who also have to face
the shame, the stigma and the risk of retaliation.

In addition, the lack of adequate national capacity
and expertise necessary to prevent, investigate and
prosecute perpetrators remains among the main
impediments in combating sexual violence. It is
critical that the United Nations increase its efforts to
strengthen national capacities. In this context, I would
like to join other colleagues and express Albania's
support for the excellent work of the Team of Experts
on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, as
well as the partnership between Justice Rapid Response
and UN-Women for their endeavours to end impunity
for perpetrators.

Albania welcomes the latest report ofthe Secretary-
General (S/2017/249) and its comprehensive analysis
of current trends as well as emerging concerns. Most
importantly, we support the implementation of its
action-oriented recommendations. We pay tribute
to the relentless work of the United Nations Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Bangura, and would like to congratulate Ms. Patten
on her new appointment in this important mandate.

But while the United Nations has a crucial role to
play, it is commitment and action by the parties to a
conflict that are the key to changing the situation on
the ground. Every Government has a responsibility
to adopt protective measures, develop investigation
mechanisms and put in place policies that protect its
people from sexual violence, whether perpetrated
by the Government's own forces or by terrorists,
in times of conflict or peace. When States fail to
comply, the International Criminal Court, whose
jurisdiction is universal, can and must fulfil its role in
ensuring accountability.

In closing, I would like to stress that Albania
believes that there should be zero tolerance for any
form of sexual violence, in all circumstances and
at all times. We member States should unite in our
efforts to eradicate this horrendous crime through a
comprehensive and integrated approach that entails
prevention, early warning, justice, accountability, and
assistance and reparations for survivors.

Today we in this Chamber stand in solidarity
with the anonymous and forgotten victims of sexual
violence, whose rights and dignity matter.

