Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Our delegation would like to start by
expressing its gratitude to the Angolan presidency for
its initiative in convening today's meeting on the topic
of the role of women in preventing and settling conflicts
in Africa. We would also like to convey our gratitude
to all the invited briefers for their participation in
the meeting and their comprehensive contribution to
the debate.

One of the most important preconditions for the
stability, sustainable development of African countries
and security and well-being of the population, including
women, isthe prevention and settlement of conflicts.
Despite the overall decline over the past decade,
the African continent remains highly vulnerable to
crises. Therefore, a timely and effective response
by the international community to emerging threats
and security challenges in Africa is essential. In that
regard, we view as unacceptable attempts to dictate to
African Governments settlement recipes without their
consent or request. We welcome the increased activity
by Africans themselves with regard to emergency
response, as well as the growing participation by
African women in peacekeeping and peacebuilding
efforts. We note the progress made in forging an African
peace and security architecture with the assistance of
the international community.

The Russian Federation is carrying out a
consistent policy of developing cooperation among the
United Nations, the African Union and subregional
organizations. We call for further pooling of efforts
regarding the conflict situations in Darfur, Somalia,
South Sudan, the Central African Republic, Mali, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Guinea-Bissau,
as well as the intra-Sudanese track, in the fight against
international terrorism, transnational organized crime,
piracy, the illegal trafficking in arms and drugs, as well
as other important areas of cooperation, including the
issue of women and peace and security. Russia is ready
to step up its cooperation with African States aimed at
strengthening their crisis-response capacities, including
through the ongoing training of their peacekeepers
and law-enforcement agents in Russian educational
establishments. Our country is participating in a
number of United Nations peacekeeping operations
on the continent and plays a leading role among the
contributors of air-transport services to them.

The issue of women and peace and security is an
inalienable component of peace and conflict-resolution
processes and post-conflict peacebuilding. The
participation ofwomen in such efforts has much positive
potential. We must also note the efforts of specialized
subregional and regional organizations in that regard.
A good example of cooperation is the African Union's
five-year Gender, Peace and Security Programme for
the period 2015-2020. In order to achieve results in
implementing the agenda on women and peace and
security, there needs to be a balanced, system-wide

approach that provides for the full-fledged participation
of women in peace processes throughout the continent
and in post-conflict reconstruction. No less pressing is

the need to ensure the effectiveness of efforts to deal

with violence against women during armed conflicts in

Africa. There is also a need to ensure that the inclusion

of gender aspects in our work on the ground does not

become an end in itself and is not only declarative in

nature. We should aim at achieving real results. In that

context, it is important to bear in mind that national

plans of action for the implementation of resolution 1325

(2000) cannot be used as an instrument for assessing

the policy of States in terms of their gender-promotion

policies. We need to bear in mind that the protection of
women during the course of armed conflicts and steps

to afford them equal opportunities for participation in

efforts to achieve peace and security are the primary

responsibility of the States involved in such conflicts.

The international community and the United Nations

must provide them assistance in that regard. One of the
main objectives of peacekeeping and peacebuilding
efforts should be the restoration of normal life and the
elimination of the consequences of conflicts, as well
as safeguarding the security of all strata and groups of
the population.

As we have noted earlier, greater effectivness of the
work of the Security Council is not always achieved
through the establishment of new structures. That is
the reason for our doubts with regard to the usefulness
of setting up the Informal Experts Group on Women,
Peace and Security. We stand ready to cooperate with
other members of the Council on this very important
topic in order to develop effective and tried methods.

The women of African States can make a
substantive and unique contribution to achieving the
objective of preventing and resolving conflicts on
the African continent through the joint efforts of all
interested parties, as there is a need to create the optimal
conditions for achieving that goal, while not forgetting
the central task of protecting African women and their
safety and security. The main guidelines in that regard
remain the provisions of resolution 1325 (2000).

