Mrs. Quiel Murcia (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
I wish to begin by expressing our appreciation to the
Russian presidency for its initiative of convening this
timely open debate on women and peace and security.

Panama endorses the statement delivered by the
representative of Slovenia on behalf of the Human
Security Network.

We underscore the significant value of resolution
1325 (2000), which was adopted unanimously in 2000,
as the first instrument to establish the relationship
between the experiences of women in conflict and
the international peace and security agenda, thereby
focusing attention on their disproportionate impact on
women. Today more than ever before, that resolution
and subsequent Security Council resolutions are of
great relevance, given the increasing violence against
women and girls carried out by extremist groups that
threaten their rights, dignity, integrity and lives.

The increasing role of women in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts and in United Nations
peacekeeping operations was enshrined in resolution
2242 (2015), which further encouraged women to take
on greater leadership roles and promote their rights
and called for efforts to turn plans made on paper
into action, as we have heard this morning from the
Executive Director of UN-Women.

We welcome the recommendations contained
in the September report (A/7l/398) of the Special
Rapporteur on violence against women, its causes and
consequences, and the Secretary-General's call for the
implementation of a zero-tolerance policy in response
to instances of misconduct, in particular comprehensive
proposals on prevention, enforcement and remedial
measures to promote greater accountability, including
his commitment to make public misconduct by United
Nations staff. Today's multiple briefings, in particular
the testimony of civil society representative Ms. Rita
Lopidia, demonstrate that, unfortunately, the impact of
armed conflict on women is disproportionately greater
and thereby makes them more vulnerable and lacking
sufficient protection.

Panama is firmly committed to promoting and
protecting women's human rights. That is why we attach
particular interest to the initiatives of UN-Women, of
which my country is a member of the Executive Board,
and to the Justice Rapid Response mechanism and the
alliance ofwomen seeking accountability for sexual and
gender-based violence. The 2015 global review of the
women and peace and security agenda highlighted the
need to incorporate a more significant role ofwomen in
the fight against terrorism and radicalization, in which
gender equality is assuming greater prominence for the
fight against that scourge.

Violent extremism has intensified and degenerated
into the worst forms of violence against women,
including sexual violence used as a weapon of war,
thereby returning us to a time that we thought had
been overcome by humankind. States must therefore
strengthen collective efforts, including national plans
and strategies to promote the increased participation of
women in all stages of the peacebuilding process, as
well as in post-conflict reconstruction.
I stress the significance of Spain's initiative to
create a network of focal point groups on women and
peace and security in September, which focuses on
the urgent and crucial question of promoting women's
leadership role and rights. The role that women can and
should play in conflict prevention and resolution and
decision-making processes aimed at sustainable peace
is fundamental. That is why it is essential to empower
women globally and continuously, as recommended in
the report of the Secretary-General.

Women's inclusion and equality are essential
elements of the equation in achieving the development
we want. We need to end the exclusion of 50 per cent
of the world's population and recognize the active, vital
role of women as agents of change, whose participation
at all levels is an undeniably positive element favouring
peaceful and constructive action.

The equal participation of 100 per cent of our
population in every single step towards lasting peace
and security will ultimately free up human potential to
resolve the issues we face - all we need is the will to
act. Given the current situation of ever-increasing global
challenges, it is unacceptable to continue debating
questions involving women's rights as leaders, or to
hold high-ranking positions or to equitably participate
at all levels of political, social or economic life.

Finally, the measures we take and implement today
to defend the rights of women and girls will be steps
towards saving humankind. That is in our hands.

