Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I wish to express my condolences
to the Government of Germany and the Government of
Russia for the tragic events that took place recently.
Unfortunately, terror and madness are just around the
corner and can affect us all.

Moving on to today's topic, I would like to thank the
Kingdom of Spain for convening this important open
debate on trafficking in persons in conflict situations.

Argentina would like to point out that, while the
threat of trafficking in persons may in fact increase
in conflict situations, it is important to bear in mind
that the United Nations has already developed a
sophisticated system to fight trafficking, which has been
designed through resolutions of the General Assembly,
in particular under the agenda items entitled "Crime
prevention and criminal justice" and "Advancement
of women".

Indeed, the General Assembly has discussed this
issue and adopted resolutions on combating trafficking
since the forty-ninth session, through annual resolutions
that have fed into and promoted the negotiation and
adoption of the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime, and in particular its
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking
in Persons, Especially Women and Children, to
supplement the Convention. Also, in 2010, the General
Assembly adopted the United Nations Global Plan of
Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons, and since
2014 has observed the World Day against Trafficking
in Persons on 30 July.
Those instruments have also provided a clear
mandate for the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime in the framework of the fight against trafficking.
The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime has
developed extensive experience in implementing
appropriate mechanisms and tools to address the issue,
including, among other initiatives, the Voluntary Trust
Fund for Victims of Trafficking in Persons and the
provision of technical assistance to States. Argentina
values and acknowledges those efforts.

In that context, it is important to note that Goal 8.7
of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) expressly
refers to the problem of combating forced labor,
modern slavery and trafficking in persons. Moreover,
its implementation, review and monitoring is carried
out under the framework of the mechanisms established
by the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Under the coordination of the International Labour
Organization, Argentina has played an active role in the
development of Alliance 8.7, in order to achieve that
Goal. Argentina has long been committed to combating
trafficking in persons as one of the worst forms of
violence against human beings, which endangers the
dignity of all people. Our commitment has always
placed priority on preventing this crime and punishing
its perpetrators, while improving the Government's
ability to assist and protect its victims.

At the national level, we established an executive
committee on combating the trafficking and exploitation
of persons and protecting and assisting the victims,
as well as a federal council on combating trafficking.
The executive committee, set up in September 2013,
is tasked with implementing a national programme to
combat human trafficking and exploitation and protect
and assist victims. It includes representatives from
the Ministry of Security, the Ministry of Justice and
Human Rights, the Ministry of Social Development
and the Ministry of Labour, Employment and Social
Security. The executive committee develops and
implements awareness-raising campaigns and is in
charge of training civil servants to address the problem
of trafficking in persons, sexual exploitation and
related crimes in order to understand the complexity
of the crime and its direct links to drug trafficking and
organized crime.

For its part, the federal council on combating human
trafficking, set up in July, is responsible for designing
a federal strategy to combat human trafficking and
exploitation and promote the adoption by various
jurisdictions of standards of conduct, protocols and
intervention networks to ensure effective protection
and respect for the rights of victims of trafficking and
exploitation. The federal council is made up of national
ministries, Government agencies and representatives of
civil society.

We therefore believe that it is important that the
Security Council, as the principal organ of the United
Nations, be sensitive to the problem of trafficking.
However, we must not lose sight of the fact that the
issue as such falls under the purview of the General
Assembly and that the Organization has developed
a sophisticated mechanism for addressing the legal
framework provided by the Palermo Convention and
its Protocol, with the guidance provided by the United
Nations Global Plan ofAction to Combat Trafficking in
Persons as a fundamental tool for the implementation
of national public policies on this issue.

