Ms. Regner (Sweden): Sweden aligns itself with
the statements to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union and the representative of Norway, on
behalf of the Nordic countries.

Combating brutal human rights violations by
trafficking in persons must be a priority for us all. It is
our common responsibility. Sweden remains strongly
committed to eradicating all forms of trafficking
in persons. We would therefore like to congratulate
the United Kingdom on organizing this ministerial
open debate.
Today's debate is important for many reasons. First,
we need to ensure that this issue remains on the global
agenda. Today's discussion builds on the momentum
created under the Spanish presidency of the Council.
Secondly, we need to move forward with actions in
line with resolution 2331 (2016). Finally, trafficking
in persons is a transnational threat that requires a
transnational response. The United Nations provides a
unique forum for achieving this goal.

Human trafficking and various forms of slavery
are flourishing. This is due to ongoing conflicts and
massive displacement of civilian populations, such as
the situation in the Lake Chad basin region, which the
Council visited two weeks ago. It flourishes because
there are those ready to cruelly exploit others in
desperate situations. The most effective way to end
human trafficking is to address its root causes. The
root cause is demand. For example, should there be
no persons - the majority of them men ~ ready to
buy sexual services ,there would be no trafficking for
sexual exploitation.

Another root cause, of course, is conflict and
displacement. We need to prevent them, as we heard
not least in the excellent briefing on Somalia. We
have to prevent them before they occur, and we have
to invest in equitable sustainable development for
all. These are important measures to combat human
trafficking. Existing international obligations relating
to human trafficking and forced labour must also be
fully implemented.

The Council has an important role to play in
prevention, including through the sustaining peace
agenda. In addition, peace operations mandated by
the Council must see the role that organized criminal
groups, as well as terrorist groups, play in perpetuating
the unstable situations and conflicts that lead to human
trafficking, and in human trafficking itself. Working on
the ground to create accountable and effective security
sector institutions can enhance the capacity of Member
States to address these groups.

As the Secretary-General has previously reported,
there is a clear nexus between conflict- and post-
conflict-related sexual violence and human trafficking,
such as sexual slavery, forced labour and organ
removal. The list is long. I will, however, focus on
sexual exploitation predominantly targeting women,
and girls and boys.

The effects of trafficking for the purpose of sexual
exploitation are different from the harm caused by
trafficking for other forms of exploitation. Recognizing
that human trafficking has a clear gender dimension
is therefore essential. All actions against trafficking
should have a gender approach.

Sweden wants to stress the importance of not
creating legal markets for human traffickers. There is
an ongoing discussion within the United Nations and
elsewhere about whether prostitution should be viewed
as a profession. The term "sex worker" is often used in
these discussions. Swedish policy on this issue is clear.
Prostitution can never be regarded as ajob; prostitution
is exploitation. Sweden urges more countries to consider
legislation that targets the person who buys sex and
offers support to the person being exploited, thereby
shifting the criminal focus and guilt from the person
being exploited to the exploiter. Knowledge about one's
own rights, including about sexual and reproductive
health and rights, is crucial.

Another essential element is accountability in
conflict and post-conflict environments. Sweden
strongly supports the implementation of the United
Nations zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation
and abuse.

As Chair of the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict, we would also like to stress the
particularly vulnerable situation of children in this
regard, and also highlight the forced or compulsory
recruitment of children for use in armed conflicts as
one of the worst forms of child labour. Target 8.7 of the
Sustainable Development Goals asks us to eliminate
this and we need to keep a strong focus on achieving
this goal. We should also focus on Goal 5, on gender
equality, and on the other relevant Goals of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. Sweden is also
proud to be a pathfinder country in the United Nations
Global Partnership to End Violence against Children.
It is a critical initiative, and Sweden would like to urge
more countries to join it.

Finally, we must enable women and girls to make
decisions about their own bodies, lives and futures
in all contexts. We must engage more women both
in peacebuilding activities and in action against
trafficking. By implementing the agenda on women and
peace and security, we can ensure that women's voices,
experiences and solutions are brought to the table.
Gender equality is about human rights.
