Ms. Saydee-Tarr (Liberia): My delegation brings
warm greetings from His Excellency Mr. George
Manneh Weah, President of the Republic of Liberia and
feminist-in-chief, and we congratulate you, Madam, on
your ascendancy to the presidency.

At the outset I should like to express our satisfaction
at the adoption of resolution 2493 (2019), which Liberia
proudly co-sponsored.

The year 2020 holds significance for amplifying
the focus on the progress of the women's advancement
agenda. The milestone commemorations of the twentieth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action and the tenth anniversary of the mandate
on sexual violence in conflict create opportunities to
undertake extensive inventories of how well we have
met our commitments to the protection and promotion
of the rights and advancement of women, as well as
provide an opportunity to develop practical and robust
solutions for addressing the gaps and challenges.

On 23 April, Liberia joined other Member States
in pronouncing a number of commitments on its
women and peace and security agenda leading up to
the twentieth anniversary, in 2020. I am proud to
announce today that we have made good on two of the
six commitments in advance of the 2020 target set.
Phase two of our national action plan on resolution
1325 (2000) has been completed and endorsed, and the
domestic violence bill was recently passed into law, in
August. We are confident that we will see the others
come to timely fruition.

In furtherance of our adherence to the tenets of
resolution 1325 (2000), His Excellency Mr. George
Weah, President of the Republic of Liberia, in his
advocacy for advancing women in political leadership,
championed a bill for an amendment to article 80 of
the Liberian Constitution in order to provide additional
seats for marginalized groupings, to include women,
persons dealing with disabilities, and young people.
That would allow for 15 more seats for women in
the Senate in addition to the 30 existing seats, as per
political subdivisions, and only female members of
political parties will qualify to contest these seats.
There will be four specialized seats in the House of
Representatives for persons dealing with disabilities,
and young people. Although there are hindrances, as
there are with everything that comes with change,
we remain optimistic that these goals will be realized
under this Administration.

The development of our first national action plan
in 2009, following the remarkable role women played
in the restoration of peace to our war-torn country,
was a logical sequence to keeping up the momentum in
women's political leadership. While there were many
stumbling blocks to the effective implementation of
the first plan, the Government of Liberia, through the
Ministry of Gender, Children and Social Protection,
in collaboration with our development partners, will
endeavour to ensure that phase two of the plan, which
is fully aligned with our own national development
framework, the Pro-Poor Agenda for Prosperity and
Development, will apply the appropriate mechanisms
to ensure a successful implementation process.

A significant aspect of the women and peace and
security agenda is the role of women in the security
sector and in peacekeeping; however, very little
attention is given to the contribution of women in this
sector in view of the full peace and security agenda.
Our Government, in its efforts to elevate this platform,
and as a United Nations troop-contributing country, has
embarked on various initiatives to expand the presence
of female officers in the Liberian security sector.
Currently the security apparatus in Liberia, including
the Armed Forces of Liberia, the Liberian National
Police and the Liberian Immigration Service, is
exerting efforts to increase the quota of female recruits
and identifying effective trainings and strategies to
build the needed capacity of female officers to cope
with challenges that hinder their advancement or entry
into the security sector. The Armed Forces of Liberia
in particular are exerting every effort to increase the
number of female officers in peacekeeping missions
by the year 2022, with the aim of fulfilling the United
Nations peace operations gender-parity requirement of
15 per cent. At this stage we are at 8 per cent.

The training provided by the United Nations and
other partners has contributed greatly to building the
capacity of our uniformed female officers. Nonetheless,
for us to achieve the overall objectives of women's
active role in peace and security, there has to be more
specialized training for women in the security sector
at every level. The establishment of a database on
women in decision-making will be key. Identifying
the gaps between male and female security officers in
decision-making in the security sector will be useful,
and a sustained monitoring and evaluation practice will
be beneficial.

To that end, we are making frantic efforts to deliver
on these initiatives. As it is with many development
initiatives, the promotion of women's active
participation in the security sector is marred by various
factors: inadequate financial and logistical resources
and capacity-building; lack of necessary equipment
and apparatus and overall support; and inadequate
retention and recruiting due to low financial benefits
and incentives. Success in meeting these objectives
hinges on overcoming these shortcomings.

In the throes of these multiple challenges, let
me reassert that the Government of Liberia remains
extensively committed to the implementation of the
international commitments to resolution 1325 (2000),
on women and peace and security, and welcomes the
adoption of resolution 2493 (2019) under this agenda
during South Africa's presidency.

On behalf of His Excellency President George
Weah, the Government and the people of Liberia
convey their appreciation to the United Nations and our
development partners for their consistent and continued
support for our development efforts and in ensuring the
full participation and inclusion of women and girls in
the peace and security agenda.

Liberia looks forward to strengthening support for
women and peace and security through its alignment
as a member of the Group of Friends of the African
Women Leaders Network, the Women, Peace and
Security National Focal Points Network and the Group
of Friends of Women, Peace and Security here at
the United Nations. As a recipient of recognition for
being the first post-conflict country to have adopted
a national action plan, we would like to urge Member
States that have not yet given it consideration to kindly
join the global initiative.

We would like to further emphasize that in
addressing issues of peace and security, it is important
to deal with and hear directly from actors in the area of
peace and security, including women in uniform and in
peacebuilding work, from the granular level upward.

Additionally, it is critical to ensure a move into
purposeful, intentional action and implementation of
our national action plan.

In conclusion, I should like to reiterate that until
women are a significant part of peace initiatives,
whether peacemaking or peacebuilding, the processes
thereof will be neither complete nor durable.

