Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I would like first to thank Germany for
organizing this debate, Madam President.

Belgium welcomes the uniformed gender-parity
strategy of January 2019 adopted in accordance with
resolution 2242 (2015). The number of women serving
under the United Nations flag is growing, but as the
Secretary-General has said, we must do more. In 2019,
4 per cent of peacekeepers and 8 per cent of female
police officers in United Nations operations are women.
We must indeed do more, and do better, at every level
of the hierarchy and in every function. Targeting the
hiring process is not enough. Women must be able to
pursue their careers with the same opportunities as men.
I would like to briefly discuss some possible solutions.

First, we must overcome the obstacles related to
deployment. Deployment conditions must be adapted
to female candidates' professional and personal needs.
Among measures to be taken on the ground, I especially
have in mind infrastructure and medical services
that are appropriate for women. That also applies to
deployment periods. In that regard, the role of gender
advisers is crucial.

Secondly, we must encourage troop contributors
to deploy more women to operations. Troop- and
police-contributing countries should deploy more
women, in line with the commitments made under the
Action for Peacekeeping initiative, but we realize that
this is still a big challenge. Belgium is above average
in terms of the percentage of women it deploys to
United Nations operations, but at the national level we
are aware that we still need to make progress. Women
make up only 8 per cent of the 27,000 active military
personnel in the Belgian armed forces. The image of a
world of men in this regard is a tenacious one. We have
begun recruitment campaigns to attract more young
women, and I want to highlight a fundamental principle
in our armed forces, which is equality. Women have the
same opportunities as men in the areas of recruitment,
training, compensation, promotions and operational
deployment. This year, for example, the Belgian
armed forces proposed the creation of a mixed-gender
engagement team within the Belgian special forces,
which should be effective beginning in 2020.

Thirdly, it is important to create a healthy
environment for women in operations. A masculine
culture in the military and the police is an obstacle to
women's participation. Cases of harassment and sexual
exploitation and abuse contribute to an environment
that women perceive as toxic or dangerous. Belgium
has been taking action in that regard. We have signed
the voluntary compact with the Secretary-General of
the United Nations on the commitment to eliminate
sexual exploitation and abuse. Our Prime Minister
participates in the Circle of Leadership created by
the Secretary-General. We are funding a centre for
sexual-abuse victims' rights within the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan. We all have a responsibility
to establish a transparent and accessible accountability
system. We must continue to provide training in the
prevention of harassment and protection. The code of
omerta must be broken, and practical methods must be
put in place to enable people to denounce such actions
in full confidence.

Finally, we must promote the women and peace and
security agenda in the Council generally. The Security
Council should continue to emphasize the essential
role of women throughout the cycles of conflict, from
prevention to peacebuilding. The women and peace and
security agenda is rich and ever-evolving. Women are
agents for change all over the world. The demands are
strong, and civil society often shows us the way. The
Council must be up to the task. We have a responsibility,
particularly in translating those demands into the
mandates of peacekeeping operations, for example by
supporting women's protection advisers in missions.
Excluding half of humankind from peace efforts
amounts to preparing oneself for failure. Belgium is
convinced that gender equality is an essential element
in achieving lasting peace and security.

