Mr. Rai (Nepal): My delegation wishes to
express its sincere appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for organizing this important open debate on the
occasion of the tenth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000) on women and peace and security.

Resolution 1325 (2000) was a landmark in the
efforts to inject the perspectives of women and gender
into every aspect of the peace process, peacekeeping
operations, rehabilitation and reintegration, and
governance structures in the aftermath of conflict. The
resolution has been vital not only for promoting gender
equality within United Nations activities while
addressing issues related to conflict, peace and
security, but also to efforts to encourage Member
States to mainstream a gender perspective in the areas
of peace, security and the post-conflict reconstruction
of nations.

As we commemorate the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000), it is quite pertinent to take
stock of our achievements, identify shortcomings and
exchange views and experiences relevant to our future
courses of action on the effective implementation of
the resolution. This debate could serve as an
opportunity to gather pragmatic input, experiences and
policy suggestions.

We are appreciative of the various notable efforts
in a broad range of areas that the United Nations
system, Member States, civil society and other actors
have made towards implementing resolution 1325
(2000). But there are many areas in which our
concerted efforts are still much needed. My delegation
wishes to see an increased number of women in
high-ranking positions in the United Nations system, as
well as peacekeepers in the field.

My Government attaches great importance to
resolution 1325 (2000), and we are in the final stage of
preparing our national action plan for the effective
implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008). As a nation emerging from conflict and moving
towards lasting peace, stability and prosperity, Nepal is
fully aware of the benefits of effective implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). Our national action plan is
structured around five pillars: participation, protection
and prevention, promotion, relief and recovery, and
monitoring and evaluation.

As enshrined in its interim Constitution, Nepal is
committed to setting aside 33 per cent of seats in
Parliament for women. We are also committed to
continuing an affirmative action policy in our civil
service with a view to bringing women into the
decision-making levels of the public sector. We are
also committed to increasing women's participation in
our army and police forces.

The Government of Nepal has adopted various
measures to fight gender-related violence, establishing
a toll-free hotline in the Office of the Prime Minister, a
gender violence prevention fund, and gender violence
control committees in every district in the country. We
have also set up local peace committees in every
district - empowered to address conflict at the local
level and to mediate between conflicting parties -
with at least 33 per cent participation by women. We
are committed to establishing women's and children's
service centres in police stations across the country for
the expeditious investigation and prosecution of sexual
and gender-related violence cases.

Women cannot be the silent bearers of the pain
and sorrows of conflict, with all of the psychosocial
trauma and stigmatization that implies. They are
peacemakers and the very foundation of social
cohesion and integration. They are an inherent part of
the reconstruction and rebuilding of our country. The
time has come to consolidate and redouble our efforts
to enhance women's involvement in peacekeeping,
peacemaking and peacebuilding by putting resolution
1325 (2000) into practice.

