Ms. Vogt: Allow me to begin by congratulating
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council, as well as for following up with us
and for the many phone calls you have made to us to find
out how we are doing and how the mission is handling
the crisis that we have been experiencing. I would also
like to thank the Council for its attention to the situaiton
in the Central African Republic, especially since the
eruption of conflict at the beginning of December 2012.

The report before the Security Council
(S/20l2/956) builds on the previous report (S/2012/374)
of 29 May 2012, and provides an update on political,
security, socioeconomic, humanitarian and human
rights developments in the Central African Republic.
It also details the activities of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central African
Republic (BINUCA) in support of the Government's
peace-consolidation efforts, in accordance with the
mandate entrusted to it by the Security Council.

Since the report was issued, on 21 December 2012,
events have unfolded in the Central African Republic
that have had a great impact on the social, political and
security situation in the country and have significantly
constrained the ability of United Nations agencies and
programmes to do their work. A coalition made up of
elements of four rebel groups launched an offensive
against the Government on 10 December, occupying
a number of towns in the north, north-east and north-
central parts of the Central African Republic.

The reporting period witnessed some significant
and positive developments, including the following: the
electoral code was revised and a permanent elections-
management body was approved by consensus, which
is a task that we struggled to achieve for a long time;
the Convention des patriotes pour la justice et la paix
(CPJP) acceded to the 2008 Libreville Comprehensive
Peace Agreement, paving the way for the conduct of
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) process in the north-east, funding for which
was made available by the European Union in July
2012; and the Government concluded an agreement
with the International Monetary Fund that lifted the
restriction on external funding and enabled the flow of
donor support, which had been blocked for about three
years. Unfortunately, those positive achievements were
undermined by the resumption of conflict, wish some
rebel groups launching a series of attacks against a
number of towns in the north-east.

On 12 December, the Convention patriotique pour
le salut du Kodro, the Convention des patriotes pour la
justice et la paix, a faction of the CPJP that calls itself
Fundamental CPJ P and a faction of the Union des forces
democratiques pour le rassemblement established
the "Seleka" coalition, which was later joined later
by the Front democratique du peuple centrafricain of
Abdoulaye Miskine. The Seleka coalition took control
of a number of towns, without much resistance from
the national army. The failure of the army to repel that
aggression is indicative of the depth of decay within
the armed forces. The army had lost cohesion and the
will to fight; many of the soldiers simply dropped their
weapons and melted into the bush. Within a few weeks
almost half of the prefectures in the territory had come
under rebel control.

The leaders of the subregion responded very
quickly to the series of crises confronting the Central
African Republic. On 17 December, President Idriss
Deby Itno of Chad deployed troops to the Central
African Republic as an interposition force, supposedly
to prevent the rebels from expanding beyond Sibut,
which is located at a strategic juncture to Bangui and
is a crossroads to many other parts of the country.
The new Chadian contingent, which was supposed to
have been brought under the control of the Mission de
Consolidation de la Paix of the Economic and Monetary
Community of Central Africa (MICOPAX), was unable
to prevent the rebels from taking Sibut. Heads of State
of the Economic and Monetary Community of Central
Africa (ECCAS) met in N'Djamena on 21 December
in an extraordinary session at which they decided to
reactivate the follow-up committee for the Libreville
Comprehensive Peace Agreement and to facilitate
peace talks in Libreville among the Government, rebel
leaders and the political opposition - talks that were
supposed to be moderated by President Denis Soussou
N'Guesso of the Republic of Congo.
Unfortunately, the N'Djamena summit was
followed by another rebel overrun of the town of
Damara, which is only 75 kilometres from Bangui.
For the United Nations Sibut was the red line for our
security guarantee. The security management team
had designed a contingency plan that would enable the
United Nations to evacuate families from the Central
African Republic in a reasonable time. The Council will
recall that Bangui is a family duty station, so there are
many children and families in Bangui. The calculation
of the team was that it would take an attacking force
about five to six hours to get to Bangui from Sibut,
leaving us with enough time to mobilize prepositioned
air assets and to assemble families. However, when the
rebels decided to overrun Damara, on 29 December, and
following indications from the national security forces
that they would not be in a position to guarantee our
security, the entire United Nations system, the African
Union (AU) and international non-governmental
organizations had no choice but to evacuate their staff
from the Central African Republic. We evacuated
members of staff and families upon the attack on Sibut,
with the remaining staff members being evacuated on
29 December following the overrun of Damara.

ECCAS heads of State then decided to deploy forces
to Bangui to reinforce MICOPAX and help defend the
city. Troops from Cameroon, the Congo, Gabon and a
new Chadian contingent were deployed within two days
over the New Year holidays. We consider that to be a
real record. The Government also requested the support
of troops from South Africa, about 400 of whom were
deployed, while the French deployed extra forces,
increasing their presence in Bangui to 600 troops.

We believe that the decision of the international
community to pull out its personnel drove home to the
regional leaders the critical security challenges in the
Central African Republic and the need to take concrete
steps to secure Bangui. It should be recalled that
MICOPAX had drawn down its forces to training and
police contingents in anticipation ofa final pull-out that
was envisaged for 2013. MICOPAX has since changed
its mandate, providing its newly deployed troops with
a mandate to aggressively defend their positions, and
Bangui in particular, and has halted plans to pull out of
the Central African Republic.

Following the N'Djamena decision and the decision
to launch peace talks in Libreville, I embarked on an
intensive diplomatic effort, together with my African
Union colleague, to engage with the parties, the
Government, the rebel groups, the political parties and
civil society members. I travelled to Brazzaville on two
occasions to consult with President Sassou Nguesso on
how he wanted to structure the peace talks in Libreville.
I offered the President the full technical support of the
United Nations, as well as our political advice. I also
briefed and consulted with the Cameroonian authorities
on options for resolving the conflict in the Central
African Republic.

These efforts were warmly welcomed, and a
coordination team was created in the Congolese
Foreign Ministry to manage the mediation efforts
of the Presidents. On my second trip to Libreville, I
was accompanied by mediation experts from the
United Nations standby mediation team - who have
remained with us - and by staff officers, as well as
the representative of the AU Commission. The United
Nations team helped to structure the mediation,
advised on the process, helped to draft a declaration of
principles and a draft ceasefire agreement, and helped
to prepare other analytical documents.

BINUCA worked closely with the ECCAS team
that was deployed to Bangui from 27 December to
7 January to prepare for the talks and to manage the
deployment of the ECCAS forces. We facilitated
their contacts with the rebels in the region, with the
Government, the opposition, political parties and civil
society. BINUCA was also requested to airlift rebel
groups from the Central African Republic province of
Bria, N'Djamena and Yaounde to Libreville. United
Nations staff officers were also requested to support
the ECCAS secretariat during the talks.

In doing all of this, I made it clear that ECCAS
was in the lead and that our role was to support and to
facilitate. The role played by the United Nations was
greatly appreciated. We are also expected to actively
participate in the follow-up mechanism that would be
established to implement any agreement that would
emanate from the Libreville talks. I will be happy
to announce later that some important agreements
have emanated from the talks. I understand that the
moderator intends to nominate a personal representative
to the Central African Republic, who would be based
in Bangui, to work with us and other partners in the
follow-up mechanism that would be established.

Contrary to the skepticism expressed and the
insistence of the rebel groups and the political
opposition that President Bozize' had lost all legitimacy
to remain in office and must be removed, the peace
talks commenced with all the parties at the table. The
regional leaders appeared determined not to allow a
rebel overrun of the Central African Republic - they
made that very clear in all their interventions - and to
prevent a forceful removal of a democratically elected
Government, but were equally hard on President
Bozize' for what they described as his lack of openness.
Still, the President, backed into a corner, was forced to
make a number of concessions and to make good on his
promise to establish a Government of national unity.

About an hour or so ago, the summit of ECCAS
Heads of State came to a close. In fact, we have just
now returned from the closing ceremony. After intense
negotiations, in which we were actively involved, and a
number of concessions made by various parties, three
agreements were signed.

The first is the declaration of principles to resolve
the political and security crisis in the Central African
Republic, which was signed by the Government, the
politico-military movements that have adhered to the
Libreville Peace Agreement, the Se'le'ka coalition and
the democratic opposition, as well as ECCAS and the
follow-up committee ofthe Libreville Peace Agreement.

The second is the ceasefire agreement, signed by
the Government and Seleka, and witnessed by ECCAS
and the follow-up committee. That agreement is to
come into force within 72 hours of signature.

The third is the political agreement on the
politico-security situation in the Central African
Republic, signed by representatives of the presidential
majority, the politico-military groups parties to the
Libreville Comprehensive Peace Agreement, the
democratic opposition and Seleka. This agreement
defines the modalities of a power -sharing and the
political arrangements.
In summary, the political agreement establishes
that President Bozize shall remain in power until the
end of his mandate in 2016. A Prime Minister will
be appointed from the opposition, with full powers
to run the Government for 12 months, renewable.
An inclusive Government of national unity will be
established and function for a period of 12 months,
renewable, and be tasked with specific responsibilities.
The Government of national unity will consist of the
presidential majority, the democratic opposition, the
politico-military groups that have signed the Libreville
Peace Agrement, the Seleka coalition and civil society.
The Government shall not be removed by the President
during the transitional period. The Government of
national unity will be headed by a Prime Minister who
will be the Head of Government and chosen from the
opposition.

The tasks that this Government will be expected
to carry out during the year-long period would be to
restore peace and security and to organize legislative
elections after an anticipated dissolution of the National
Assembly. It is expected that the National Assembly
will be dissolved one year into the game and that new
elections will be held.

The Government will also reorganize the
security forces and the territorial administration and
presumably also help expand Government authority to
a greater part of the country, reform the judicial system,
actively implement DDR and security sector reform
with the assistance of the international community
and undertake the reform of the economic and social
sectors. It is also envisaged, in this arrangement, that
neither the Prime Minister, the President nor members
of his Cabinet will be able to run in the next election.
Later, the Prime Minister, not the President, would be
eligible to take part in the next presidential election.

This agreement has just be concluded. President
Bozize, in his closing remarks, invited the opposition
and all the parties to return with him immediately to
Bangui so that this new Government can be put in place
tomorrow.

In my most recent briefing to the Council (see S/PV.6687) and in the report under consideration
I signalled a marked improvement in the security
situation in a large part of the Central African Republic,
following the successful conduct of disarmament in the
north-east and north-central regions, the beginning of
the reinsertion programme in those regions and the
repatriation of the Chadian rebel leader, Baba Ladde
and his men. It is instructive that the north-west,
even in all of this, has not been impacted by the rebel
overrun. The accession of the CPJP to the Libreville
Peace Agreement, on 25 August 2012, cleared the final
political hurdle to the successful launch of the DDR
process in the north-east. Tha was to have take place in
January 2013, and was to be facilitated, and will still be
facilitated, by funding for the reintegration programme
provided by the European Union and the World Bank.
We chose January because we needed to wait until the
end of the rainy season, as that part of the country is
not accessible from June to November or December
because of road conditions.

Why was this new wave of rebellion launched
precisely at the time that the DDR process was to
restart? It will be recalled that we have been reporting
on the dissent within the armed forces and deep
divisions among the political leadership, which were
partly engendered by rumours that the President
planned to change the Constitution to remain in power
beyond the end of his constitutional mandate in 2016.
The rise of active rebellion may not be unconnected
to the frustration of some who had nursed succession
ambitions. Besides, it is clear that the DDR process in the
north-east is unlikely to benefit all the fighting forces.
The region is vast and sparsely populated and most of
the rebel movements have within their ranks militia
groups from Chad and the Sudan. Any disarmament
effort in that region would require the cantonment of
those forces, in a region where there is practically no
Government presence, and the identification of who is
Central African or foreign would be difficult. Such an
exercise would only be successful through a regional
approach - and we were aware of that - that involves
the neighbours of the Central African Republic.

While we have been monitoring and reporting
on the increasing incidence of military activities by
different armed groups, including dissident groups of
the CPJP and deserters ofthe presidential guard, we did
not anticipate that an organized rebel assault on some
key locations would lead to such a quick overrun of half
of the country. The rebel success was more a factor, in
our view, of the failure of the national security forces
than of the capacity of the rebels. We are hopeful that
the agreements that were signed today in Libreville will
contain the immediate f lair-up, calm the situation in the
Central African Republic and enable us to recalibrate
the disarmament process. However, we believe that a
failure to go further to discuss the reasons for the lack of
implementation of previous agreements and to correct
those factors may lead to another meltdown a few years
down the line as a result of expectations frustrated
and not met. We were comforted by the statement by
the mediator to the effect that he remains engaged and
that the discussions would continue to look at those
fundamental issues.

Allow me to now turn to the issue of the Lord's
Resistance Army (LRA). During the period under
review, there were consistent reports of an increase in
LRA activity in the south-east region of the Central
African Republic. Up to the moment the report was
issued, 48 presumed LRA attacks had been carried
out, leading to 24 deaths and 85 abductions. There are
21,000 internally displaced persons and 2,400 refugees.
In its efforts to counter the LRA threat, the Government
has committed to deploy a battalion to fight the LRA,
with about 350 troops actually deployed at any given
time - the others will be rotated in and out - before
the upsurge in conflict in the north-east. Of course, the
upsurge there has completely detracted from that plan.

The coordination of monitoring activities has been
enhanced with BINUCA, the Government, the African
Union, the World Bank and the international LRA
working group, which we established here in Bangui.
The deployment of two consultants by BINUCA to the
LRA-affected area, funded by the World Bank, has also
greatly helped.

I would like to briefly say something about
the humanitarian conditions, because I had asked
our colleagues to send me the latest input on the
humanitarian situation. As of today, the humanitarian
conditions remain dire, as the displacement of the
population fleeing their homes into the bush continues.
That is why one of the provisions in the ceasefire
agreements, which calls for an immediate withdrawal
of the rebels from the cities, is particularly important,
as that will hopefully allow people to go back home.
We have registered incessant looting of the offices of
humanitarian organizations and stores. The World Food
Programme warehouse in Bria has been practically
emptied out, the United Nations offices, including
BINUCA offices in Bambari and Kaga-Bandoro have
also been affected, and the UNICEF office in Kaga-
Bandoro has also been looted by the rebels.

Humanitarian access has been constrained, and we
estimate that 800,000 people are living in the affected
areas and need emergency assistance as soon as we
are able to get it to them. The difficulty now is to help
create that space for us to get to them. Constrained
humanitarian access due to insecurity continues to be
a major challenge, and I was told that humanitarian
partners want us to underline to the parties - and I
have done so with my own engagement with them - the
importance of respect for international humanitarian
law and human rights law, including as regards
immediate humanitarian access, the protection of
children against recruitment into the armed forces and
protection against sexual and gender-based violence.
We made sure that those provisions are very clearly
underlined in the ceasefire agreement.

I am pleased to note that Ms. Zainab Bangura,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, will brief the Security
Council today. We were very happy to host her during
the fact-finding mission that she undertook to the
Central African Republic, and we have provided details
of her visit. BINUCA looks forward and stands ready
to work closely with her office and, of course, the entire
United Nations system in the Central African Republic
to implement the undertakings contained in the two
memorandums she signed during her trip to the country.

In conclusion, as dramatic as the events of the
past few weeks may have been, they have presented
emerging opportunities to get the partners to undertake
dialogue and to consult on how to pull the country back
from the brink. The Council may recall that many of
our reports have been replete with calls for dialogue.
However, those opportunities will be lost if advantage is
not taken of the opportunity to put in place an efficient
an efficient and effective Government that is capable
of addressing the many challenges that the country
faces. I have made that very clear in our consultations
with all the parties. It is not just about giving people
posts, but about ensuring that we have a Government
that really works. The follow up to the first Libreville
Agreement, as well as the inclusive political dialogue,
stalled only partly due to the lack of political will.
While that is indeed true, it is also true that the Central
African Republic has been an aid orphan. Many of
our core activities have remained underfunded. I have
in the past called for a clear investment in peace and
development to prevent the Central African Republic
from falling down a slippery slope. We may be on that
slippery slope now.

It is also clear that BINUCA and the United Nations
presences in the Central African Republic will have to
re-evaluate our priorities and capacities to enable us to
be more effective partners in the implementation of the
agreements that have been signed and as development
partners of the country. Plans for the implementation
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration must
be accompanied by robust political engagement on the
ground and within the region to help enhance State
authority and capacity. We need to engage more in
social cohesion and local mediation. We need to more
assertively push for the reform of the security sector
and to work with the Bretton Woods institutions to
cover post-conflict reconstruction and recovery efforts.

We intend to recommend that BINUCA lead a
strategic assessment to review our priorities and to
redefine our needs. The international community now
needs to engage more forcefully, both diplomatically
and financially, to pull the Central African Republic
back from the brink. Security is fundamental to peace
and development. The Central African Republic
requires a functional and effective army and security
forces. There is a need for a Government that can be
present in all parts of the country, with appropirate
capacities. BINUCA should be able to support those
efforts, and civilian capacities should be built. All that
will require international accompaniment and generous
funding. I am happy to report that we work very closely
on the ground with our partners, the United States
representative, the African Union, the European Union,
France and the African group of ambassadors.

The Secretary-General is paying close attention
to the situation in the Central African Republic and
has accorded us the same level of priority that he has
accorded to Syria, Somalia and others conflicts. I count
on the Council to continue to support these efforts, and
thank the members of the Council for the solidarity
they have shown, especially in the past few weeks, as
we have tried in grapple with the current crisis.

