Mrs. Ratsifandrihamanana (spoke in French):
Woman, by her very essence, is the source of life and
thus a source of peace. Woman, by her very nature, is
made of compassion, humanity and sensitivity. She
labours for peace. She gives birth in great pain, and she
deserves peace.

By providing us with a platform for discussion on
a topic that is close to the hearts of the African Union,
you, Mr. President, enjoy our full appreciation and
support. We are also grateful to all the other members
of the Council and all those who have defended peace
and security for women, by women and with women. I
pay special tribute to the very valuable contributions of
my two sisters present here - Rachel Mayanja and
Ines Alberdi.

With respect to peace and security for women, in
Africa, women are the first victims of war, conflict,
violence, rape, forced marriage, slavery and human
trafficking. The African Union is not indifferent and
has developed a significant number of political and
legal instruments on the protection and empowerment
of women. These efforts today benefit from improved
coordination for their effective implementation. The
African Union, inter alia, has been developing a project
on the rehabilitation of girl soldiers since December
2007, by focusing on the specific case of the countries
of the Great Lakes region.

This year, zero tolerance for cases of violence,
rape, sexism and abuse of women is the African
Union's watchword within the framework of its
strategic policy on gender, based on respect for human
dignity. Special focus is placed on sanctions against the
perpetrators of such acts. Among other initiatives, a
training manual was developed for African Union
peacekeepers, in order to raise their awareness
regarding human rights.

I turn next to peace and security by women. The
African Union is striving to strengthen the role of
women in peace processes, especially in countries in
conflict and those emerging from conflict. It has rightly
created an African Women's Committee on Peace and
Development, a very active advisory structure for
advocacy in the field of women's rights. It is also
preparing a conference planned for 2009 on the role of
women in post-conflict reconstruction and development.

With regard to peace and security with women,
lasting peace and security require the man-woman
tandem and the balanced contribution of all of society's
stakeholders. In the African Union, the Continental
Peace and Security Architecture, which has been
operational since 2004, is the foundation of all actions
in the field of peace and security. The current challenge
lies in mainstreaming the gender component in our
actions and in structures such as the Peace and Security
Council, the Panel of the Wise, the Continental Early
Warning System and the African Standby Force.

A memorandum of understanding between the
African Union and the regional mechanisms for
conflict prevention, management and resolution,
concluded in January 2008, will provide, inter alia, for
enhancing the coherence of actions for peace and
security on the continent. The African Union also
possesses a number of instruments, including the
Protocol to the African Charter on Human and Peoples'
Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa and the
Framework for Post-Conflict Reconstruction and
Development, adopted in 2006, which highlights the
gender aspect.

(spoke in English)

The African Union welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2008/622). It reiterates its support

for resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008) and calls
for their effective implementation in Africa by
mainstreaming gender in peace policies, programmes
and activities. The African Union also calls for the use
of internationally agreed principles, such as the Paris
Principles and guidelines, as the basis for interventions
in Africa, which should incorporate measures to prevent
sexual abuse and discrimination against women and to
promote their equal status in society.

The African Union also seeks to mobilize women
leaders to participate in peacekeeping operations at all
levels, in peace mediation and as special envoys. The
African Union seeks to work with the relevant United
Nations bodies on measures to address all forms of
violence against women perpetrated in various ways,
such as human trafficking, child labour, prostitution
and abuse.

We have been greatly honoured by the growing
contributions of women in recent peace processes in
Africa, such as those in Mozambique, Angola, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Sierra Leone as
well as in the ongoing efforts for lasting peace and
security in the Sudan and Somalia. I should like,
however, to underscore the need to strengthen the
involvement of women in such processes.

Indeed, the international community's efforts on
the implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000) and
1820 (2008) have brought about a deeper
understanding of the centrality of the gender
perspective in the maintenance of international peace
and security.

The specific challenges of women in armed
conflict situations, sexual slavery and abuse are now
well known and cannot be tolerated any longer. We
must take concrete actions to ensure that the
knowledge gained thus far is fully integrated into the
framework of cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

