Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): Austria fully endorses
the statements of the European Union and the Human
Security Network. Allow me to elaborate a few points.

In 2000, Security Council resolution 1325 (2000)
called for women's equal participation and full
involvement in all efforts for the maintenance and
promotion of peace and security. Little progress has
been made since then. Women remain marginalized in
the process of peacebuilding and post-conflict
reconstruction.

At the 2005 world summit a few weeks ago, our
heads of States and Governments reaffirmed their
commitment to the full and effective implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and to the Beijing Declaration
and Platform for Action.

Austria firmly believes that women must be able
to participate fully in peace negotiations, peace
agreements and the development of a stable society.
Now, the creation of the Peacebuilding Commission
provides us with a unique opportunity to ensure the
involvement of women in United Nations-led
peacebuilding processes. Let us use this opportunity by
integrating a gender perspective in both the mandate
and the structure of that new United Nations body. That
concept is contained in the letter addressed by women
foreign ministers - including Austrian Foreign
Minister Ursula Plassnik - to the Secretary-General
and the President of the General Assembly.

The Peacebuilding Commission should ensure, as
part of its mandate, that women and women's groups
are represented in peace processes, thus enabling them
to play a meaningful role. Concerning the structure of
the Peacebuilding Commission, Member States and
organizations involved in its work should bear in mind
the desirability of gender balance in all meetings of the
Peacebuilding Commission. Austria believes that a
gender advisor should participate in all meetings of the
Peacebuilding Commission in its country-specific
configurations in accordance with paragraph 100 of the
summit outcome document.

Moreover, special representatives, special envoys
and other emissaries involved in peace negotiations
should have firm guidelines to enhance women's
participation in peace processes and transitional
structures. Experience shows that a determined policy
on the part of the international community in the
immediate post-conflict phase in favour of women's
participation, inter alia by ensuring that post-conflict
legislation gives them a right to participate, can
increase the long-term participation of women in
political processes in their countries.

As an example, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, which is currently taking
action to enhance implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), has, with its handbook on monitoring women's
participation, already achieved important results
regarding the role of women in elections as voters,
candidates and officials.

Austria welcomes the United Nations system-
wide action plan for the implementation of resolution
1325 (2005) proposed by the Secretary-General in his
report. We now have a window of opportunity, with the
United Nations reform process. It is up to each of us -
Member States and the United Nations - to seize this
opportunity and enhance women's participation in
conflict prevention, peacemaking, peacebuilding and
post-conflict reconstruction.

