Mr. Akbaruddin (India): Ithank you, Mr. President,
for providing us an opportunity to express our views on
what are extraordinarily disturbing issues.

We share the Secretary-General's distress, so
passionately articulated in his oral briefing and in his
report (A/70/729) to the General Assembly. I will be
very brief. As a country that has provided peacekeepers
to 48 of the 68 United Nations peacekeeping
operations, and as a country with the largest cumulative
number of troops being contributed to the United
Nations, we are deeply disturbed by this increasing
phenomenon. We have contributed our troops because
we see peacekeeping as the shining example of the
international community's commitment to collective
security. Therefore, to us, it is very worrisome that the
protectors are now being widely perceived as predators.

We in India have a policy of zero tolerance. In
our approach, there is no hesitation or reluctance. It
would be immoral if it had been so. Aberrations have
taken place in United Nations peacekeeping, and they
are abhorrent and repugnant. That is particularly so
given the confidence that has been reposed in the Blue
Helmets and in the Organization.

The malaise that we are confronting is not one
merely of enforcing compliance, but of setting norms.
What we are venturing into is putting emphasis on
values of universal application. The approach and
the cures that have been mentioned require a format
that is more broad-based and more inclusive than
merely addressing the issue as a matter of peace and
security. What we need to do is to send a message that
we are together in addressing it, not a feeling that we
are addressing it as a command issue. Regaining our
collective reputation as exemplars of universal idealism
is too important a matter to be confined to a few. It
requires the participation of all, not the least the troop-
contributing countries. That may be difficult. And it
may be frustrating and slow. But as the medium is the
message, then the message we ought to convey can be
only through a more inclusive format. Anything less
will, in our view, not convey the same message.

We will continue to support the effort to implement
the United Nations zero-tolerance policy. We will
continue to work with other Member States in this
endeavour, and the Secretary-General will have our full
cooperation in the effort.

