Mr. Thomson (Fiji): At the outset, the Fiji
delegation wishes to salute you personally,
Mr. President, and your Government, and to convey
our gratitude for your convening this important event.
At the same time, we thank the Secretary-General for
his most comprehensive report (S/2010/498).

Fiji associates itself with the statement to be
delivered this evening by the representative of Papua
New Guinea on behalf of the Pacific small island
developing States (SIDS).

For the purposes of this event, we first wish to
comment on the pronouncement, highlighted in the
Secretary-General's report, that in the 10 years since
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), its overall
implementation has been slow. Undoubtedly, progress
has been made, but much work remains to be done in
implementing the resolution and assessing the progress
of individual countries.

On a more positive note, we welcome with
appreciation the initiative of the Security Council and
the work carried out by the Secretary-General in
establishing the set of indicators, which will not only
track the implementation of the resolution, but also
serve as a guide for all Member States in their efforts
to achieve its goals. We believe that such universal
indicators can be used to full advantage only if national
frameworks and policies are put in place to implement
the various thematic areas of the resolution. This belief
is based on the fact that the slow rates of overall
implementation of the resolution derive from the
difficulties faced by many countries in linking and
incorporating its relevant principles into practical
Government policies.

It is for this reason that the Pacific SIDs are of
the view that the first important step for us to take is to
develop a regional framework that incorporates the
principles of the resolution, with clear policy
guidelines on its application to our unique national and
regional characteristics. We believe that this will
provide the impetus to accelerate the implementation
process in the Pacific.

Consequently, the Fiji delegation reiterates the
Pacific SIDs' request for the United Nations to support
the convening of a regional high-level meeting to
develop and adopt a regional action plan on women
and peace and security in order to support
implementation of the resolution at the regional and
country levels. In addition, with the establishment of
the Asia-Pacific Regional Advisory Group on Women,
Peace and Security by the Economic and Social
Commission for Asia and the Pacific, we are hopeful
that it will also play an active role in providing the
expertise and advice the region requires.

Fiji is fully committed to the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). This commitment is
exemplified in our continuing efforts to meet the goals
set out in the four broad thematic areas of the United
Nations System-wide Action Plan. In the area of
participation, our policies strongly encourage the
recruitment of women in our security forces and their
deployment, with equal opportunities, to peacekeeping
missions. We support the global effort to increase the
participation of women in United Nations police
peacekeeping roles to 20 per cent by 2014. We
encourage the provision of pre- and post-deployment
training of our peacekeepers and welcome further
assistance and expertise in this aspect of training.

Furthermore, we support the participation and
representation of women at all levels of decision-
making. In our consultations and interactions with civil
society and the public, we are fortunate to have
femLINKpacific, a Fiji-based non-governmental
organization that specifically deals with resolution
1325 (2000). We also welcome the appointment of its
coordinator to the United Nations Civil Society
Advisory Group on Women, Peace and Security. The
Fiji Government promotes the enhancement of efforts
to collaborate with the expertise and experience of
women's civil society, with a View to enhancing the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) at the
national level.

We consider this event to be an important
opportunity to take stock of achievements, best
practices and lessons learned. It is an important step
towards achieving the intent of the resolution. To this
end, we look forward to further exchanges of best
practices from other countries and regions on
resolution 1325 (2000) and call for the support of the
United Nations system in assisting Fiji and Pacific
SIDS in the implementation of that resolution.

