Ms. Burgstaller (Sweden): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the Nordic countries, namely,
Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden.

I would like to begin by thanking the Indian
presidency for organizing this debate. I also thank the
Deputy Secretary-General, Under-Secretary-General
Michelle Bachelet and Under-Secretary-General Herve
Ladsous for their valuable remarks at the beginning of
this meeting. I also wish to express special thanks for
the valuable insights of Ms. Bineta Diop on behalf of
civil society.

The full implementation of all Security Council
resolutions on women and peace and security is a
priority for the Nordic countries. The issues at stake
are central to the core mandate of the Security Council,
namely, the maintenance of peace and security.

We welcome the presidential statement adopted by
the Council on 31 October (S/PRST/2012/23). We are
also grateful for the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2012/732) and fully support its recommendations.

The Nordic countries echo the concern about the
lack of implementation, as shown by the information
collected and analyzed while using the indicators. We
call for renewed urgency and greater consistency in
implementing the resolutions on women and peace and
security, all of which were unanimously adopted and
are thus binding and relevant to all Member States.

Not providing protection for women in conflict
constitutes serious neglect; not tapping the resources of
women in building peace is seriously wasteful.

The Nordic countries support civil society, in
particular women's organizations that tirelessly work to
prevent and solve conflicts, build peace and stability and
defend human rights, while often putting themselves at
great personal risk in difficult conditions. Their work
contributes to more sustainable and legitimate peace.
They deserve our full political and financial support,
as well as physical protection.

The Nordic countries work with numerous civil
society organizations from many different countries
and we plan to do so in the future. The implementation
and review of our own national action plans has greatly
benefitted from our close cooperation with civil society.
This year, through a series of meetings with women's
rights advocates from several countries on the Council's
agenda, the Security Council has had an opportunity,
before renewing mission mandates, to hear directly
from women who are working for peace and security
in their respective countries. We are encouraged by
the steps taken by the Council in its country-specific
work to address the concerns brought forward by those
women advocates.

The incorporation of a gender perspective in peace
and security efforts is not only necessary, but effective
and strategically opportune. Not only women, but
whole families and communities will benefit; as will
national institutions, the overall security situation
and the rule of law, which is strengthened through,
for example, measures to address impunity for human
rights violations, including sexual violence.

Women and men must have full and equal
opportunity to participate in all political processes
linked to conflict resolution and the promotion of
stability, peace and security. That includes conflict
prevention, mediation processes at all levels, including
contact groups and informal consultations, as well as
formal negotiation, peace-agreement implementation
mechanisms and donor conferences. It is of particular
importance to support women's full and effective
participation in post-conflict constitutional and
electoral processes, including through special measures
and security arrangements. Special attention should
also be paid during times of mission drawdown.

That of course requires everyone to do their part.
As committed Member States, we commit to supporting
women's active participation and to fostering a gender
perspective in all our peace and security efforts.
That includes promoting women's inclusion in peace
processes and ensuring that personnel and troops
are adequately trained to take women's rights and
perspectives fully into account.

We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(A/66/811) on strengthening the role of mediation in
the peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict prevention
and resolution and its annex I, entitled "Guidance for
Effective Mediation". Both the report and the Guidance
highlight the importance of the role of women. We
call on the Secretary-General to nominate women as
chief mediators and special envoys and as members of
mediation teams.

Let me finish by commending UN-Women for
its crucial work in leading and coordinating the
United Nations system work on women and peace and
security. We commend the work of the former Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Margot Wallstrom. We also
welcome the appointment of her successor, Ms. Zainab
Hawa Bangura, and look forward to working closely
with her, as well as with the United Nations Action
Against Sexual Violence in Conflict.

In conclusion, 12 years after the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), we, the Nordic countries,
renew our commitment to the equal right of women
to determine the peaceful future of their societies.
We recognize that full and effective participation of
women and men alike enhances the legitimacy of peace
processes, as well as the prospect for a durable and
lasting peace. We have a collective responsibility to
translate that awareness into further actions.

