Mr. Nkosi (South Africa): On behalf of my
delegation, let me take this opportunity to thank
you, Mr. President, for your personal conviction and
outstanding leadership on this very pertinent subject.
At the same time, I wish to thank the Permanent
Mission of Germany for submitting the resolution on
this matter (resolution 2467 (2019)), the adoption of
which we welcome here in the Chamber.

South Africa's vote in support of the German text
on sexual violence in conflict is a strong indication
of its unwavering commitment to a zero tolerance for
sexual violence in conflict settings. That is despite
the Council's inability to advance this agenda in a
meaningful way that would protect the victims of
sexual violence and restore their dignity.

We engaged constructively in this process in order

to advance a principled position focusing on three
areas - the critical link between illicit trade in natural
resources and sexual violence, which continues to fuel
that heinous crime; accountability for the perpetrators;
and a survivor-centred approach. In that regard, South
Africa advocated the provision of comprehensive
essential services, in particular for sexual and
reproductive health, given the importance of those
services to the lives of victims of sexual violence. In
that regard, we wish to reiterate our belief that everyone
has the right to have access to health-care services,
including reproductive health care.

It is regrettable that the adopted text does not
take into consideration the gains made over the past
number of years in this very important area. We are
disappointed that the adopted text has departed from
the initial objective and intention expressed by the
penholder, which was aimed at providing maximum
protection for the victims of sexual violence and
ensuring full accountability for the perpetrators of such
grave and inhumane violations.

It is unfortunate that the Council could not uphold
its own consensus reached in previous resolutions in
the area of sexual and reproductive health. On the one
hand, the text calls for a survivor-centred approach,
while on the other hand it is denying survivors essential
sexual and reproductive health services when they need
them most. The Council is therefore telling survivors
of sexual violence in conflict that consensus is more
important than their needs.

We will continue nevertheless to advocate a
survivor-centred approach in the discussions on sexual
violence in conflict in order to ensure that the Council
remains committed to its obligations, including - and
most importantly - the protection of Victims.

