Mr. Diamonds (Namibia): Namibia welcomes
the Security Council's decision to discuss the issue of
women and peace and security as a standing agenda
item. We are encouraged by the overwhelming support
for today's open debate.

We align ourselves with the statement delivered by
the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security.

We would also like to thank the briefers for their
helpful input in our debate.

Progress on the issue of women and peace and
security is encouraging, with the Security Council
having adopted eight related resolutions. However, the
global study carried out in 2015 to mark the fifteenth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) revealed that
global implementation of the resolution was occurring
at a snail's pace.

Reports by the Secretary-General on the work
of the Organization have acknowledged the women
and peace and security agenda and reported on its
implementation. Regional organizations are doing
their part, with the African Union having appointed
Ms. Bineta Diop as the Special Envoy on Women,
Peace and Security. We commend her work in raising
the profile ofthe issue ofwomen and peace and security
globally. By August 2018, 76 countries had adopted and
were implementing national action plans on women
and peace and security. Those plans provide a valuable
tool for States to implement their commitments to the
women and peace and security agenda and to detail
their actions and obligations under the eight relevant
Security Council resolutions.

We recognize that many Member States are
implementing resolution 1325 (2000) without national
action plans. We encourage them to set up such plans
so as to ensure structured implementation, follow-up
and evaluation of resolution 1325 (2000), including the
recruitment of women into security forces, educating
women on how to conduct negotiations and training
them to assist women affected by violence in either
conflict or non-conflict situations.

Progress can be seen in the general inclusion of the
women and peace and security agenda in multilateral
forums. As Chair of the Group of Seven (G-7), Canada
included a gender-related theme in the proceedings of
the G-7 Summit held in June. When Germany recently
requested Namibia to partner with it on these issues, it
was the first time that Namibia had been approached by
a G-7 country to do so within the G-7 framework. We
encourage further partnerships of that nature.

Resolution 1325 (2000) sets out to achieve the
inclusion of women at the negotiation table. Accordingly,
access to quality conflict-sensitive education for women
and girls, especially in conflict settings, is essential if
women's participation in peacebuilding processes is to
be ensured.

Earlier this year, the Security Council unanimously
adopted a landmark resolution on protecting children
in armed conflict (resolution 2427 (2018)). We call
on parties to armed conflicts to immediately cease
unlawful attacks and threats of attack against schools,
students and teachers and to refrain from actions that
impede girls' and women's access to education.

In line with resolution 1325 (2000), the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations requested troop-
contributing countries to deploy greater numbers of
female officers so as to reach the 15 per cent target of
women participation in peacekeeping missions by the
end of December. As of July, Namibia was at 13.3 per
cent in its deployment of female officers, with only two
females remaining to be deployed for 2018 to meet the
15 per cent target.

Namibia is a founding member of the Women,
Peace and Security Focal Points Network. The Focal
Points Network enables closer coordination among
Member States and facilitates annual sharing and
exchanges of best practices and lessons learned. The
Network welcomes the participation of Member States,
UN-Women and civil society organizations. We believe
that the Network is critical to the operationalization of
the women and peace and security agenda.

Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
announce that, on 10 and 11 April 2019, Namibia
will host, in Windhoek , the third capital-based Focal
Points Network Meeting. The theme for the event
will be "Women, Peace and Security: Towards Full
Participation". All Member States and members of civil
society are invited to participate.

