Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I would
like to thank Foreign Minister Maas and Germany
for convening today's open debate. The high-level
participation in this discussion on sexual violence in
conflict, as well as the late hour due to the very long
list of speakers today, is a testament to the global
importance of this issue to many Member States.

We all agree that sexual violence in conflict is a
particularly heinous and vicious crime, as well as a
threat to international peace and security. We have
heard, however, how some armed groups continue
to use sexual-based violence as a tactic of war, with
no fear of consequence, in order to subjugate and
humiliate their opponents or to retain recruits. As the
Council has heard, Da'esh in our region is particularly
notorious for these actions and, despite its recent loss
of territories and defeats, not a single member of that
terrorist group has been held accountable for the sexual
violence it has inflicted, as poignantly described in
Nadia Murad's brave testimony this morning. Similarly,
it is unconscionable that no one has been punished for
the sexual Violence directed against the Rohingya. As
the Secretary-General mentioned earlier, women and
girls were gang-raped in their homes before they were
forced to flee Myanmar. Ending impunity is indeed an
essential deterrent against future crimes.

Beyond the trauma that conflict-related sexual
Violence causes, it contributes to the dangerous cycle of
insecurity and inequality that impedes the participation
of survivors - predominantly women - in peace
processes. Via resolution 1325 (2000), United Nations
Member States have committed to increasing the
participation of women across the peace-development
continuum, recognizing the crucial role of women in
preventing conflict and sustaining peace. I would like
to share what my country, the United Arab Emirates, is
doing to try and help in its small way.

Earlier this year, the United Arab Emirates and UN-
Women launched a military and peacekeeping training
programme for Arab women at the women's military
academy in the United Arab Emirates. The programme
aims to build the capacity of women in our region and
will strengthen the pipeline of women for deployment
to peacekeeping operations in the future. The first
cohort of women, 134 in total, recently completed the
training, and we will expand the programme to include
women trainees from countries beyond the Arab region
as part of our global commitment.

Meaningful participation in peace processes
requires an enabling and encouraging environment for
survivors to tell their stories, as we have heard today. The
majority of those survivors are women and girls. Few
of them come forward because of the perceived shame,
fear of rejection and lack of resources, among a number
of other factors. To address these challenges, we need a
survivor-centred approach, as recognized by resolution
2467 (2019), adopted today. We need to raise awareness
of the stigma surrounding rape and offer resources and
support in a way that empowers survivors. The United
Arab Emirates has financially supported the excellent
work of the Special Representative's Team of Experts
on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict
and we encourage other Member States to do the same.
In our efforts to further the women and peace and
security agenda in the next phase of implementation
beyond 2020, I am pleased to announce that the United
Arab Emirates will shortly launch a panel series,
with the Georgetown Institute for Women, Peace and
Security, to examine the important role of women
across the social, political, and economic components
of post-conflict reconstruction and to elevate research
and better inform data-driven policy and practice. It is a
critically underresearched area of the women and peace
and security agenda and we look forward to sharing the
outcomes of the project with Member States.

Ending conflict-related sexual violence, as
envisioned by resolution 1820 (2008), is a daunting task
but a moral imperative for us all. Member States should
implement the Secretary-General's recommendations
on conflict-related sexual Violence, and we believe
they should prioritize the following three actions.
First, we should focus on documenting and tracking
cases of conflict-related sexual violence. Without
evidence and data, it is impossible to measure the
effectiveness of our efforts to eradicate sexual violence
and hold individuals accountable. Secondly, we should
support national efforts to address impunity in States
currently in conflict or in a reconstruction phase, as
Amal Clooney called for this morning. That includes
strengthening the capacity of national investigative and
judicial bodies, as well as supporting and increasing
the number of women protection advisers in United
Nations missions. Thirdly, we should mainstream
gender equality and women's empowerment in our
foreign policy and development programming. The
United Arab Emirates has set a goal of ensuring that
all of its foreign assistance programming includes a
gender component by 2021, and we encourage others to
establish similarly ambitious targets.

