Mr. Skinner-Klee (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful to the Ghanian presidency
for convening this annual meeting on women and peace
and security, which helps us further the work of
achieving the full and complete implementation of
Council resolution 1325 (2000).

This debate also allows us to consider the full
application of that important resolution. We are
convinced of the essential role played by women in the
prevention and settlement of conflicts, in the
promotion of justice and of reconciliation, support for
disarmament and demobilization and the reconstruction
of national institutions - all essential pillars for
peacebuilding.

We are also aware that women and girls suffer
from effects more devastating than those already
entailed by the conflict itself, especially owing to
increasingly widespread gender-based violence, rapes,
sexual exploitation, sexual slavery, undesired
pregnancy as a result of these heinous acts and the
stigma that those women and girls suffer in their own
communities. Those are all acts that affect their
psychological and emotional stability and even put
their lives at risk.

We shall not rest until we see that in the field, the
specific needs of women and girls are receiving the
special priority attention they deserve, with the active
cooperation of the United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes that work on this issue and Member
States, with the support of non-governmental
organizations and civil society groups. In that context,
we want to recognize the important work being done
by the United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM) and the Office of the Special Advisor on
Gender Issues and Advancement of Women. We urge
them to continue their contribution in view of the
major challenges that lie ahead.

In that connection, we support the creation of
effective institutions that ensure the promotion of the
rights of women and girls and the capacity-building
necessary to their inclusion, on an equal basis, in peace
process negotiations and at the decision-making level

in peacebuilding. The mainstreaming of the gender
perspective in national and international plans is vital
to achieving integral, balanced peacekeeping
operations.

We thank the Secretary-General for his annual
report (S/2007/567), which serves as a basis for this
dialogue, because it continues to update, monitor and
revise the previous Action Plan, for 2005-2007, and for
his presentation of the new, updated Action Plan, for
2008-2009, on the advances and obstacles in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

Our delegation believes that the changes made in
the Action Plan for 2008-2009 are positive. The
re-shaping of the concept and the focus on five
thematic areas - of which prevention, participation
and protection are transversal, interrelated with other
thematic resolutions; relief and recovery emphasize the
concrete needs of women and children; and the
normative thematic area - will make it possible to
broaden the scope of efforts to apply resolution 1325
(2000) and will help States to meet their commitments
regarding equality between women and men and the
empowerment of women in the field of peace and
security.

As a country that has emerged from conflict, we
are aware of the importance of receiving help in
preparing national plans and strategies to coordinate
policies, because that is the most important time to
promote the application of resolution 1325 (2000).

At the national level, the Ministry of Defence of
Guatemala confirmed its commitment to the principle
of gender equality through a process that harmoniously
integrates women into military life. That has been
accomplished with respect for human rights and in the
context of the national and international legal order.

Since women were accepted in the military in
1996, there has been a yearly increase in the
participation of Guatemalan women in the army, as
cadets in the Polytechnic School. Currently, there are
59 women officers in active duty, which represents
4 per cent of the total. There are 604 women
specialists, which represents 18 per cent. There are 42
women who are commissioned officers, representing
almost 16 per cent. In summary, there are 955 women
in active duty, amounting to 7.17 per cent of the total.
Those woman have grades ranging from second
lieutenant to colonel, in areas such as army
administration, military police, war material,
transmissions, navy and air force, and are all graduates
of the Polytechnic School.

In peacekeeping operations, we have maintained
an average of 11 per cent of female personnel in
contingents in the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) and the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), including military
observers. We will continue to broaden our policy of
including female personnel in each contingent.
Currently, in the military police unit in our
MINUSTAH contingent, a woman commands the
operational and investigation unit.

Allow me to refer to gender advisers, who should
be included in peacekeeping operations in the field.
Currently, 11 out of 18 active missions in the
07-55817

Department of Peacekeeping Operations include that
post. That is encouraging, but it is not enough. We
believe that every mission should incorporate that post.

Peacekeeping operations, in addition, can help
provide information on the violent acts committed
against women and girls. The basic thing is to know
exactly what is happening on the ground. As Minister
Koenders of the Netherlands rightly pointed out, it is
essential not to remain silent and not to allow silence
to become impunity.

