Mr. Perovic' (Montenegro): I would like to thank
the Spanish presidency for organizing this timely open
debate on trafficking in persons in conflict situations and
for preparing an informative concept note (S/2016/1031, annex). Allow me to thank you, Mr. President, for the
manner in which you have conducted the affairs of
the Council. I also thank the briefers for their input in
the debate.

Montenegro welcomes the adoption today of
resolution 2331 (2016) and associates itself with the
statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union. I would like, however, to make some additional
remarks in my national capacity.

We have seen how ever country is affected by
trafficking, whether it is a country of origin, transit
or destination for the victims. The latest report of
the Secretary-General (S/2016/949) and the briefings
have painted a disturbing picture. We welcome the
Secretary-General's report, which notes the linkages
between conflict situations and trafficking in persons.
It is unfortunate that women and children account for
the vast majority of trafficking victims, which also
include boys and men, as human traffickers target
the most fragile, exhausted, desperate and vulnerable
societal groups.

Human trafficking in conflict is a growing
concern, particularly in the context of the current
migration crisis but also due to the increased use of
social media platforms and new technologies to recruit
victims. Institutionalized sexual slavery and the forced
recruitment of children as suicide bombers and the
victims of organ traffickers have become horrifying
spirals within this negative phenomenon. The use
of slave by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
and Boko Haram is not the problem of only certain
countries. Like today's conflicts, the problem has
become international and no region is immune.

It is unacceptable that this crime has become one of
the fastest-growing activities of transnational criminal
organizations, with widespread violations of human
rights that are not condemned while those responsible
are not held accountable, despite the efforts ofthe United
Nations and other international bodies, Governments
and civil society groups. We have to enforce the law
and pursue the criminals who exploit victims in a brutal
manner. This is a global threat that can be found in
many conflict areas and, as such, requires a response at
the national, regional and international levels.

In Montenegro, our focus has been on prevention
and education, criminalizing trafficking in persons,
disrupting criminal and terrorist networks and
addressing related crimes. In that regard, we are
working closely with the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime and in partnership with the
International Organization for Migration, UNICEF and
the European Union.

We support international peace operations as an
efficient and dynamic instrument to promote respect
for human rights and build sustainable institutions in
conflict areas. In today's conflicts, United Nations
peacekeeping operations are more involved in protecting
civilians than monitoring ceasefires. That is why peace
operations should use new technologies to strengthen
their intelligence-gathering capacities. In preparing
Montenegrin soldiers to take part in peace operations
and activities, the Government office for the fight
against trafficking in human beings, in cooperation with
the Ministry of Defence, conducts regular trainings on
the fight against human trafficking.

Montenegro strongly condemns cases of sexual
exploitation in United Nations peacekeeping operations,
as such criminal activity and abuse have no place
under any circumstance in the United Nations flagship
activity. It is our collective duty to ensure thorough
investigations into those cases, as well as accountability
and justice for the victims. Zero tolerance and zero
impunity must prevail as our only options in order to
avoid tarnishing the credibility of the United Nations
once again.

Counter-trafficking activities should start at the
outset of any crisis and before evidence of trafficking
and exploitation appears. Increased regional and
international cooperation and sharing of information
are also vital to block criminals from finding
safe haven. In that regard, Montenegro has signed
cooperation protocols with neighbouring countries
Albania and Kosovo.

At the international level, the Security Council's
role is highly important, including through the sanctions
regime against the Islamic State and Al-Qaida. As
the Secretary-General has made clear, the trafficking
of women and girls and their sexual enslavement
are a source of financing for the Islamic State and a
recruitment tool. Every Member State needs to play its
part in updating the list of designated individuals and
entities that are engaged in trafficking activities.

All victims should see an end to their suffering.
They deserve protection and support, as well as justice
and opportunity. We therefore need to redouble our
efforts at all levels and address that pressing issue in a
way that will provide real results on the ground.

