Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): I would like
to thank the United Kingdom leadership for convening
this meeting. I appreciate the presence here today of
the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth
Affairs, Mr. William Hague. I would also like to express
my sincere appreciation to the Secretary-General and
his Special Representative, Ms. Bangura, for their
informative briefings, as well as to Ms. Angelina Jolie
and Ms. Jane Adong Anywar for their powerful and
moving statements.

Rape, sexual slavery and other forms of sexual
violence in conflict are strictly prohibited under
international humanitarian law and can constitute
war crimes, crimes against humanity and constitutive
acts of genocide. Ensuring accountability for those
responsible is crucial to eradicating conflict-related
sexual Violence. However, it is a disturbing historical
fact that, in many cases, national and international
justice systems have failed to bring perpetrators of such
sexual violence to justice. Against that backdrop, my
delegation would like to commend the leadership of the
United Kingdom in addressing the issue.

We welcome the declaration of the Group of Eight
(G-8) on preventing sexual violence in conflict, adopted
in April under the United Kingdom presidency of the
G-8. As the declaration recognizes, sexual Violence
represents one of the most serious forms of violation
or abuse of international humanitarian law and human
rights law, and there should be no safe haven for
perpetrators of such crimes.

1 would like to underline the following three points.
First, we underscore the importance of accountability at
the national level. States bear the primary responsibility
to protect women and girls from conflict-related sexual
violence and bring those responsible to justice. In that
regard, my delegation welcomes the stress placed by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on national ownership, leadership and responsibility in
combating sexual violence as one of her priorities. All
States should include the full range of acts of sexual
violence in national penal legislation and ensure the
investigation and prosecution of those responsible for
violations through proper legal and policy frameworks.

We believe that political will is crucial. The lack of
adequate national capacity to investigate and prosecute
sexual violence may also be one of the main challenges
to ensuring accountability for crimes of conflict-related
sexual violence. We welcome the fact that the Team of
Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict has been focusing its efforts on strengthening
the capacity of national rule of law and justice actors.

The long-term prevention of sexual violence is
equally important. We also commend UN-Women for
its increasing contribution to the promotion of gender
equality and women's political, social and economic
empowerment, as well as their participation in every
sector of society.

Secondly, we would like to stress the significance
of the international justice mechanism. When national
justice systems are unwilling or unable to fulfil their
responsibilities, international mechanisms, including
the International Criminal Court (ICC), as well as
the ad hoc and mixed tribunals, should play the role
of ensuring accountability. The fact that charges of
sexual violence are included in nearly every case
of investigation and prosecution indicates both the
prevalence of conflict-related sexual violence and the
significant role of the ICC in holding perpetrators of
those crimes accountable.

The Security Council should play its role by referring
serious sexual violence to the ICC and by adopting
targeted and graduated measures of relevant sanctions
committees. Furthermore, the Security Council needs
to systematically reflect sexual violence in conflict
in all relevant country resolutions and ensure the
inclusion of specific language on addressing conflict-
related sexual violence, including the accelerated and
extended deployment of women's protection advisers in
all peacekeeping and political mission mandates.

Thirdly, fighting impunity and ensuring
accountability should be given critical importance in
ceasefire and post-conflict reconstruction processes.
Ending impunity is crucial ifa society recovering from
conflict is to come to terms with the past and to prevent
future abuses. Sexual violence should be included in
the definition of acts prohibited by ceasefires and in
provisions for ceasefire monitoring. Furthermore,
crimes of sexual violence need to be excluded from
amnesty provisions in the context of conflict resolution
processes.

In that context, my delegation would like to stress
that delivering justice for victims of sexual violence
is not just about holding perpetrators accountable, but
also ensures reparative justice. We fully support the
recommendation in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/ 149) that reparations awarded through judicial
or administrative mechanisms be established and made
available to victims of sexual violence in conflict.

My delegation welcomes resolution 2106 (2013)
adopted today, and commends the leadership of the
United States delegation for effectively steering the
negotiation process. We believe that the resolution will
mark another significant milestone in our difficult but
Victorious journey towards ending sexual Violence and
the culture of impunity the world over.

Before closing, my delegation would like to
commend the excellent work of Special Representative
Bangura and extend its full support to her in fulfilling
her mandate. The Republic of Korea will remain
committed to fighting conflict-related sexual violence,
in cooperation with the international community.

