Mr. Kamau (Kenya): Kenya commends France for
convening today's important open debate.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women and Peace
and Security.

We also welcome the 2017 report (S/2017/861) of
the Secretary-General and its recognition of the fact
that the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda contributes to the achievement of
the Sustainable Development Goals and facilitates
sustained peace and the prevention of conflict.

On 8 March 2016, International Women's Day, the
Government launched Kenya's national action plan
for the implementation of Security Council resolution
1325 (2000). Aptly entitled Kuhusisha wanawake ni
kudumisha amani, which means "involving women to
sustain peace," it has been very well received in our
country. The plan draws on relevant national, regional
and international instruments to address the intersecting
areas related to security, peacebuilding and conflict
resolution, as well as to ending impunity for violence
against women, promoting gender mainstreaming and
protecting human rights.

With regard to participation and promotion, Kenya
is ranked first in the world among troop-contributing
countries in its deployment of military female officers.
I am happy to report that today our deployment of
women in peace support operations stands at 19 per
cent, surpassing the United Nations-recommended
percentage of 15 per cent. Efforts aimed at increasing
female professional advancement and improving
gender balance in our military leadership have led to
many women being promoted to the ranks of brigadier
or colonel.

Kenya's gender policy guides the integration of
gender and resolution 1325 (2000) into all our military
operations. It is behind our project for engendering
peacebuilding activities in Kenya, which is now the
basis for our establishment of a national conflict early-
warning and early-response system. On prevention,
the Government has established an international peace
support training centre for enhancing the capacity of
both women and men as meaningful participants in
peacebuilding, negotiations and preventive diplomacy
at the community and national levels. On protection,
we have launched a country-wide campaign,
Jitokeze - which means "speak out" - aimed at
breaking the silence on gender-based violence.

Among my Government's efforts to promote
countrywide sensitization to the gender dimensions
of peace and security are its formulation of a 2016 bill
on access to public information and a review of our
national information and communications technology
policy. Our establishment of a toll-free number,
the Gender Helpline, and revitalization of various
platforms for peace dialogue and online reporting have
increased the number of users accessing early-warning
and early-response systems throughout the country.
The Government's efforts have been complemented
by various non-State actors, including the media. A
network of 150 journalists are permanently engaged
with the Kenya national action plan to build media
capacity on gender- and conflict-sensitive reporting
through training workshops.

With regard to the relief and recovery pillar, the
Government's efforts include establishing, first,
clear guidelines on referral pathways within medical
facilities for sexual and gender-based violence
survivors; secondly, national guidelines and standard
operating procedures for the psychosocial management
of survivors and forensic management; and thirdly,
gender-based violence recovery centres within health
facilities, which help to create access to justice for
survivors, with noted improvements in the investigation
and prosecution of gender-based violence cases.

In September 2016, the President launched a
national strategyfor countering violent extremism
that incorporates women into its county security and
intelligence committees, which are also linked to local
peace committees and community policing initiatives.

The rapidly changing nature of terrorism and the
limited research available on it is a major concern for us.
Kenya's priorities for future action in these areas include
climate change and its impact on women and peace and
security; disarmament for nomadic populations where
illicit small arms proliferate; the increased insecurity
that results from regional instability and growing
border conflicts; the radicalization of young people; the
emerging forms and dynamics of cyber- and technology-
led crime, including electronic violence against women,
which is becoming more prevalent; the mobilization of
funding for women and peace and security initiatives,
including closing the gap between research and
practice. We are also working on establishing a strong
monitoring system for the Kenya's national action plan
for women and peace and security and, lastly, we are
setting up a central depository for peace and security
data that can be accessed by everyone.

In conclusion, Kenya remains committed to
implementing the women and peace and security
agenda in full measure. We support the reinforcement
of the United Nations Trust Fund in support of actions
to eliminate violence against women and the United
Nations Fund for Gender Equality. We continue to
call for further support and increased funding for
UN-Women.

