Mr. Serrano: I thank you, Mr. President, for
giving me the floor to speak on behalf of the European
Union. The candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the countries
of the Stabilization and Association Process and
potential candidates Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia, as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align
themselves with this declaration.

The Secretary-General's progress report on
peacebuilding (S/2010/386) and his report on women's
participation in peacebuilding (S/2010/466) show the
important steps which have been taken to improve the
international community's response in post-conflict
situations in order to achieve enduring peace. We are
here today to consider how to pursue further progress.

Predictable and timely funding aligned with
national peacebuilding priorities, swift deployment of
high-quality civilian experts to help build national
capacity and strong partnerships with international
financial institutions and regional players represent
some of the areas where much more remains to be
done.

The United Nations cannot achieve these goals in
isolation. The European Union is more than ready to
lend its assistance and work hand in hand with the
United Nations system. The deployment of
international civilian expertise is one of the areas
where the European Union is already strongly
involved. Over the past 10 years, civilian aspects of
European security and defence policy and crisis
management have seen exponential growth. The
European Union now has nine civilian missions with
around 2,000 seconded personnel currently deployed in
eight different theatres of operations. We look forward
to the outcome of the review of international civilian
capacities early next year and, in particular, to seeing
how we can broaden and deepen the pool of experts
involving the global South.

In a similar way, common assessments, planning
and strategies are also of paramount importance. Since
early 2007, the European Commission, the United
Nations and the World Bank have worked together in
setting up a platform for cooperation on post-crisis
needs assessments for natural disasters and conflict
scenarios. This tripartite partnership has played a key
role in recent difficult scenarios, such as those in Haiti
and Pakistan.
The European Union warmly welcomes the report
of the Secretary-General on women's participation in
peacebuilding (S/2010/466). As we mark this month
the tenth anniversary of Security Council resolution
1325 (2000), we need to redouble efforts to increase
women's participation at all stages and all levels of
peace processes and peacebuilding efforts. The three
pillars of lasting peace - economic recovery, social
cohesion and political legitimacy - cannot be
achieved without the active engagement of women.
According to United Nations figures, nevertheless,
women accounted for less than 6 per cent of formal
peace negotiators. The action plan presented in the
Secretary-General's report offers useful and practical
suggestions on how to address the present challenges,
and we look forward to these being taken forward in an
appropriate manner.

The European Union has developed a
comprehensive strategy to implement Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000), and the European Union
Council adopted in July this year indicators to measure
progress in achieving our commitments. The
comprehensive strategy is complemented by the action
plan to promote gender equality in development
cooperation, which, inter alia, commits the European
Union to promoting capacity-building in fragile States
for the implementation of Security Council resolutions
1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008).

Let me turn now to the final step of the 2010
review of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). From
the outset, the European Union has been a strong
supporter of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture and has worked tirelessly within the
country-specific configurations. During the past
months, the European Union has also been strongly
committed to making the 2010 PBC review a success.
The European Union would like to commend the
extraordinary work done by the three co-facilitators,
and we look forward to the adoption of an appropriate
resolution at a later date.

The most recent inclusion of Liberia on the
PBC's agenda, with a sizeable peacekeeping mission in
the country, is a good opportunity to implement several
of the recommendations contained in the report
(S/2010/393, annex). It is also a good case to prove the
PBC's added value by fostering earlier linkages and
coherence between peacekeeping and peacebuilding
activities. In this regard, we welcome the Council's
resolve to enhance interaction with the PBC and to
make greater use of its advisory role, as reaffirmed in
the draft presidential statement to be adopted today.

The European Union also firmly believes that the
Peacebuilding Commission has an important role in
helping to champion the two reports brought to our
attention today and, in doing so, to enhance the
effectiveness of United Nation's peacebuilding efforts.

In conclusion, the latest reports of the Secretary-
General, on peacebuilding and on the participation of
women in peacebuilding, as well as the review of the
Peacebuilding Commission, have all generated
renewed political momentum to collectively engage in
improving assistance to countries emerging from
conflict.

Our duty now is to make a difference on the
ground. The European Union is ready to assume its
responsibilities and to assist the United Nations in
these tasks.

