Mr. Majoor (Netherlands): I would like to fully
align myself with the statements made by the
representative of Finland on behalf of the European
Union and the representative of Slovenia on behalf of
the Human Security Network.

Like others, I also would like to extend my
thanks to you, Sir, for marking the sixth anniversary of
the adoption by the Council of resolution 1325 (2000)
on women, peace and security by holding an open
debate on the role of women in the consolidation of
peace. This subject deserves our full attention and,
even more important, concrete action.

If we are really serious about promoting peace
and security, we cannot afford to miss a single
opportunity to promote women's rights and increase
women's participation in peace processes, and it is
crucially important at this point in time that women's
rights organizations, such as those whose
representatives spoke before me, are speaking out.
They are calling on their leaders and on us, the
international community, to fully include them in the
peace processes.

War and conflict affect women, men, girls and
boys in different ways. Shocking reports about the
widespread occurrence of gender-based violence are
almost daily news. In many resolutions and meetings,
we condemn this kind of violence, yet it remains
increasingly used as an instrument to terrorize civilian
populations.

We must turn the tide and take action now.
Gender-based violence is not an inevitable
consequence of war and conflict. Resolution 1325
(2000) highlighted the importance of women's
protection needs, and several United Nations agencies,

such as the United Nations Development Programme,
are active in reforming the security and justice sectors
to ensure that those institutions are responsive to those
needs. In that regard, I also should mention the
adoption of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court as a groundbreaking development in
the criminalization of sexual and gender-based
violence.

What steps has the Netherlands taken to
transform resolution 1325 (2000) into action? First, we
have established an inter-ministerial task force on
women in situations of conflict and peacekeeping to
ensure an integrated approach towards the issue. The
Ministries of Social Affairs and Employment, Defence,
the Interior and Foreign Affairs have brought relevant
actors together and raised awareness in support of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). As a result,
the Ministry of Defence has set up a gender force to
ensure that a gender perspective is embedded in the
planning and implementation of peace support
operations.

In addition, the Netherlands supports both
national and international non-governmental
organizations and United Nations agencies in
advancing the involvement of women in maintaining
and promoting sustainable peace. Since 1997, the
Government of the Netherlands has, for example,
provided support for efforts to ensure the effective
involvement of Sudanese women in the peace
processes in the Sudan.

As a follow up to resolution 1325 (2000), the
Netherlands, together with other partners, has provided
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO)
with funds for gender expertise to integrate a gender
perspective into peacekeeping operations. In the course
of this year, together with Norway and the United
Kingdom, we undertook a joint donor review of
DPKO's implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
Our joint findings in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Kosovo, Sierra Leone and Liberia were
presented to Under-Secretary-General Guehenno this
week. They include numerous good practices, as well
as lessons learned and remaining gaps and challenges.
The overall conclusion was that significant progress
towards the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
has been made and that the gender advisers are doing
an excellent job. However, commitment and
accountability are still limited, especially at the senior
and middle-management levels. The Netherlands
welcomes the initiative of Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno to issue a clear policy directive to his staff
in that regard.

Another challenge is coordination between the
security, humanitarian and development pillars on the
ground, which is often insufficient, sometimes
resulting in overlap in work. Moreover, gender is still
not always considered to be an integrated and essential
cross-cutting issue in peacekeeping and peacebuilding
efforts. Those gaps need to be addressed by DPKO,
which is in the lead; by the Peacebuilding Commission,
which will have to play an important role in that
respect; by the United Nations country teams on the
ground; and by us all in order to guarantee successful
implementation. The overall availability of adequate
financial and human resources is key to more
sustainable progress and success in the future.

In conclusion, I would like to underline the
continued crucial role of the Security Council,
including the need for it systematically to integrate
resolution 1325 (2000) into its work. It starts by
including the gender perspective and a specific,
explicit reference to resolution 1325 (2000) in all its
resolutions that establish or extend mandates for
peacekeeping missions and monitoring their
implementation in its subsequent work.

