Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): The recent report
of the Secretary-General (S/2014/181) once again
illustrates the alarming increase in sexual violence,
which is often used as a method of warfare. With the
adoption of resolution 2106 (2013), the Council has
provided us with important tools to end that abominable
practice. Nevertheless, we continue to face a major
gap in the actual implementation of those measures.
A lack of prioritization, capacity, adequate training,
services - and ultimately resources - are the main
reasons.

Liechtenstein was therefore pleased to be among the
144 States that endorsed the Declaration of Commitment
to End Sexual Violence in Conflict initiated by the
United Kingdom. The Declaration sends a clear message
that we all must redouble our efforts in that regard. We
sincerely hope that the upcoming summit in London in
June will help bring about increased impetus and better
implementation.

A major barrier to the effective protection of
women from sexual violence is the continuing culture of
impunity. We welcome the focus of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) on the fight against
sexual violence in her work. Crimes of sexual violence
play a role in nearly every case under investigation.
That speaks both to the startling prevalence of conflict-
related sexual Violence and to the ICC's commitment to
holding perpetrators of those crimes accountable.

Nevertheless, justice for survivors of conflict-
related sexual violence continues to be the exception
to the rule, and holding perpetrators accountable has
proven to be exceedingly difficult. Generally speaking,
it is crucial that evidence be professionally collected at
the earliest possible stage. That process may be assisted,
inter alia, by the Justice Rapid Response initiative.

Survivors of sexual violence also only rarely receive
reparations. In that context, we particularly commend
the work of the ICC Trust Fund for Victims, which
adopts a gender perspective across all its activities and
assists survivors of sexual and gender-based violence.

Protection issues are crucial, but we need the same
level of emphasis on participation. The Secretary-
General reports that sexual violence is also specifically
being used as a method of curtailing the participation of
women and girls in public life. That is a very worrisome
development. Indeed, the voices of survivors, especially
of sexual violence, are rarely heard. We must do more
to ensure that survivors and their representatives and
organizations are at the table when we work towards
ending sexual violence. We are convinced that such an
approach will have a strong impact on the willingness
of the relevant actors to bring about change.

