Mrs. Zappia (Italy): I would like to commend
South Africa for having convened this important
debate. We truly appreciate your presence here today,
Madam President. I also wish to thank the briefers for
their insightful contributions.

Italy aligns itself with the statement to made by
the representative of the European Union and with the
statement to be made by the representative of Canada
on behalf of 56 Member States.

As we approach the twentieth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), we must redouble
our efforts to fully implement the women and peace and
security agenda, in order to fill the remaining important
gaps that were clearly highlighted by the Secretary-
General in his latest report (S/2019/800). Italy strongly
supports the Secretary-General's call to action to the
United Nations system, the Security Council and all
Member States as well as the proposals he made.

We are implementing our third national action plan
on women, peace and security, which was elaborated with
the active engagement of civil society organizations,
academia, non-governmental organizations, the private
sector and trades unions, and received public funding
from the Italian Parliament. The plan envisages a
monitoring and evaluation mechanism and periodic
reports on the state of its implementation. A similar
approach is inspiring the drafting of our fourth national
action plan.

In keeping with our commitment to empower
women as vital agents for peace, fostering women's
participation in mediation was one of the major
priorities of our recent term on the Security Council
and our presidency of the Group of Seven. In October
2017, we launched the Mediterranean Women
Mediators Network. We are very proud of the results
it has achieved so far: new members have joined; the
first two local antennae, in Cyprus and Turkey, were
established; training, capacity-building and networking
opportunities were provided; and fruitful synergies
with the United Nations, the African Union, other
regional networks and various Member States were
developed. The latest achievement is the creation
of the Global Alliance of Regional Women Mediator
Networks, which was successfully launched in New
York on 26 September.

The next step is the organization in Rome of two
events. On 3 and 4 December, in collaboration with
UN-Women, we are hosting, at the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, an international seminar on strengthening
women's participation in peace processes, to consider
the roles and responsibilities of Member States.
Indeed, alongside the United Nations, Member
States have a responsibility to advance the full and
effective participation of women in mediation and
peace processes, and we would like to encourage
further commitments to that end. The next day, in the
framework of the Mediterranean Dialogues, we will
hold the third session of the Women's Forum.

The protection and promotion of women's
rights and the fight against all forms of violence and
discrimination against women remain key priorities of
Italy's international action. Promoting gender equality
and women's empowerment also means fighting all
forms of Violence against women, and vice versa.
Indeed, we attach the greatest importance to the fight
against all forms of gender-based violence, in particular
harmful practices such as female genital mutilation and
child, early and forced marriages. We support several
humanitarian initiatives aimed at preventing gender-
based violence and protecting Victims of abuse, as well
as providing victims with education, livelihoods and
other tools that allow them to become agents of change
and build resilient communities. We also support with
determination the important role of women human
rights defenders in promoting and advocating the
realization of all human rights.

Italy is stepping up its efforts to increase the
number of female peacekeepers. Over the past few
years, our Ministry of Defence has incorporated gender
perspective into its policies and training curricula,
appointed a Gender Advisor and established a Joint
Council on Gender Perspectives. In order to increase
the female presence within the armed forces and the
Carabinieri, the Ministry of Defence has commissioned
sociological research to identify the appeal of armed
forces to young Italian females. This report should
identify possible ways to increase the number of recruits.

Italy is devoting an increasing number of resources
to implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda. The funds allocated to our national action
plan help civil society and academia to realize many
interesting projects. Beyond the annual core contribution
to UN-Women, this year the Italian Development
Cooperation Agency provided financial support to the
UN-Women flagship Women's Peace and Humanitarian
Fund established in 2014. This multi-donor global
facility is designed to support women's and men's equal
leadership and participation in shaping peace, security
and humanitarian action. The Italian Development
Cooperation Agency also provided ad hoc in-kind
contribution through our Junior Professional Officers
programme, under which we deployed a women, peace
and security analyst to UN-Women in Kinshasa.

Italy has been a staunch supporter of the Arms
Trade Treaty (ATT) since the first stages of its
negotiation. The ATT is the first arms-regulation
treaty to recognize the link between conventional arms
transfers and gender-based Violence, particularly with
regard to the disproportionate impact of small arms and
light weapons on women and girls. We strongly support
the provision contained in article 7.4 as a concrete way
to address the potential risk of serious acts of gender-
based violence that could be generated by arms transfer.

Let me conclude by reaffirming that Italy will
continue to play its part in matching commitments with
actions, thereby making full implementation of the
entire women and peace and security agenda a reality.

