Mr. Castaneda Solares (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the German presidency of the
Security Council for having convened this open debate
and for having circulated the concept note (S/2018/293, annex) that will serve as a basis for our discussions.
We also appreciate the briefings delivered on this very
important topic.

The full and significant participation by female
military and police personnel and civilian experts in
United Nations peacekeeping operations contributes to
the greater credibility and more effective implementation
of the mandates handed down by the Security Council.
It also represents an important message about the
progress made towards achieving gender equality
and the empowerment of women in host-country
communities, encouraging their participation in the
process of the establishment and building of peace.

Resolution 1325 (2000) set a precedent in
recognizing the crucial role of women in the promotion
of international peace and security. As Member States,
our focus in the context of this resolution should not be
limited only to setting a baseline in reference points
but also include practical ways of promoting women's
participation in conflict prevention, peace negotiations
and post-conflict recovery.

Experience has shown that women have made
invaluable contributions to peacebuilding, particularly
in the recovery of local economies, post-conflict
planning and the restoration of governance. For these
reasons, we believe in the need to continue joining
forces within the United Nations system to continue
giving fresh impetus to resolution 1325 (2000),
particularly as regards prevention, under the concept
of sustaining peace, based on those resolutions that
reaffirm the peacebuilding architecture.

It is clear that if women are not involved in the
drawing up of national policies, societies will not
move forward. It is therefore necessary to eliminate
inequalities and ensure that woman's abilities are no
longer excluded. In this regard, we reiterate the fact
that actions to ensure the empowerment of women are
instruments that promote the development of States
and that public policies must therefore ensure the
mainstreaming of a gender parity and equality focus.
As a United Nations troop-contributing country,
Guatemala is honoured to participate by deploying
troops in areas of armed conflict. Over recent years,
we have deployed more than 300 women officers to
posts that include military observers, staff officers,
assistant staff officers, logistical support staff, platoon
commanders, doctors, interpreters, office workers
and investigation specialists, which attests to the
commitment and the potential of Guatemalan women to
seek peaceful and comprehensive solutions to conflicts.
Many of these women promoted projects that had a
positive impact in Haiti and in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

To that crucial end, Guatemala, through its
regional peacekeeping operations training centre, has
provided training that focuses on protection, special
needs and human rights, specifically regarding women
and children in conflict and post-conflict situations.
We have also promoted the participation of women in
international courses offered by the Organization.

To conclude, I would like to underscore the fact
that Guatemala is closing the inequality gap in the firm
belief that women contribute added value to this noble
task. We therefore will continue to promote actions
through our national action plan on resolution 1325
(2000), with the goal of increasing and strengthening
women's participation, particularly in key and
decision-making posts. It is a source of pride and an
honour for Guatemala to contribute women staff; we
will continue to do so because we are a country that is
committed to peace.

