Ms. Boniver (Italy): It is a great honour for me to
be here today to discuss the effect of conflicts on
women and girls and the key role that they can play in
the peace process.

Let me say first that Italy fully aligns itself with
the statement made by the United Kingdom on behalf
of European Union.

Women are the chosen victims of modern wars
par excellence. Most of today's conflicts are essentially
internal conflicts, leading to political and economic
chaos, human insecurity and terrible suffering for the
entire civilian population. Uncontrolled groups of
criminals thrive in such an environment. Those
elements, as a whole, make women especially
vulnerable. Indeed, in a growing number of cases,
atrocities against women are used as a warfare tactic.

These, of course, are very well-known facts, and
the United Nations has taken steps to fight such
patterns, starting with Security Council resolution 1325
(2000) and as recently as the latest report of the
Secretary-General on women and peace and security,
published on 10 October (S/2005/636). The report's
action plan defines 12 areas of action, which are
illustrated in the lengthy annex to the report, indicating
strategies, concrete steps, players and timetables.

Moreover, the declaration and action plan of the
twenty-third special session of the General Assembly,
on the theme "Women 2000: gender equality,
development and peace for the twenty-first century"
(General Assembly resolutions S-23/2 and S-23/3),
recognize that men and women are affected differently
by armed conflict, making a gender approach
absolutely essential when enforcing international
human rights and international humanitarian law. A
historic breakthrough was the definition in the Statute
of the International Criminal Court of sexual violence
against women as a deliberate instrument of war, to be
treated, in particularly heinous cases, as a crime
against humanity.

Definitely, women have a major role to play in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. As a consequence, a
more systematic approach to gender mainstreaming
should be taken in those processes. Practical guidelines
based on lessons learned should be developed that
indicate how to foster the full, active involvement of
women in the rebuilding of institutions and of society.
States should be urged to compile national rosters of
potential women candidates for positions in the areas
of conflict-prevention and post-conflict rehabilitation.

In Darfur, in the Sudan, gender-based violence,
such as mass rape and mutilation, is a common means
used to uproot rural communities. In Chad, near the
Sudanese border, women and girls fleeing the violence
in Darfur risk being assaulted and raped by civilians or
militia members while going about everyday tasks such
as collecting water, fuel or animal feed. Let there be no
mistake: these acts are crimes against humanity and
should be classified as such. We thus strongly appeal to
the Government of the Sudan to do everything in its
power to resolve the humanitarian crisis in Darfur.

The end of hostilities does not always translate
into the end of violence. Women in post-conflict
situations have reported rapes, sexual assaults and
trafficking. The survivors often suffer from
psychological trauma, permanent physical injury and
long-term health risks, especially HIV/AIDS. As we all
have very sadly learned, the face of HIV/AIDS is a
woman's face. Moreover, hundreds of thousands of
women still in refugee camps face serious threats to
their safety or are forcefully prevented from
participating in political activity.

I now wish to pay tribute to Aung San Suu Kyi,
leader of Burma's pro-democracy movement and Nobel
Peace Prize laureate. This week marks the tenth
anniversary of her nearly total isolation under house
arrest. Her only crime, after winning the 1990 national
elections, is having worked to establish democracy in
her country, free her people and promote civil and
political rights. Her immediate release is of paramount
importance to restore a positive climate for national
reconciliation.

Women are not just the victims of armed
conflicts. They are also combatants, leaders,
negotiators, peacemakers, peacekeepers and activists.
Denying these women their basic human rights is thus
also a major obstacle to the reconstruction process.
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) formally
acknowledges their crucial role in the prevention,
management and resolution of conflicts at the national,
regional and international levels.

The potential of women in the reconstruction
phase is remarkably clear, for example, in Iraq. Women
there have fought for decades to gain their rights to
vote, to work, to dress and to be educated as they
choose. What they need now are assurances that they
will not be excluded from the process of
democratization to which they have contributed so
much and have so much to contribute. This is why Italy
has just started a very ambitious training programme
for Iraqi women professionals.

The experience of the European Union shows the
crucial importance of involving female personnel in the
whole peace process. The increased presence of women
in the civilian, military and police components of
peacekeeping in the former Yugoslavia and in
Afghanistan, for example, has greatly improved
relations with local communities and has facilitated
communications with the most vulnerable groups,
namely, women and children.

My personal experience suggests that a more
proactive role for women in emergency situations can
be better achieved when we take a comprehensive
approach. This is what I have witnessed personally in
Afghanistan, where Italy, as members know, is the lead
country for the reform of the justice system, and where
we pay special attention to projects and activities that
safeguard the basic rights of women.

Perhaps our greatest challenge is to ensure that all
the main legal and judicial programmes promote
gender mainstreaming and a gender perspective,
actually implementing the approach that emerged from
the United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM) Conference on Gender Justice in Post-
Conflict Situations. That is a goal we strive to achieve
by working closely with the Ministry of Women's
Affairs in Afghanistan, the Afghan Independent
Human Rights Commission and associations of Afghan
women professionals. We are also defining a strategy
to establish legal aid centres to allow women to
exercise their basic rights. To ensure Afghan ownership
of the process, the Legal Department of the Ministry
for Women's Affairs - which has been strengthened
through capacity-building activities - has been asked
to play a fundamental role.

Last but not least, women need to participate
fully in post-war elections, which are a fundamental
stage in the reconstruction phase. Women must
therefore be able to take part in them on an equal
footing and be legally empowered to both vote and
stand for election.

Here, too, the Afghan experience is enlightening.

During two consecutive elections - the 2004
presidential elections and the recent parliamentary
elections - the women of Afghanistan manifested

their political awareness by turning out in
overwhelming numbers at the polls and exercising a
right that they had never known before. In so doing,
they broke with tribal customs - which kept women at
home while only men participated in politics - and
wholeheartedly embraced the opportunity to be directly
involved in the making of their democratic State.

In closing, I cannot emphasize enough the strong
link that exists between any peace process and the
granting of full human rights - civil, political and
economic rights - to women. The Secretary-General's
report is an example of the ongoing progress in the
field. Italy fully endorses it and will continue to
support national representatives, members of civil
society and all the international stakeholders working
in crisis-stricken areas today, who ultimately are
working, as we all are, to improve the lives of women.

