Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I would first like to thank Mrs. Naledi Pandor,
Minister for International Relations and Cooperation
of the Republic of South Africa, and Ms. Michelle
Mfintefering, Minister of State at the Federal Foreign
Office of the Federal Republic of Germany, for
honouring us with their presence at this important
debate. We would also like to extend a warm welcome
to Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director
of UN-Women, Ms. Bineta Diop, Special Envoy on
Women, Peace and Security of the African Union (AU),
Ms. Lina Ekomo, former Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Central African Republic, on behalf of FemWise
Africa and the African Women Leaders Network, and
Ms. Alaa Salah, civil-society activist and community
leader. I thank them all for their informative briefings.

We applaud South Africa's initiative with regard
to resolution 2493 (2019), on women, peace and
security, which we have just adopted, as it is crucial
to the advancement of the implementation of this
important agenda.

Equatorial Guinea acknowledges the importance of
gender equality and actively promotes the participation
ofwomen in all sectors. However, we note with concern
the Secretary-General's latest reports on women and
peace and security (S/2019/800) and on conflict-
related sexual violence (S/2019/280). As the speakers'
accounts have illustrated, despite the achievements that
have been registered, there is still much to be done to
ensure the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda. In that regard, we support the
Secretary-General's new strategy for achieving gender
parity among uniformed personnel in peace operations
by 2020, and we encourage continued support for
efforts to implement it.

As has been acknowledged many times in this
Chamber, we all agree with the initiative to improve
the quality and scope of the Security Council's work
in situations of armed conflict. Under the presidency
of Equatorial Guinea in February, the Council
unanimously approved resolution 2457 (2019) on
silencing the guns in Africa by 2020. The spirit of that
resolution is broadly reflected in the goal of gender
parity, in the objectives of the resolution we have just
adopted and in resolution 2467 (2019), adopted in
April under the leadership of Germany and intended
to promote the prevention and elimination of conflict-
related sexual violence. In that perspective, we reiterate
the importance of strengthening the relevant training
guidelines issued prior to and during peacekeeping
operations to ensure the effectiveness of missions
and the protection of civilians, especially the most
vulnerable, from any abuse and its consequences.

In that connection, we recognize the impact that
armed conflicts have on society's most vulnerable
members, typically women and girls, who, despite
often being the victims of horrible acts, have repeatedly
demonstrated their ability to contribute, to peace and
security efforts and to peacebuilding and prevention
at every level. That is why we recognize United
Nations efforts to support those crucial groupings
and enhance their Visibility, and to make clear the
direct relationship between gender equality, resilience
and conflict prevention. In that regard, we want to
highlight the high-level visit to Afghanistan led by
Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed and the
joint trips with the AU to South Sudan, the Sahel, the
Democratic Republic ofthe Congo, the Niger and Chad,
and the visit to Cameroon in April this year. They serve
to highlight the efforts of States to combat impunity,
ensure accountability and achieve gender equality,
while always respecting State sovereignty.

The Council has recognized the linkages between
inequality, gender discrimination and conflict-related
sexual violence, on the one hand, and Violent extremism
and terrorism, on the other. In our View, the equality
required to tackle the root causes of conflicts and
their increasing complexity goes well beyond gender
equality. It also encompasses and reflects the need to
ensure equality among States and the right of all States
to sustainable development. For that reason, I would
like to acknowledge the commitment and dedication
to mainstreaming this agenda that have been shown by
the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and
Security and the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
We also want to encourage the strategic initiatives
under the framework of cooperation agreement with
the African Union Commission on preventing and
responding to sexual violence in conflict in Africa,
which are bolstered by the support of UN-Women, the
African Women Leaders Network and FemWise-Africa.

Since Africa is the continent with the most
peacekeeping missions, it needs the cooperation of the
international community to ensure the implementation
of Security Council resolutions, especially those
relating to an agenda as important as women and peace
and security. That cooperation will be particularly
important for the adoption of the draft resolution on
financing peacekeeping operations in Africa that is
pending before the Council and which the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea hopes to see adopted before the end
of the year. Enhanced cooperation between the Security
Council and the African Peace and Security Architecture
of the African Union, which in turn strengthens
subregional initiatives for the implementation of
Council resolutions aimed at advancing the women
and peace and security agenda, among other things, is
an example of the kind of alliance that should receive
continued and more predictable support.

I would like to take this opportunity, as Equatorial
Guinea's membership of the Council draws to a close,
to thank Council members for their leadership and
commitment to the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda. In 2020 we will celebrate
the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), the tenth anniversary of the founding of
UN-Women, the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action, and the seventy-
fifth anniversary of the establishment of the United
Nations. In that regard, we urge Council members to
continue working together to fully mainstream the
role of women in conflict resolution, peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and sustainable development.

