Mr. Sow (Guinea) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, first of all, I would like to tell you how
much my delegation appreciates your organizing this
meeting and the competent manner in which you have
been leading the work of the Council this month. I
would also like to thank Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno and
Mesdames Rachel Mayanja and Noeleen Heyzer for
their dedication to the cause of women and peace and
security, as well as for the useful information and
relevant analyses they have given us.

My delegation viewed with keen interest this
morning the UNIFEM. documentary, which underlines
the relevance of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000). We would like to express our gratitude to
Mesdames Sweeta Nori, Helene Dandi, Elsie-
Bernadette Onubogu and Mr. Anders Johnsson for the
wealth of experience they have been so kind as to bring
to our attention.

Resolution 1325 (2000) raises not only the
problem of armed conflict's impact on women and girls
and the role of women and girls in conflict prevention
and resolution, but also their contribution to
peacebuilding, as well as the commitment of various
actors in the international community to shoulder their
respective responsibilities in the implementation of the
resolution.

My country greatly appreciates the attention
given to the resolution and the efforts under way by
various actors in the international community for its
effective implementation. We believe that the
organization of today's meeting proceeds from the
determination and willingness of the Security Council
to continue to shoulder its responsibilities in this
regard. During the consideration of this item on 25 July
2002, my delegation pointed out, inter alia, that as part
of the responsibility incumbent on the various actors in
the implementation of the resolution, each body of the
United Nations system should clearly identify the areas
in which it could make its contribution and
subsequently find areas of complementarity with the
other bodies.

Today, as we thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2005/636), we note with interest the
development of a system-wide plan of action for the
United Nations to implement resolution 1325 (2000),
thanks to the work of the Inter-Agency Task Force on
Women, Peace and Security, in partnership with other
actors. We welcome the identification of the 12 areas
of action and the suggested approaches in the
individual and collective responsibility of various
bodies of the United Nations system. We feel that the
action plan requires a more in-depth consideration in
order to allow for a better understanding of the various
responsibilities mentioned therein.

Until we reach that point, my delegation supports
the objectives and the timetables set out in the report,
especially the periodic evaluation by intergovernmental
bodies and inter-agency organs of the efforts of the
United Nations system regarding the action plan. We
emphasize the importance of the United Nations Chief
Executives Board for Coordination, the Executive
Committee on Peace and Security, the Executive
Committee on Humanitarian Affairs and the United
Nations Development Group in strengthening their
collaboration so as to allow the inter-institutional organ
to carry out its work successfully.

We are of the view that intergovernmental
bodies - among others, the Security Council, the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and the Commission on the Status of Women - and
the competent expert bodies should continue to play a
crucial role in monitoring and following up the
responsibilities of United Nations bodies. When the
Peacebuilding Commission enters into force, it should
also be involved in this exercise. Furthermore, my
delegation emphasizes the importance of sending to the
Security Council useful information on the
implementation of the resolution, so as to correct the
gaps noted in the report.

In adopting the outcome document at the world
summit, held in New York from 14 to 16 September,
world leaders at the highest level recognized gender
equality and the promotion of women, emphasizing the
importance of women's role in conflict prevention and
settlement, as well as in peacebuilding, and reaffirmed
their commitment to the effective and full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

To this end, my delegation appreciates the
interest that the various actors in the international
community continue to give to the resolution,
especially on this fifth anniversary of its adoption. We
welcome the fact that the United Nations system has
undertaken a planning effort that is as broad as it is
complex, encompassing all the areas of activity
covered in the resolution. We hope that, as already
mentioned in the document, the strategies and activities
included in the action plan might allow for an
improvement in the contributions that the United
Nations system will make to enhancing the activity of
women in areas of conflict.

Furthermore, while the implementation of the
action plan is incumbent first and foremost upon the
United Nations bodies, it goes without saying that
cooperation with the other actors, especially the
Member States, non-governmental organizations and
civil society, is absolutely necessary for the effective
implementation of the resolution.

While appreciating the methodological approach
and accountability of the United Nations bodies, my
delegation hopes that the periods for review of the
action plan will enable us to consider a global strategy
for the implementation of the resolution, taking into
account the comparative advantages of all the actors
involved. In that connection, my country, the Republic
of Guinea - with its experience in crisis management
in the West African subregion, with its desire to
involve Guinean women and with the support of the
network of women in the Mano River Union in the
prevention and resolution of conflicts and in
peacebuilding - will continue to give its support to
collective efforts.

In conclusion, I would like to indicate that we
subscribe to the Secretary-General's conclusions and
recommendations (S/2005/636) and we encourage the
Security Council and the international community to
work tirelessly for the effective implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).

