Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the outset, we would like to express our
gratitude for the convening of today's meeting. We
thank Secretary-General Antenio Guterres for his
assessment of progress in the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda. We listened
with interest to the briefing by Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-
Ngcuka, Executive Director of UN-Women, on the
Secretariat's contribution to enhancing the role of
women in preventing and settling armed conflicts, and
the remaining challenges in that area, as well as to what
the invited speakers had to say about their work on
the ground.

Today's discussion confirms the relevance of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), adopted almost
two decades ago. A very important part of the Council's
work in implementing that resolution is enhancing the
role and contribution of women in peace processes and
their protection from the violence they continue to face
in situations of armed conflict. It is chiefly women who
are the victims of sexual violence, which is often used
as a tactic of war. We are outraged by cases in which
women are used as a kind of human commodity to raise
funds for terrorist and criminal activities. We call on
the specialized agencies of the United Nations system
to coordinate more closely with the Security Council in
order to stamp out abhorrent practices such as sexual
violence and human trafficking in armed conflict.

We believe it is vital to avoid duplication in the
work of the various organs of the Organization and to
focus on situations that present an unquestionable threat
to international peace and security, in accordance with
the prerogatives of the Security Council. It is important
to remember that the General Assembly, the Human
Rights Council and the Peacebuilding Commission are
also part of the efforts to advance the role of women,
protect their rights and ensure gender equality.

The Russian Federation calls for concentrating on
specific measures in the interests of women in armed
conflict. That particularly has to do with developing
national action plans that should be specific to
particular situations of armed conflict, which makes for
instruments that are useful and effective instruments
and not just another paper pronouncement. The adoption
of such plans on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), especially when they are simply intended to
meet reporting requirements and tick boxes, cannot
serve as a criterion for assessing countries' policies on
improving the position of women.

If the existing problems in this area are to be
effectively resolved, women themselves have to be
effectively involved. We are grateful to the Secretary-
General in that regard for his continued attention
to the problems of expanding women's meaningful
participation and involvement of women in peacekeeping
operations, peace negotiations and political processes
in general. Russia is a stalwart partner of the United
Nations in the business of preparing peacekeepers,
including women, in certified training centres, and
we are actively involved in that cooperation through
the All-Russia Peacekeeping Training Centre of our
Ministry for Foreign Affairs in Domodedovo, which
also trains foreign specialists.

Today we supported the adoption of resolution 2493
(2019), prepared by South Africa, in our firm belief in
the importance of protecting and promoting the rights
of women in situations of armed conflict. However, we
feel obliged to point out that the resolution contains
a number of provisions that go beyond the Security
Council's mandate. It is overloaded with issues relating
to the protection and promotion of human rights, which
the General Assembly and the Human Rights Council
already deal with successfully and effectively. We urge
the Security Council to adhere strictly to its mandate,
and we do not support attempts to justify its interference
in matters that are part of the remit of other organs.

In conclusion, we also feel obliged to share our
assessment of the first years of the activity of the Informal
Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security, which
is mentioned in the resolution we adopted today. We
are compelled to conclude that that Group has not fully
succeeded in becoming a coordinating link in the chain
of the work in this area. It has been unable to avoid a
certain degree of politicization in its work or to develop
genuinely transparent and democratic procedures
for reaching and adopting decisions, which is an

essential condition for sustaining dialogue between
Governments on such an important subject. It will be
crucial to address these shortcomings in order to meet
the expectations of States that are dealing with conflict.

We are ready to cooperate constructively with all
interested States on the harmonious promotion of the
subject of women on the Council's agenda. In October
of next year we will mark the twentieth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). We must
reach that anniversary from a position of solidarity that
demonstrates the Council's significant achievements
and unity.

