Mr. Lal (India): We thank the delegation of Spain
for organizing this open debate and for sharing its
informative concept note (S/2016/1031, annex). We
appreciate the remarks made by the President of the
Government of Spain and by the Secretary-General and
the other briefers.

Trafficking in persons across borders has been a
cause for concern for some time. The United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
was adopted by the General Assembly (resolution 55/25)
and entered into force 13 years ago. That Convention
and its subsequent Protocols represent important steps
taken by the international community in its collective
fight against transnational organized crime.

The Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking
in Persons, which the General Assembly adopted
by consensus in 2010 (resolution 64/293), further
recognized the global scale of the problem and outlines
the coordinated approach required to deal with it. The
Plan of Action reaffirms the central role of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) in the
global efforts to deal with the issue. It also recognizes
the work being carried out by other United Nations
entities, such as the International Organization for
Migration, the International Labour Organization, the
United Nations Children's Fund and the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights. Trafficking in
persons is also recognized as a challenge to be overcome
in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.

India is a signatory to the Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocols and
has resolutely addressed various aspects concerning
trafficking in persons through a series of laws and
other measures. Article 23 of the Indian Constitution
specifically addresses the issue. As part of the
continuing efforts to strengthen the relevant legal
frameworks within India, India unveiled, earlier this
year, a comprehensive draft law aimed at the prevention
of and protection from the trafficking in persons and
the rehabilitation of trafficked persons. The draft
legislation aims to unify our existing anti-trafficking
laws and prioritize the needs of victims and protect
them. India continues to work closely with United
Nations agencies, including United Nations Women
and UNODC, on related issues. India has entered into
various agreements with other countries to combat such
crimes. India also works closely with its neighbours
to implement the 2002 South Asian Association for
Regional Cooperation Convention on that issue.

The nexus between organized traffickers and
terrorist networks through illicit financial linkages
is a dangerous phenomenon. The Secretary-General's
report (S/2016/949) notes the low rates of conviction
for crimes of trafficking across countries: that needs
to change. The persistence of transnational organized
crime in that area and its links with terrorist networks
represent a challenge that requires us to step up our
efforts and use the existing tools and mechanisms
to counter terrorist-financing, including sanctions
regimes, more effectively in that regard.

Situations of armed conflict provide fertile ground
for trafficking in persons, in particular those belonging
to vulnerable groups such as women, children and
refugees. They are victims of sexual slavery and forced
labour, including in the mining sector or as fighters.
In recent times, the heinous actions of terrorist groups,
such as Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and Boko
Haram, specifically target vulnerable groups, such as
women and children, in situations of armed conflict as
a deliberate tactic of war, adding another even more
serious dimension to such crimes. Such terrorist groups
continue to act with impunity.

The primary focus of the Security Council is to
address threats to international peace and security.
While an increased focus on addressing trafficking
in persons and its linkages to terrorism and armed
conflicts is timely, we must strengthen international
collaboration so as to better utilize the various
existing mechanisms, including through more effective
coordination of the various entities of the United
Nations. Those United Nations entities and mechanisms
take a more holistic approach that seeks to address the
legal, social and economic contexts of the problem. They
provide strong legal and practical frameworks that can
enable and facilitate joint responses against trafficking
that involves multiple jurisdictions. Their autonomy of
decision-making needs to be further strengthened.

While the Security Council should retain its focus
on situations ofarmed conflict, the broader mechanisms
should be more fully utilized to strengthen national
capacity-building, including in criminal-justice
capacities and regulatory frameworks in banking and
financial institutions, so as to disrupt illicit financial
flows and improve research and analysis, as well
as regional and inter-regional cooperation for the
protection of victims.

India remains committed to working with the
international community in our joint endeavour to
eliminate the global challenge of trafficking in persons,
including in situations of armed conflict.

