Mr. Khare: Thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to brief the Council on the chain of events
surrounding the recent incidents of mass rapes in North
Kivu and the cases of rapes in South Kivu. The map on
the screen shows the area in question.

As the Council is aware, I visited the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, on the instructions of the
Secretary-General, from 28 August to 2 September.
Apart from Kinshasa, I travelled to North Kivu,
notably to Goma and Walikale and to Lubonga and
Luvingi where the systematic rapes had occurred, and
to Kirumba, where three Indian peacekeepers were
killed on 18 August. In South Kivu, I travelled to
Bukavu and to Uvira, where cases of rapes have also
been reported.

During the visit, I met with Government officials,
including the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Alexis
Thambwe; the National Security Adviser, Mr. Pierre
Lumbi; and the Governor of South Kivu, Mr. Marcellin
Cishambo. I also met with several senior operational
officers of the Forces armees de la Republique
democratique du Congo (FARDC): General Dieudonne
Amuli, commanding general of Operation Amani Leo;
General Pacifique Masunzu, commanding general of
the South Kivu military region; Colonel Delphin
Kahimbi, commander of Operation Amani Leo in
South Kivu; and Lieutenant Colonel Bernard
Byamungu, commander of the Uvira military region in
South Kivu.

I had the opportunity to interact with civil society
groups in Kinshasa and Kirumba, as well as in the
villages where rapes were perpetrated, both in North
Kivu and South Kivu. In all these meetings, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Roger Meece
accompanied me as we sought out together, both
internally and with our partners, the details
surrounding the outrageous and utterly condemnable
systematic and mass rapes in the Kibua area, and
thereby sought to identify our shortcomings.

After outlining the details surrounding the mass
rapes in North Kivu and the cases in South Kivu, I will
present certain actions that the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
10-50633
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) has already
initiated and some that the Mission envisages
initiating, as well as certain proposals for consideration
by the Council. I will provide information on
additional cases of rape in Uvira, Movinga and
Shabunda, in South Kivu, as well as in Mubi and Pinga
in North Kivu, which have been recently reported to
us.

The Forces Democratiques de Liberation du
Rwanda (FDLR) still retains a strong and active
presence in the Kibua area. On 25 July, the FARDC -
that is, national army - units deployed in the area of
Kibua were redeployed to Walikale. Five days later, on
30 July, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) office in the area
received unconfirmed information about possible
attacks by FDLR in Mpofi. However, the MONUSCO
company operational base in Walikale could not
confirm this information. Information, again,
unconfirmed, indicated that Mai-Mai Cheka allegedly
intended to block off the Walikale-Goma and Walikale-
Bukavu roads, which members see on the map, to halt
the movement of minerals. An unconfirmed case of
rape in Mpofi was also reported on 30 July. The same
day, the security officer of the United Nations
Department of Safety and Security (UNDSS) in
Walikale sent an advisory by SMS to OCHA in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, security officers of
the World Food Programme and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), focal points of the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) and United Nations
Office for Project Services and MONUSCO security
officers in Goma, stating that the area of Mpofi, on the
Masisi-Walikale axis, had passed under the control of
FDLR and that UNDSS recommended the suspension
of movements in that zone. The same message was
transmitted to humanitarian workers and
non-governmental organizations by the OCHA office in
Goma.

On 31 July, we learned that, in an encounter near
Mpofi, the FARDC had killed eight FDLR combatants
and seriously wounded another. The chef de
groupement of Kibua contacted the FARDC and the
MONUSCO company operating base in Kibua on that
day to inform them about attacks and looting but did
not mention any rapes at that stage. A subsequent
patrol conducted by the Kibua company operating base
established that two shops, including a medicine shop,
10-50633

had been looted in the Lubonga area and that there was
no movement of civilians on the road between
Walikale-Mpofi-Kibua-Goma, perhaps because of the
fear of the presence of armed groups. Increased
movement of FDLR cadres was observed between
Mpofi and Ruwenge, 22 kilometres north-west of
Kibua, and between Mpofi and Lubonga, 13 kilometres
west of Kibua.

The next day, 2 August, was a market day in
Kibua, where, as an innovative practice for civilian
protection, the company operating base in Kibua
provides market patrols, which includes escorting
villagers who assemble at Ishunga to Kibua.
Nevertheless, a forenoon patrol to Lubonga and
Luvingi on 2 August did not result in reporting of any
rapes to our peacekeepers. The patrol also interacted
with Lieutenant Colonel Mukale of the 2112 battalion
of the FARDC at Mpofi, as well as with the villagers of
Bunyampuri. The patrol was accompanied by an
interpreter. However, none of the villagers told the
patrol that there had been cases of rape. The patrol on
2August also arrested a Mai-Mai cadre between
Lubonga and Luvingi.

The first report of 15 rape victims who sought
medical attention at the International Medical Corps
(IMC) supported health centre was received on
5August. The perpetrators had disappeared into the
surrounding forests long before that time. Obviously,
until that time the perpetrators had been in either the
villages or the surrounding areas, and the victims had
not been able to report their suffering or even to seek
medical attention. This was confirmed by the villagers
in Luvingi, which recorded the largest number of
rapes: over 103, as reported to me when I visited them.

The initial figure of 15 rose to 47 on 9 August,
and to 68 on 13 August. As this horror unfolded,
MONUSCO deployed a joint protection team on the
Mpofi-Kibua axis to assess the security situation of the
villages along the axis, verify the allegations of recent
attacks, mass rapes and lootings and evaluate the
protection needs of the local population.

A human rights investigation team was also
deployed from 25 August to 2 September, and
interviewed victims and witnesses in each of the
13 villages in the area. The investigation's report is
being finalized and will be made public in the coming
days.
3

Assistance to victims, particularly medical and

psychosocial assistance, is being provided by IMC and

Heal Africa, with some transport assistance by
MONUSCO.

It is now clear that at least 242 persons, including
28 minors, were systematically raped in 13 villages in
that area between 30 July and 2 August. The
inhabitants of Luvingi, which recorded the largest
number of rapes - over 103 - told me that the
perpetrators of the attack, mass rapes and looting
arrived in their village on 30 July. A Mai-Mai Cheka
leader, the so-called Colonel Mayele, and the so-called
Colonel Sarafim of the FDLR claimed that they had
come to protect Luvingi, had decided to participate in
the reintegration process and only wanted to rest in the
village. The Mai-Mai Checka hail from the Walikale
territory and had visited the village often before. Many
villagers ran away on seeing the FDLR, but returned
when they learned that the FDLR had decided to
integrate with the FARDC. That this was a trap became
evident only later, as the horror and suffering unfolded.
The inhabitants of Luvingi also confirmed to me that
the rape victims sought medical attention only after
they were certain that the perpetrators had left the area,
because severe punishments were inflicted on people
who tried to escape.

While the primary responsibility for protection of
civilians lies with the State, its national army and
police force, clearly we too have failed. Our actions
were not adequate, resulting in unacceptable
brutalization of the population of the villages in the
area. We must do better.

Let me briefly reflect on the main conditions of
the area before outlining the actions that would, I hope,
improve our response. In North Kivu, the Walikale-to-
Pinga road is an important transshipment route for
minerals and other natural resources. However, this
area, like others in the region, is not electrified and the
untarred road is quite broken and difficult to traverse.
In the absence of long-term income-generation
projects, many male villagers in the area stay away
from their families for periods of two to four weeks,
undertaking artisanal mining.

The journey from Kibua to Luvingi takes around
one and a half hours each way, as I discovered during
my visit. It would normally take the villagers some
four to five hours to walk the distance in either
direction. There is no mobile phone coverage, and even
the high-frequency radio coverage is extremely patchy
due to the mountainous and forested terrain. The armed
groups often wear clothes that are identical to FARDC
uniforms, and it is quite difficult for our peacekeepers -
and even for the villagers - to distinguish the enemy
from the friendly force.

The Kibua company operating base has one
interpreter and one mobile satellite phone, thus
operationally restricting it to one patrol at any given
time, given the distances and conditions of the roads to
be traversed. Finally, of course the number of
peacekeepers in North Kivu remains quite small -
4,000 peacekeepers for an area of around 59,483
square kilometres.

Continuous efforts at improving relations with the
community that we serve and better and
institutionalized mechanisms of information-gathering
are essential. It has been decided that more evening
and night patrols should be undertaken. The Force
Commander has further directed the company
operating bases to undertake more random and spot-
check patrols. It has also been decided that, within the
next few weeks, a separate tactical doctrine that builds
on the rules of engagement will be developed for the
company operating bases and the temporary operating
bases to provide our peacekeepers with the necessary
guidance to explore deeper when reports of armed
group movements are received from particularly high-
threat areas - for example, an area that has been
recently cleared of armed groups by the FARDC and
where reprisal attacks on the civilian population might
take place.

A standardized list of questions to be asked
during patrols will also be instituted in our effort to
ensure that the patrols can and will probe even deeper
when interacting with the communities. This doctrine
would also cover the response expected from the
company operating bases in specific protection
situations, building on the guidelines produced within
the civilian substantive sections.

The Foreign Minister of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Mr. Alexis Thambwe Mwamba,
remarked to me that victims of rapes are victimized
twice - first by the perpetrators and secondly by their
communities. It is therefore no surprise that immediate
reports of rapes are unlikely to come forward.
Therefore, reports of looting and the presence of armed
groups in vulnerable areas that had been recently
cleared of their presence would constitute indicators
that sexual violence may have occurred even though no
reports of rapes are received.

Due to the terrain, the region does not have
mobile phone coverage. Active consideration is being
given by MONUSCO as to how radio communications
can be improved in areas where civilian protection is a
particular concern, despite the huge logistical
challenges related to this exercise. To this end, efforts
are under way to immediately and rapidly install a
high-frequency repeater in Luvingi, to be financed
within existing resources. However, I wish to take this
opportunity to inform the Council that mobile phone
coverage does not exist in the area of operations of
27 company operating bases or temporary operating
bases out of the total of 77 such forward deployments
of MONUSCO forces. The Mission would swiftly
evaluate the technical and financial aspects of
installing similar high-frequency repeaters in the
remaining 27 company operating bases or temporary
operating bases without mobile coverage and would
report to the Council and to the financial bodies. I
would strongly recommend that the Council encourage
such high-frequency installations as a matter of priority
for better and timely contact between the communities
and the forward bases.

Mobile phone coverage available for the other 50
company or temporary operating bases would also be
utilized more effectively. MONUSCO is actively
engaged with the main private telecommunication
providers in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
with a view to replicating in these company operating
bases, the surveillance centre concept successfully
tested in Kiwanja, North Kivu. Closed user groups will
be obtained from commercial mobile service providers
to allow unlimited calls within a limited number of
users to report imminent threats or attacks. I will
provide further details to Security Council members
and troop-contributing countries in closed meetings so
that the information will not be available to the FDLR
and other groups.

On 1 September, during my stay, MONUSCO
launched Operation Shop Window, a force projection
operation for area domination aimed at protecting
civilians in the region of Pinga, Kibua and Walikale in
North Kivu. The operation is also aimed at providing
security cover to the efforts of the relevant authorities
to apprehend the perpetrators. Shop Window is carried
out by some 750 peacekeepers, supported by attack and

observation helicopters, as well as operational bases
already deployed in the area of operations. The
operational headquarters is based in Kibua.

The initial reports of the operation are positive,
with 27 FDLR cadres with 12 automatic rifles and
ammunition surrendering at Pinga on the first day, and
three FDLR cadres, with firearms, being apprehended
on the second day in Luvingi. The operations, which
were launched for a period of a week, until
6 September, have been extended in the area until
10 September, and may be further extended after due
evaluation.

It is essential that the perpetrators of this heinous
crime be swiftly apprehended and brought to justice.
Rapid and exemplary punishment would deter others
who might repeat similar criminal acts. MONUSCO
will make all efforts, including a more aggressive
posture of peacekeepers, force multipliers such as
Radio Okapi, and information-gathering on these
people and the like to assist the efforts of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in this direction.

I would like to report that the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has already
constituted a commission to bring the perpetrators to
justice. The commission is composed of an operational
military prosecutor, a military magistrate, two judicial
inspectors and special police for the protection of
women and children. However, reports indicate that,
until yesterday, no decision had been taken on the
commission's date of departure for Walikale, despite
the willingness of various partners to support the
project, including MONUSCO, UNDP and the
American Bar Association, among others. I would
strongly urge the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to take advantage of the
assistance that the United Nations can offer the
commission. In addition, I would like to recommend,
for consideration by the Council, the imposition of
targeted sanctions on the leaders of this group -
including those within and outside the country - if a
chain of command is proven.

More sustained and rigorous efforts need to be
made by the Government and the international
community to implement the five priorities of the
23 March 2009 Peace Agreements. A number of those
demobilized have returned to their former armed
groups, thereby discouraging others from seeking the
path of demobilization. Furthermore, in the absence of
long-term community reintegration projects, those who
return disillusioned are likely to prove more
recalcitrant and perhaps more virulent in their actions.

The international security and stabilization
strategy remains the main framework for supporting
the Government's stabilization and reconstruction plan
for war-affected areas. A key objective of that plan is to
develop the State's capacity to provide security and
enforce the law. Thirty projects are currently being
implemented by United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes, for a total value of around $190 million.
But only one of the plan's programmes is being run in
Walikale, as the region is still not considered safe
enough to commence the stabilization programme.

Nevertheless, efforts need to be made to channel
more projects aimed ultimately at supporting the
stabilization of Walikale and other such remote areas,
focusing on road access, the reintegration of
ex-combatants and the extension of State authority. The
lack of State presence on the ground is directly related
to the lack of State capacity. Financial constraints,
coupled with the lack of a corresponding execution
capability of the State, remain a major challenge. In the
meantime, the United Nations country team has
developed additional programmes, including the
expansion of reintegration programmes for
ex-combatants, the expansion of road networks and
reinforcement of State capacity in the rule of law and
local governance. I would appeal to the Government of
the Democratic Republic of Congo and to international
stakeholders to make the implementation of these
projects a priority.

Before I provide a brief update on rapes that
occurred in other parts of the country, permit me to
express my regret for the delay in providing
information to the Council in a timely manner. We have
institutionalized mechanisms to speed up the process of
information flow between field offices and mission
headquarters, as well as between mission headquarters
and the Secretariat. The Secretariat remains at the
Council's disposal to provide a daily briefing on
important developments in this Mission or others,
either to the President of the Council or to the Council
as a whole, as it may decide.

Let me now refer briefly to the rapes in Uvira and
other regions of North and South Kivu. Ten women
were raped by elements of the FARDC on 17 August in

Katalukulu, in Fizi territory, in South Kivu. I visited
the area, as requested during discussions in the
Council, on 26 August. While the military prosecutor
has opened an investigation, I hope that justice will be
quick and exemplary. We have indicated clearly to the
FARDC at all levels, from its generals to its lieutenant-
colonels - whom I met - that as a national army it
will be essential for the FARDC to maintain a much
higher standard of discipline, good behaviour and
conduct, and observance of human rights.

In North Kivu, on 17 August, there was an attack
by a coalition of FDLR and Mai-Mai Cheka in Mubi,
36 kilometres north-west of Walikale on the Walikale-
Kisangani axis, slightly on the other side of the road.
Initial reports indicate that several houses were looted
and 50 civilians were kidnapped to transport looted
goods. Two FARDC soldiers died valiantly in that
attack and seven civilians were injured. On 25 August,
eight days later, the civilians were released; only after
that did the reports of rapes start to surface. A
MONUSCO joint protection team was deployed to the
area on 30 August. The team learned that at least 40
rapes had been committed in that village. Furthermore,
in the Pinga area, towards the north-east, in Chuho
market, on the same day, 17 August, Mai-Mai Coalition
des patriotes resistants congolais, along with the
FDLR, carried out 13 rapes.

It appears that many rapes were also carried out
in Shabunda and Mwenga, both in South Kivu, during
July and August. We received reports on 26 August that
in the village of Miki, 74 cases of sexual violence have
been recorded in the past two months, including
against 21 minors, girls aged between 7 and 15 years,
as well as six men. In the nearby villages of
Lubumba, Lusosa, Maheta and Masondjo around 395
houses were burned during the same period. An
evaluation team is being dispatched by MONUSCO to
Miki.

A few days before I was due to leave the
Democratic Republic of Congo, on 31 August, we
received information that in the territory of Shabunda,
between 1 and 20 August, at least 130 cases of rape
had been recorded across nearly 10 villages, including
40 cases in Bubila, 42 cases in Tchateka, 14 cases in
Tshombi and 12 cases in Lumba. There are some
reports, as yet unconfirmed, indicating that in the
village of Kiluma all the women might have been
systematically raped. Shabunda is not connected by
road, and five of the most serious cases were evacuated
by MONUSCO helicopters to the nearest hospital,
Panzi in Bukavu, on 1 September, as soon as we
learned of this new challenge. The deployment of
protection cluster teams led by UNHCR, using
MONUSCO air assets, was also undertaken from 3 to
8 September, and a second visit is planned for 10 to
17 September.

I hope that the additional measures that I
described earlier in this presentation, particularly the
efforts to apprehend and punish the perpetrators, will
assist in controlling this spike in violence, especially
sexual violence, that we have observed in North and
South Kivu during the past two months.

In order to ensure a comprehensive approach, the
corrective measures I have just outlined will need to be
complemented by other essential efforts, including
maintaining the military pressure on the illegal armed
groups; the implementation of non-military measures
to address the FDLR issue; combating the illegal
exploitation of natural resources, which is clearly
driving the violence in the region; and establishing
effective State authority in the conflict-affected areas. I
must also stress that, considering the temporary nature
of the presence and efforts of the Blue Helmets, the
long-term solution to eradicating the increasing
entrenchment of a culture of sexual violence in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo lies in building the
capacity of the country's security and rule of law
institutions and, in particular, transforming the armed
and police forces into protectors of the civilian
population. And, indeed, that is also the key to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo's long-term
stability.

Allow me to conclude by making a brief but
important reference to the ongoing United Nations-
Government of Democratic Republic of the Congo
joint assessment that will form the basis of the Security
Council's decision regarding the next steps on
MONUSCO's drawdown. The process has so far been
completed in the eastern regions and is still pending for
Katanga, Equateur and the West. The joint assessment
has contributed to the building of a common
understanding between the Government and
MONUSCO of the remaining threats and security
challenges, including the complex challenge of
protecting the civilian population. A detailed update on
progress in this important process will be provided in
the next report of the Secretary-General, which is due
in October. Nevertheless, the key point I would like to
highlight is that the recent spike in violence has
demonstrated the need for a cautious approach
regarding the next steps in the reconfiguration of the
Mission.

To conclude, I feel personally guilty over the
people who have suffered this brutalization and I trust
that we, all of us, will indeed do better next time.

