Mr. Kolga (Estonia): At the outset, allow me to
join others in expressing gratitude to the Secretary-
General, the Executive Director of UN Women,
the High Commissioner for Human Rights and the
representative of the Non-governmental Organization
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security for
their statements. I would also like to thank the Council
presidency for taking up the topic and organizing the
open debate today.

Estonia aligns itself with the statement of the
European Union delivered earlier. In addition, I would
like to make the following remarks.

Estonia is dedicated to protecting and promoting
human rights and fundamental freedoms, both
nationally and internationally. As a member of the
Human Rights Council, our particular focus is on the
rights of women and children, gender perspective in
conflict settlements and the fight against impunity.
Estonia firmly believes that the rule of law in conflict
and post-conflict situations must promote justice and
accountability in ways that further the rights of women,
including through legal and institutional reforms that
are gender sensitive. The equal right to decision-making
and participation, along with women's empowerment,
is crucial to ensure a functioning society and peace and
justice in the aftermath of conflicts.

Additionally, as stated in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2013/525), women's representation in the
justice sector plays a significant role in increasing the
reporting of crimes and enhancing public trust in the
rule of law institutions. The importance of prevention
must likewise be stressed. By enabling women to fully
participate in judicial systems, we can better tackle the
root causes of impunity for Violence against women.

Estonia welcomes the call by the Security Council
in today's resolution to Member States to comply
with their relevant obligations to end impunity and
to thoroughly investigate and prosecute persons
responsible for atrocity crimes. Estonia further agrees
with the Council that the fight against impunity for the
most serious crimes of international concern against
women and girls has been strengthened through the
work of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
the ad hoc and mixed tribunals, and the specialized
chambers in national tribunals. ICC prosecutions
will not, however, be sufficient to ensure complete
accountability. Therefore, it is essential that the gender
provisions of the Rome Statute are translated into
national prosecutions.

Justice for victims of atrocity crimes, however,
entails more thanjust punishing perpetrators. The Rome
Statute further empowers victims by its broad victim-
participation scheme and underlines its commitment to
victims by its reparations provisions. Likewise, the ICC
Trust Fund for Victims has been doing important work
to alleviate the suffering of Victims in the countries
where the Court is conducting investigations.

Estonia was honoured to join the Declaration
of Commitment to End Sexual Violence in Conflict
during the General Assembly's opening week. We were
also glad to see how much interest there was in the
topic of enhancing accountability for sexual violence
in conflict, discussed at a side event during that week
that focused on the role of the ICC and that was hosted
by the Estonian Mission to the United Nations. We
would like to commend the important work of the Team
of Experts on Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict, and I am glad to note that Estonia has made
financial contributions to the activities of the Team.

Estonia would also like to take the opportunity
to emphasize that in addition to conflict-related
sexual violence, increased attention should be paid
to the full range of violations and serious crimes
experienced by women, including gendered impacts
of enforced disappearances, foreign occupation, mass
forced displacement, restrictions on humanitarian
aid, conflict-related trafficking and the destruction of
civilian infrastructure.

Let me also commend UN Women for their work
targeted at raising the number of national action plans
related to resolution 1325 (2000) or other relevant
planning instruments, as outlined in the recently
adopted UN Women Strategic Plan. Estonia developed
its national action plan in 2010 and has advised a number
of States on developing theirs. We would be ready to
cooperate in that regard with other States in the future.
We are looking forward to hearing the results of the
global study, and to the high-level review in 2015.

In conclusion, we are glad to note that Estonia was
among the sponsors of resolution 2106 (2013), which
strengthens the monitoring and prevention of sexual
violence in conflict, and we were happy to co-sponsor
resolution 2122 (2013), adopted today.

