Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan): First of all, I thank
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Rwanda for having
presided over this very important open debate. I thank
also Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his report on
sexual violence in conflict (S/2013/149), as well as his
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, for her briefing.

I would like to highlight some key proposals and
strategies to minimize the prevalence of sexual violence
in conflict. Sexual violence is a global phenomenon in
times of peace and war and in post-conflict phases.
It also affects my region and demands our urgent
attention.

Promoting the rights of women is at the core of my
country's human rights policy. Kazakhstan, as a member
of the Executive Board of UN-Women, has repeatedly
voiced the need to accelerate the implementation of
global gender commitments. Those include the outcome
of the twenty-third special session of the General
Assembly (see A/S-23/lO/Rev.1), the Millennium
Development Goals, the Beijing Platform for Action,
the 2013 Commission on the Status of Women follow-
up process, and resolutions 1325 (2000), 1888 (2009),
1889 (2009) and 1960 (2010) - all of which touch
upon sexual violence in conflict. To implement them,
Member States must live up to their commitments and
actions. Closer interaction is needed among the Council
and the Special Representative, UN-Women, the Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict, as well as country teams on the ground.

The Council is taking a positive step by expanding
its work at the level of Sanctions Committees by
considering sexual violence and rape as designation
criteria in various sanctions regimes, as a tool to
enhance accountability. It is therefore obligatory on
such committees to reinforce those criteria. To succeed,
there has to be better information sharing among the
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
the Sanctions Committees and their associated expert
groups. The submission of names of perpetrators should
be followed up on without delay, and without impunity
being granted to State or non-State actors.

It would help to have at least one gender expert on
every Sanctions Committee and peacekeeping mission
or political office in the field. Resources must be
allocated to that end. Likewise, the women and peace
and security agenda should be incorporated into the
terms of reference of Security Council visiting missions
when interacting with interlocutors and stakeholders.

It is noteworthy that provisions for protection
against gender-based violence and violence against
women and children were incorporated into article 7,
paragraph 4, of the Arms Trade Treaty, which regulates
the transfer of major types of weapons and which the
General Assembly adopted earlier this month. The
2001 Programme of Action on Small Arms and Light
Weapons must also begin to reflect a gender-sensitive
perspective, like the Arms Trade Treaty, because
armed sexual violence in armed conflict totally
devastates women and children. For significant results
to accrue, each tool should not to be implemented
piecemeal but taken as part of a unified, consolidated
and comprehensive approach. United Nations system-
wide coherence on gender-based violence in conflict,
combining synergy with regional organizations,
intergovernmental bodies and key stakeholders, would
result in strengthened mechanisms for monitoring,
reporting and implementation.

At the same time, we need to facilitate and reinforce
women's participation, through their local networks
and groups, by assessing and overcoming factors that
impede their effective involvement. Hurdles created by
a lack of resources, access to information and security
itself can be counteracted through the inclusion of
women's groups in strategies for conflict prevention,
resolution and recovery, especially in the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes, through
training and capacity-building.

In conclusion, we commend the Security Council's
continuing attention to the urgent and crucial issue of
women and peace and security and strengthening it on
its ongoing agenda.

