Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened this open debate. You could not
have chosen a better topic to close the successful
presidency of your friendly country, India, of the
Council this month. I would also like to thank Deputy
Secretary-General Mr. Eliasson for his clear and
concise presentation of the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2012/732), as well as Ms. Michelle Bachelet,
Executive Director of UN-Women; Mr. Herve' Ladsous,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations;
and Ms. Bineta Diop, President and Founder of Femmes
Africa Solidarite, for their respective contributions.

My delegation welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General on women and peace and security
(S/2012/732) and the adoption in October of the
presidential statement on that issue (S/PRST/2012/23).
The statement sent a strong message of the firm and
ongoing commitment of the international community
to helping women to become independent and to
protecting their rights. Today's debate will allow us to
take stock of the progress made in the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), in particular with respect to
strengthening women's involvement in decision-making
processes and to mainstreaming gender into
peacekeeping operations and training programmes for
peacekeeping personnel.

The Council adopted resolution 1889 (2009) in the
context of the initiative to strengthen the existing legal
arsenal in promoting and protecting women's rights and
participation in efforts to prevent and resolve conflict
and in post-conflict reconstruction. The resolution
allowed us to make significant progress towards the
independence of women in conflict situations through
the drafting of national action plans, with quantifiable
indicators, allowing for the establishment of an
effective mechanism to follow up the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). The Secretary-General's report
also notes the important progress towards women's
participation in peacekeeping operations and their
representation in decision-making processes.

The establishment of specific post-conflict
strategies is imperative and must go hand in hand with
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). In that
respect, particular attention must be focused on the
participation of African women in peace negotiations,
mediation efforts, electoral processes, constitutional
commissions and truth and reconciliation entities.

Because women are the most vulnerable and most
targeted members ofa population in conflict situations,
they have an undeniable and precious contribution
to make and value to add to peace negotiations and
peacebuilding. Members of the Council will note that
experience in West Africa and Haiti has shown that
when women are associated with peace processes, they
have been able to make a difference by bringing their
sensitivity, creativity and commitment to bear not only
on peace processes, but also on national reconcilation
and socioeconomic reintegration.

The establishment of genuine peace requires
sound and inclusive political, economic and social
structures. Local women's organizations are engines
for promoting women's independence and their
effective participation in political, economic and social
life. My delegation endorses the recommendations
contained in the Secretary-General's report, in
particular those that encourage Member States to work
with women's organizations effectively to implement
resolution 1325 (2000).

My delegation also welcomes the action undertaken
in the context of the on Joint Strategy on Gender and
Mediation launched by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) and UN-Women to enhance
the competence of mediators in promoting women's
involvement in mediation and peacebuilding processes.
We further welcome the measures undertaken by the
DPKO to protect women in armed conflict and to
mainstream gender issues into peacekeeping. These
initiatives of the DPKO and the Department of Political
Affairs highlight the gender policy implemented by
the Secretary-General since he took office, which has
promoted undeniable progress to date. We commend
the Secretary-General's determination to consolidate
and pursue that policy.

With respect to the protection aspect, the
Secretary-General's report emphasizes that women
and girl refugees continue to fall victim to violations
of international humantarian law and refugee rights,
in particular with regard to access to humanitarian
assistance. Regional dialogues with women refugees,
regularly organized by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees show that
undocumented women and girls continue to suffer worst
from acts of gender-based discrimination, especially in
terms of access to health services, education and other
social services. According to the report, programmes
for emergency registration could have a positive effect
on making women and girls more independent. We
fully endorse that approach and recognize the need to
act to make it feasible.

In conclusion, the success of the international
community in implementing resolution 1325 (2000) will
depend on the political will to translate its provisions
into reality and to ensure their implementation. The
noble cause of women's independence and effective
involvement in establishing and building peace is a long-
term task. It is a vital and salutary mission, particularly
in countries in or emerging from conflict, especially
in Africa. It must be pursued and undertaken with
resolve and success. The role played by Ms. Bachelet at
the head of UN-Women is critical to that end, and we
support her efforts in that area.

