Mr. Arbeiter (Canada): I am pleased to speak
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace
and Security - an informal network of 57 interested
Member States, chaired by Canada, representing all
five regional groups at the United Nations.

Including women in United Nations peace
operations is both the right and the smart thing to do.
Resolution 1325 (2000) recognizes the importance of
women's equal participation and full involvement in
all efforts for the maintenance and promotion of peace
and security. The Security Council has been resolute
in affirming the indispensable role of women in
peacekeeping and continues to highlight the imperative
of increasing the number of civilian and uniformed
women in peace operations, including in resolutions
2242 (2015), 2378 (2017), 2382 (2017) and 2436 (2018).

Troop and police contributors have echoed those
calls, including through the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative of the Secretary-General. Overall, increasing
the participation of women in peace operations
contributes to the effective implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustaining Development, including
Sustainable Development Goal 5, on gender equality,
and Goal 16, on peace, justice and strong institutions.

Evidence and experience demonstrate that women's
participation leads to outcomes that make peace
operations more effective. Women bring valuable
perspectives, improve situational awareness, increase
the protection-reach of missions, enhance the access
of populations to critical services and help build trust
with local communities. That enhances the safety
and security of peacekeepers and the communities
they serve, as well as the operational effectiveness
of missions.

Despite facing persistent barriers, women have
repeatedly demonstrated their ability to perform the
same tasks, to the same standards and under the same
difficult conditions, as their male counterparts. The
Group of Friends applauds the efforts undertaken by
the Secretariat, in particular the uniformed gender
parity strategy of the Department of Peace Operations,
to increase the number of uniformed women personnel.
We are committed to helping achieve its targets.

However, we stress that this is not a numbers
game. Women must be able to participate fully and
meaningfully in peace operations at all levels and in
all positions - whether serving in civilian, police or
military roles and whether in leadership or as part of
integrated mission teams.

In addition, efforts to reduce barriers to women's
participation and develop institutional standards
to promote their safety, such as training on sexual
harassment and on abuse prevention and response, are
critical. We also welcome recent progress in achieving
the gender targets under the strategy, including
increasing the deployment of mixed-gender police
and military units and the appointment of women to
command positions in missions.

Yet despite that progress we are still failing to
ensure the full inclusion of women in peace operations.
Less than 5 per cent ofmilitary contingents and less than
8 per cent of formed police units are women, and only
22 per cent of civilians in peace operations are women.
The situation is even more dire when examining the
participation of uniformed women in the higher ranks
of peace operations. We must do better.

While a number of efforts have been undertaken by
the United Nations, it is ultimately up to the troop- and
police-contributing countries to recruit, train, support,

equip and deploy women peacekeepers. All troop- and
police-contributing countries should comprehensively
review their criteria and procedures for deployment
to United Nations peace operations, including by
addressing persistent barriers facing women, such as
those related to recruitment, training and promotion
initiatives, restrictions on occupations, access to
deployment opportunities, institutional challenges
related to the structure of respective security services
and additional attitudinal constraints.

We simply cannot achieve success in United
Nations peace operations without getting our own
houses in order. To that end, national action plans and
strategies on women and peace and security can serve
as important tools to catalyse commitments on women
in peace operations. We encourage the adoption and
revision of such plans to enhance women's recruitment,
retention and deployment in security services
supporting peace operations.

Finally, the Group notes that increasing the number
of women in peace operations must be accompanied by
a relentless effort to meet United Nations commitments
to mainstream gender considerations in such operations.
Success depends upon peace operations being equipped
with appropriate gender analysis and expertise at all
levels and all stages of a mission. The role of gender
advisers and women protection advisers in achieving
that cannot be understated, and we emphasize the
importance of ensuring that they have the access to
the resources and training needed to fulfil their critical
tasks. Collectively, we can make peace operations more
effective and reflective of the communities they serve.

(spoke in French)

On behalf of my country, allow me to make a few
additional remarks about women's participation in
peace operations. I underscore the excellent briefings
by the Secretary-General, Major General Lund and
Ms. Merekaje. As we heard today, the meaningful
participation of women in peace operations is not
merely desirable but is, in all honesty, imperative. That
assessment is neither new nor the subject of dispute.
It has been reiterated by many Member States, the
Secretary-General, the Under-Secretaries-General,
civil-society representatives and the Force Commanders
on the ground. It is a point of consensus, which Canada
welcomes. That consensus must, however, be translated
into operational change. The numbers are nowhere near
where they should be. Something is not working. Most
members of the Council and the General Assembly
agree that progress on the participation of women in
peace operations has been scant, slow and insufficient.

Canada's Elsie Initiative for Women in Peace
Operations seeks to change that. Its concept and
design are informed by the views of women who have
personally participated in peace operations. Together
with our partners, we started by listening to women
peacekeepers about their experiences before, during
and after deployment. We heard directly from them
about the significant structural barriers they continue
to face, including a lack of opportunity for training;
a lack of mentors and support networks; inadequate
accommodations, facilities and equipment in the field;
a lack of information about deployment opportunities
and a lack of leadership. We also heard about their
experiences of unwanted touching, sexual advances and
offensive remarks and the impact of such experiences
on themselves and their missions. They questioned
whether to report such incidents, and if so, to what end.
The fact that such a situation persists is disheartening,
but we can and must address it.

(spoke in English)

What we heard was anecdotal, but accurate. We
need to continue listening. For that reason, Canada
and Norway are funding the development of a barrier
assessment methodology to gather the kind of empirical
evidence that can help to sharpen our understanding of
the systemic barriers confronting women peacekeepers.
The Canadian Armed Forces and the Royal Canadian
Mounted Police are also working alongside our
bilateral partners in the Elsie Initiative, the Ghana
Armed Forces and the Zambia Police Service to use
those barrier assessments to find ways to address the
structural barriers that exist in our own systems. Our
intention is to share what we learn with everyone and
to encourage others to undertake similar efforts. We
were very pleased to hear this morning from several
members addressing the Council that they are also
understanding the barriers in their systems. We realize
that that may not be an easy thing to do and that some
Member States may need some support.

In that context, we congratulate UN-Women for
launching the Elsie Initiative Fund for Uniformed
Women in Peace Operations on the eve of the
Peacekeeping Ministerial. The Elsie Fund offers an
innovative approach by financially incentivizing the
increased deployment of trained and qualified women,
including by providing premiums for the deployment
of gender-strong units. Canada has already provided
$15 million to the Fund, and we welcome the additional
contributions recently announced by the Netherlands,
the United Kingdom and Finland and, earlier today,
by Germany. We encourage all Member States to
consider applying for funding to support their own
domestic efforts or, alternatively, to consider providing
contributions to the Fund.

I would also like to commend Germany's leadership
in establishing a network for women peacekeepers.
We have heard from many Canadian and other women
peacekeepers about the value of such a network. We
heard the same from briefers this morning, and look
forward to working with Germany and other stakeholders
on networking in relation to the Elsie Initiative. The
importance of networking was also raised repeatedly
at the Peacekeeping Ministerial preparatory meeting
on women and peace and security, which Ethiopia and
Canada co-hosted in Addis Ababa in January. With
women and men from over 60 countries participating,
the gathering exemplified the diversity that can improve
the effectiveness of peacekeeping missions.

I was there and I learned a tremendous amount
from the women peacekeepers, civil society leaders,
academics and diplomats who shared their own
personal experiences while on mission. Their message
was clear - women are agents of change and partners
for missions, they are mobilizers and they have deep
connections to local communities. They also said, quite
clearly, that leaders should be held accountable for
being inclusive. Inclusion is easier said than done. It
is a choice in how we act. That choice extends to how
United Nations operations are designed, resourced,
staffed and evaluated.

The Security Council has a choice as well. It can
demonstrate that it is listening in how it formulates
mission mandates, from inception to drawdown and
beyond. Canada is strongly committed to working with
the United Nations on practical ways to overcome the
barriers facing women peacekeepers. We are convinced
that we can achieve those goals by continuing to listen
and continuing to act.

If elected for the 2021-2022 term on the Security
Council, Canada will bring that approach and
commitment to its work. We need to encourage and
push each other and the United Nations. It will be
challenging, but everyone benefits from more inclusive
United Nations peace operations. It is only when we
work together that we can make that a reality.

