Mr. Duque Estrada Meyer (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I wish to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this debate. I also thank Deputy
Secretary-General Amina Mohamed and the Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Pramila Patten, for their briefings, and Ms. Razia
Sultana for her statement.

We note with concern that, despite the efforts
of the United Nations, serious incidents of sexual
violence continue to occur on massive scales in armed
conflicts. Addressing this problem is rendered all the
more difficult as victims of violence are often unable
to find ways to report such abuse, given the absence of
protection mechanisms and the fear of stigmatization or
even punishment for speaking up. We underscore that
the most effective way to combat the crime of sexual
violence is the prevention of conflict itself. In this
regard, we support the preventive approach advocated
by the Secretary-General in his report on the issue
(S/2018/250).

The increase in the number of women in United
Nations peacekeeping operations and in peacebuilding
initiatives is a central element in advancing the
prevention of and response to sexual violence in
conflict and post-conflict situations, including in cases
of sexual abuse and exploitation. It also represents
the positive contributions to various aspects of
conducting multidimensional operations, in particular
by improving interaction with women in local societies
and contributing to the effectiveness of monitoring and
investigating reports of abuse.

Brazil therefore welcomes the measures recently
announced by the Office of Military Affairs with a view
to reaching the target ofwomen constituting 15 per cent
of those deployed in peacekeeping operations. In this
regard, Brazil has redoubled its efforts to increase the
number of female candidates for civilian and military
posts in peacekeeping operations and special political
missions. In July, Brazil will host a United Nations
course for developing leadership capacity among
female police officers aimed at Latin American and
Caribbean nations.

We recall that the issue of access to justice for all
victims and the punishment of perpetrators are of central
importance in confronting the threat of sexual violence
in conflict and upholding respect for international
humanitarian law. Conflict resolution processes must
take into account the legal, medical and psychosocial
needs of victims of sexual violence. The complementary
jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court can play
a decisive role in that regard. The Security Council must
also contribute to such efforts by conferring mandates
and adequate means of protection for women and
advocating for the punishment of such crimes. Brazil
has been supporting cooperation projects to addressed
gender-based violence at the bilateral and triangular
levels in countries such as Haiti, Guinea-Bissau and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

We express our appreciation for and gratitude to
the Secretary-General for his new strategic approach
to taking action against sexual exploitation and
abuse committed by personnel of United Nations
peacekeeping missions and special political missions.
Brazil signed the voluntary compact on preventing and
addressing sexual exploitation and abuse and strongly
supports all efforts for its full implementation. Brazil
has also been part of the Women, Peace and Security
Focal Points Network since its creation. A year ago,
we launched our first national action plan on women,
peace and security.

We will achieve inclusive and lasting peace only
when women, who form half of the world's population,
can participate fully in all efforts to that end. With
regard to the prevention of sexual violence in conflict,
the perspective of women is all the more essential in the
general framework of the peace continuum proposed by
the Secretary-General. As the representative of Brazil
to the United Nations Conference on International
Organization in San Francisco in 1945, Bertha Lutz,
said: "There will never be unbreakable peace in the
world until women help to forge it".

