Ms. Power (United States of America): The United
States will vote against the proposed amendment put
forward by Egypt for a simple, stark reason, that is,
the amendment would undermine the purpose of the
draft resolution (8/2016/235). Our draft resolution
does not dictate how any Member State should go
about investigating allegations or punishing those
perpetrators found within their own systems to be
guilty. But it does clearly state - finally - that there
would be real consequences if the concerned troop- or
police-contributing country failed to credibly respond
to the allegations against its personnel. Under the draft
resolution, a non-response is simply not an option. Our
draft resolution outlines broad, objective criteria for
troop- and police-contributing countries to satisfy, as
appropriate, in the event that their personnel are the
subject of an allegation or allegations. Those criteria
relate to countries not taking any of the following steps,
namely, not investigating an allegation or allegations,
not holding accountable somebody who has been found
to be a perpetrator, or not informing the Secretary-
General of the actions that the State has undertaken.
In the draft resolution, which will come up for a vote
shortly, the failure to do any one of those things should
trigger the replacement provision set out in paragraph 2
of the draft resolution owing to non-response.

Please hear me out on this issue: by merely inserting
a very simple word - one of the most often-used words
in the English language, "and" - the amendment
proposed by Egypt stipulates that all three conditions
must be met prior to triggering that provision. For
example, under the Egyptian provision, if a country
merely sends a letter to the Secretary-General, after
receiving an allegation or allegations, that it has chosen
not to investigate, giving no reason, but informing the
Secretary-General according to that provision, and if it
does nothing else, it would be in compliance with the
draft resolution as amended by Egypt. That would be
enough. If a Member State investigated and determined
that an individual committed an act of sexual abuse
and exploitation but does not hold the perpetrator
accountable, it would actually be in compliance with
the draft resolution as Egypt would have it amended.

Withthe proposedEgyptian amendment, there would
be no cost either for non-response or for uninvestigated,
unaccountable criminal behaviour. That undermines
the purpose of today's draft resolution, which is to get
countries to respond to credible allegations against
their personnel and to change a system that is not
working. It is to move away from talking about zero
tolerance to actually having a provision that puts in
place consequences that incentivize the kinds of actions
that every member of the Security Council, including
Egypt, has said it supports.

For that reason, we will vote against the proposed
Egyptian amendment. As a Council, we often demand
that perpetrators be held accountable, and no one has
said before that the Council is acting in contravention of
the presumption of innocence. That is not what we are
doing. In that regard, again, Member States will have
the authority within their own systems to determine
how to pursue an investigation, whether a guilty
finding is appropriate and what will be the means of
accountability that they put in place. But it cannot be
the case that simply sending a note to the Secretary-
General after allegations of such gravity are brought is
enough to dispense with a State's obligations under the
draft resolution.

My last point is that we in the United States are
vehemently opposed to collective punishment. I think
that everyone on the Council is totally united on
that. We oppose the stigma that is placed on whole
units serving honourably when single individuals are
alleged to have committed crimes of the magnitude
we are talking about. But what is causing collective
punishment, collective guilt and stigmas - not just
for a unit, but for the United Nations as a whole and
for its missions - is the failure to establish individual
responsibility. The collective gets the blame when
the individual is not held accountable, and Egypt's
proposed amendment would make it less likely that we
would see individual responsibility.

