Ms. Rodriguez Pineda (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): We congratulate Spain on this successful
meeting on the fifteenth anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000). We welcome the new global study on
women and peace and security, which was drafted
by Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy and her team. We
also thank Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive
Director of UN-Women, for her efforts.
Properly implementing resolution 1325 (2000)
requires unwavering political will on the part of
all relevant Government agencies. That will is
demonstrated by clearly defined budgetary allocations
both in our national budgets and in the contributions
made by the international community. Governments
and civil society must work together and complement
each other's efforts.

Women play a crucial role in conflict prevention
and resolution, the promotion of justice, the promotion
of reconciliation and the rebuilding of national
institutions - all essential pillars for the consolidation
of lasting peace. The involvement of women in
decision-making processes at all levels is important.

Broad-based sustainable development can
contribute to addressing the underlying causes of
conflict. By definition, such development requires that
women be included. We therefore welcome the inclusion
of Goal 5, on the empowerment of women and girls, in
the sustainable development agenda.

We reiterate that the prevention of, and protection
against, gender-based violence and sexual abuse
requires the involvement of men and boys. It concerns
everybody.

We strongly condemn the reported cases of sexual
violence, which continues to be used as a strategy for
intimidation and terror. Furthermore, we condemn the
incidents of violence and sexual abuse in peacekeeping
operations. We demand the implementation of the zero-
tolerance policy.

Security forces must recognize that women play a
vital role in the national reconciliation dialogue. Those
forces must ensure their safety and integrity as an
important aspect of the peace and security equation.

We will not rest until we see that the special needs of
women and girls in the field are receiving the attention
they deserve. That will be achieved with the active
involvement of all the various agencies, funds and
programmes of the United Nations system and Member
States, and with the support of regional organizations
and civil society, in particular women's organizations.

We recognize the important work undertaken
by UN-Women in advancing the gender perspective
in all activities of United Nations field missions. We
urge that office to continue to provide their valuable
contributions to our efforts to meet the challenges now
facing us.

We reiterate that the review of the peacekeeping
and peacebuilding processes should include the
commitments relating to the women and peace and
security agenda. We need to improve the existing
cooperation and establish synergies between
peacekeeping operations and country teams. That is
the only way we can exploit the mutual comparative
advantages of both.

We must improve access to justice and strengthen
the participation of women in the drafting of national
legislation. Through joint and coordinated efforts,
we can achieve peaceful and inclusive societies for
all. In that regard, we would like to emphasize the
complementarity of the women and peace and security
agenda with the mandate of the Committee on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women and its review of the national reports submitted
by States parties.

The Rome Statute constitutes the most progressive
international legal framework on gender-based crimes
to date. It should be incorporated into the national
context so that States have a comprehensive framework
for investigating international crimes of sexual violence
and gender-based crimes, with specific procedures to
support victims and witnesses, and with programmes to
teach women the laws concerning them. Each of those
components has a significant effect on women's access
to justice.

In conclusion, we support resolution 2242 (2015),
which was adopted today and which we sponsored.
We urge all the members present to take advantage of
this important opportunity to move forward towards a
stronger and more substantial commitment to gender
equality and to ensure that the empowerment of women
and girls is one of the cornerstones of peacebuilding.

