Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Before I make my statement, I wish sincerely to
thank Mr. Guehenno, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, for his briefing. I should like
also to thank the Adviser to the Secretary-General on
Sexual Exploitation and Abuse by United Nations
Peacekeeping Personnel, Prince Zeid, for his report.
Their briefings enabled the Security Council to
understand better the situation. We deem it very
significant for us to consider this issue.

In recent years, all the parties have deepened
their understanding of the positive role played by
peacekeeping operations and have also increased their
inputs in that respect. At the same time, however, there
has been a succession of occurrences of involvement
by peacekeeping personnel in sexual exploitation and
abuse. That is not only shocking to us but also a
disgrace to peacekeeping operations.

Like other members, China is deeply concerned
in this respect. If we cannot find an adequate and
comprehensive solution to this problem, there is no
doubt that it will undermine existing peacekeeping
operations and impose serious constraints on the future
deployment of new peacekeeping operations.

Last year the General Assembly's Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations discussed this
issue and put forward a series of corrective measures
and proposals that included the investigation and
punishment of suspected perpetrators, the revision of
the relevant codes of conduct and legal provisions, and
the enhancement of pre-deployment training for
peacekeeping personnel and of educational campaigns.

China has taken note of the fact that most of
those proposals have been implemented and that initial
results have been achieved in eliminating and
preventing sexual exploitation and abuse by
peacekeeping personnel.
China resolutely supports the proposals put
forward by Prince Zeid, especially as concerns the
recommendation that the United Nations formulate and
implement a "zero-tolerance" policy for sexual
exploitation and abuse in peacekeeping operations.

The next step should be to focus on prevention
and response and to severely punish the perpetrators.
At the same time, we need to formulate effective
measures with respect to assistance to victims, revise
the model memorandum of understanding between the
United Nations and troop-contributing countries, and
work to improve the entertainment facilities available
to peacekeepers.

There is an old Chinese saying that one flaw
cannot obscure the splendor ofjade. In contrast to all
of the efforts and contributions of the entire
peacekeeping team, only a small handful of people
have engaged in such disgraceful behaviour. China
resolutely believes that with joint efforts on the part of
the Secretariat, troop-contributing countries and all the
parties concerned, this problem will be resolved. China
will continue to make positive efforts in that direction.

