Mr. Falouh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Syria stresses the importance of the item
under consideration and condemns all forms of sexual
violence, particularly in armed conflict. It stresses also
the need to put an end to such acts and to bring their
perpetrators to justice while avoiding selectivity.
My country has read the report (S/2012/33) of the
Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual violence.
It has also read the information provided by the Special

Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict. Syria supports all efforts to end
conflict-related sexual violence and to punish
perpetrators and end impunity. However, we reject the
allegations and claims made in the report with respect
to my country, Syria. We request that caution and
objectivity be exercised in addressing these important
humanitarian issues.

We would have hoped that the authors of the
report would have based the contents of the report on
proof, evidence and facts instead of relying on
allegations that could be traced to reports by media that
are hostile to Syria and to its people. The Syrian
Government is ready to address any case in that respect
so that it can investigate it and punish anyone who has
been proved to have committed a crime under Syrian
laws.

The Special Representative mentioned my
country in the report before us in the context of what
she called sexual violence and in the context of
elections, political strife an civil unrest, thereby
exceeding the mandate entrusted to her by resolutions
1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010). Under those resolutions,
she has the right to express concern and to draw the
attention of the Security Council to forms of sexual
violence committed only in the context of armed
conflict or post-conflict situations.

Recent developments in Syria have shown that
there is an unprecedented fierce and misleading
political and media campaign against Syria that is
aimed at undermining its stability and security. That
campaign uses the lives of Syrians and their legitimate
demands for reform as a means of implementing
special foreign agendas that would not serve the Syrian
people or promote their human rights. The campaign
seeks to undermine centuries-old coexistence among
Syrians and the Syrian State in favour of fomenting
violence and promoting chaos and terror.

Western and Arab States have, unfortunately,
provided generous financial contributions to arm the
terrorist groups that are committing acts of violence of
all kinds, including killings, against civilians, members
of the military and public and private institutions. The
Syrian Arab Republic would like to reiterate that the
Syrian State, under the Charter, has exclusive
responsibility for the protection of its people and for
ensuring respect for human rights and guaranteeing
those rights for all individuals residing on its territory
and under its jurisdiction, as provided for in the
provisions of international law, free from any foreign
intervention.

My delegation addressed many official letters to
the Special Representative, including documented
information on the responsibility of armed terrorist
groups for acts of rape and sexual abuse as well as the
killing of Syrian women and girls. We also sent the
Representative a DVD including the documented
confessions of members of those groups, proving their
responsibility for those crimes. Regrettably, the Special
Representative ignored our attempt to provide her with
that document and made only a passing reference to the
documented crimes perpetrated by terrorist groups. The
Special Representative chose to depend on reports that
lack credibility and professionalism, so that she can
hold the Syrian authorities responsible for the
commission of acts of sexual violence without any
credible evidence. That is supported by the Secretary-
General, who states, at the end of paragraph 87 of his
report, that the international commission of inquiry had
not received sufficient testimony in connection with
allegations of acts of rape or other forms of sexual
violence.

The Secretary-General and his Special
Representative adopted those allegations, while
ignoring the responses of the Syrian Government and
information already corroborated by public
confessions. Such positions can be seen as indirect
participation in misleading public opinion and
disregard for the Syrian Government's position
regarding events on its own territory. It is an
irresponsible incitement of all sorts of acts of violence,
providing international cover for international terrorist
acts undertaken by terrorist groups against Syria, its
interests and its people. We would have hoped that the
Special Representative would try to be objective,
neutral and non-political, and that she would not
undertake work contrary to her mandate or take
advantage of her post to cater to the interests of certain
influential States Members of the Organization.

In conclusion, it is truly strange that the
representative of the Israeli occupying Power - whose
country has for decades committed all kinds of
violations and crimes, including violence against girls
and women in the occupied Arab territories in Palestine
and in the occupied Syrian Golan - should accuse or
lecture us even as Israel continues to commit all kinds
of violence against women and girls who are still under

the yoke of the Israeli occupation. They are killed,
raped and abused. In the occupied Palestinian
territories, a Palestinian woman gives birth or has a
miscarriage at an Israeli checkpoint and can barely
reach a hospital. That is all I have to say.

