Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, I wish to thank the Secretary-General for
personally introducing his report. I also wish to thank
Ms. Angela King, Ms. Hannan and the relevant
agencies of the United Nations for their efforts to
advance the full participation of women in the cause of
peacekeeping. We thank them for their efforts and for
the valuable views they have put forward.

The Chinese delegation welcomes and has
carefully read the report submitted by the Secretary-
General. It is very comprehensive and valuable. We
attach great importance to the 21-point action plan
drafted by the Secretary-General and are carefully
studying them at this point. We also hope to engage in
an in-depth exchange of views with all sides on its
feasibility. China particularly welcomes the Secretary-
General's goal of attaining a 50-per cent appointment
ratio for female special representatives and special
envoys by 2015. China is also actively seeking suitable
candidates.

In any armed conflict, the most grievously
harmed victims are women. We must therefore take all
necessary measures to protect their rights and interests.
We must also recognize that, in preventing conflicts,
promoting reconciliation and rebuilding societies,
women truly play an extremely important role. We
should give full play to their advantages and potential.
The international community has also reached a
consensus on that and has adopted a series of
international instruments to strengthen that. In recent
years, the Security Council has deliberated on this
matter on several occasions and has incorporated the
gender perspective into specific peacekeeping
operations' mandates, such as in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Timor-Leste. When the Security
Council sends missions to conflict areas like Sierra
Leone and Kosovo for on-site observation, it also
listens closely to the views and suggestions of local
women's organizations, which fully reveals the
importance the Council attaches to that matter.

At the same time, we believe that we can protect
women's rights and interests only through curbing
conflicts, promoting development, reducing poverty,
eliminating the root causes of strife and through
development. Therefore, on one hand, we should give
full consideration to a gender perspective in places
where conflicts have already taken place, support the
Secretary-General's recommendations on implementing
a policy of zero tolerance with respect to peacekeepers,
maintain a database on gender specialists and women's
groups and networks in conflict countries and regions,
give full play to the role of local women's
organizations, promote their participation in decision-
making and pay close attention to the gender dimension
in the process of disarmament and reintegration into
society. We call on the parties concerned to start taking
action to implement those recommendations.

On the other hand, we should adopt effective
measures to prevent and curb conflicts and, in that
context, give full consideration to the gender
perspective. To that end, China supports the Secretary-
General's recommendation concerning women's
participation in peace negotiations and in promoting
reconciliation. We strongly appeal to the parties to a
conflict to abide by international humanitarian law and
to respect human rights. The Security Council should
make further efforts to effectively prevent and curb
conflicts and take all measures to prevent situations in
which the achievements of the international community
in protecting the rights and interests of women and
giving full play to their role unravel because of the
outbreak of a war or conflict.

The Secretary-General's report reflects the
various aspects of women's participation in the peace
process. Truly meeting the special needs of women and
giving full play to their unique role requires the
concerted efforts of all sides. The best results can be
achieved only when the United Nations agencies
emphasize the overall advantages of such a course. In
proceeding in its work, the Security Council should
fully respect the work being done by the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and
relevant agencies.

