Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): Allow me to join
others in congratulating you, Sir, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council this month. We
thank you for organizing this important debate and the
Secretary-General for his reports on peacebuilding in
the immediate aftermath of conflict (S/2010/386) and
women's participation in peacebuilding (S/2010/466).

We also thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-
moon, and the Chairperson of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC),
Ambassador Wittig, for their briefings. This debate
comes at a critical time for peacebuilding, as evidenced
by the centre stage that peacebuilding has taken in
international discourse, including the review of the
Peacebuilding Commission (S/2010/393, annex).

Despite the multiplicity of peacebuilding efforts
by the United Nations and other role players, it would
seem that, as shown by the Secretary-General in his
report, we are making good progress. But there is still
much work that needs to be done. Countries emerging
from conflict face a multitude of challenges and need
international assistance. However, such countries
should be given space to identify priorities that could
anchor peace and show dividends. In short, national
ownership should remain the foundation upon which
all peacebuilding endeavours are predicated.

The Secretary-General's report reveals that some
ground has been covered in the areas of leadership and
accountability as they relate to post-conflict
peacebuilding. We are pleased to note progress in the
efforts to bridge leadership gaps in field missions,
especially in Haiti, Somalia, Chad, Cote d'Ivoire and
Afghanistan.

Development cannot take place without peace
and vice versa. They are mutually reinforcing and
should be pursued simultaneously. In that regard, we
believe that integrated strategic frameworks should be
holistic, coherent and, most important, organic to the
context in which they are to be applied.

South Africa strongly supports the call for greater
collaboration, coordination and interaction among the
various role players, such as international financial
institutions, the private sector, local communities,
regional organizations, the United Nations, donors and
national authorities, in addressing national priorities in
post-conflict situations. In that regard, the development
of civilian capacities should play a major role in
supporting and developing critical areas for post-
conflict peace consolidation, such as strengthening the
rule of law and security sector reform. We call on the
donor community to align their funding and
programmes with the economic and social recovery
programmes of the national Governments so as to
ensure sustainability and greater coordination and
effectiveness.

We continue to underscore the importance of
building local capacities and providing training in
order to enhance the capacities already existing at the
national level, as in most instances, they are ready,
available and willing to participate actively in the
reconstruction of their countries.

In that respect, timely and predictable financing
remains crucial in realizing the objectives of
peacebuilding. That will indeed require resources
beyond the funding capacity of the Peacebuilding
Fund. The United Nations must therefore look at
innovative ways of funding peacebuilding programmes
and activities. We should continue to explore assessed
contributions as a means of kick-starting peacebuilding
activities as missions transition from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding.

Additionally, in the light of the ongoing debate on
the nexus between peacekeeping and peacebuilding,
South Africa reiterates the view that peacebuilding
elements should be integrated into peacekeeping
mandates. We welcome the Council's expressed
willingness "to make greater use of the Peacebuilding
Commission's advisory role", as stated in the draft
presidential statement before us. The PBC review has
generated considerable political momentum, which
must be maintained and sustained.

We welcome the progress made by the PBC in
strengthening its partnership with international
financial institutions and regional organizations, in
particular its efforts to institutionalize its relationship
with the African Union. The United Nations will stand
to benefit from closer interaction with regional
organizations, such as the African Union, with regard
to preventive, peacemaking and peacebuilding
activities. In fact, it is an established view that
countries that are closer to the countries emerging from
conflict have better knowledge of the situation in those
countries.

My delegation has noted the report of the
Secretary-General on women's participation in
peacebuilding. Women can play an important role as
agents of change, and South Africa has always viewed
the participation of women in post-conflict situations
as critical to the attainment of peace. To that end, the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), which we are
about to commemorate later this month, was a response
to the need to fully involve women in promoting peace
and in playing a pivotal role in the post-conflict
reconstruction and development of their countries. We
remain convinced that women should be provided with
the necessary support to be able to play an effective
and visible role in providing leadership for
peacebuilding and full participation in the development
processes of their countries.

In conclusion, we welcome the adoption of the
draft presidential statement on post-conflict
peacebuilding and further emphasize that South Africa
remains committed to the United Nations efforts
towards sustainable peace. South Africa will continue
to work in unison with the international community in
its quest to prevent conflict where it has not yet
occurred, find lasting solutions where conflict still
persists, and consolidate peace where open conflict has
ceased.

