Ms. Enstrom (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Nordic countries: Denmark, Finland,
Iceland, Norway and my own country, Sweden.

I would like to begin by thanking the United
Kingdom presidency for having organized this open
debate and the Secretary-General for his briefing. I
also express warm thanks to Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Bangura and Special Envoy
Jolie as well as to the representative of civil society
for their crucial role in developing, advocating and
implementing this agenda.

We welcome the adoption today of resolution 2106
(2013), which, together with resolutions 1820 (2008),
1888 (2009), 1889 (2009) and 1960 (2010) complement
landmark resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace
and security. All five Nordic countries are sponsors of
today's resolution.

We also welcome the United Kingdom's initiative
on preventing sexual violence in conflict and the
subsequent Group of Eight declaration, which we hope
will enforce the already existing array of mechanisms
within the United Nations and at the regional and
national levels. The focus on sexual violence is
important but should not come at the expense of the
broader agenda on women, peace and security.

In my statement, I would like to focus on three
issues: the need to strengthen the participation of both
women and men in efforts to prevent sexual violence;
the need to strengthen national ownership and to
build capacity at the national level to effectively fight
impunity; and the need for accountability, to end the
culture of impunity for such crimes.

The full and equal participation of women and men
in conflict prevention and peacebuilding is fundamental
to combating sexual violence. Solutions must encompass
all sectors of society, both in peacetime and in times of
conflict. Women must not be seen merely as victims but

as active participants who are central to all efforts to
combat sexual violence in conflict.

Experience shows that women's involvement in
peace processes can lead to more legitimate and lasting
agreements. We need women to participate actively not
only in United Nations field operations and missions,
but also in national and local institutions.

Efforts to end sexual Violence in conflict must
include scrutiny of how gender roles are shaped
and upheld in peacetime. Societies that view men as
superior create an environment that is conducive to
sexual violence in armed conflict.

As Minister for Defence, I would like to emphasize
the importance of integrating a gender perspective in
peacekeeping operations. If we neglect information
from 50 per cent of the local population, missions
will be less successful. If we do not include half the
population in our security assessments, we cannot
address the security needs of the whole population.

Two months ago, I visited Mali, a country whose
northern regions are currently experiencing conflict.

As in any conflict situation, it is the international
community's responsibility to ensure accountability
for the atrocities committed, including sexual violence.
We welcome the United Nations-led peacekeeping
operation to Mali, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, and the
deployment of a senior women's protection adviser
from the outset. It is in all our interests that operations
include a gender perspective and awareness of sexual
violence in conflict.

The Nordic Centre for Gender in Military
Operations, established last year, supports military
organizations in applying a gender perspective in
operations. The centre is a hub for the exchange of
knowledge and experience in this area.

On the issue of accountability, if a State is
unwilling or unable to investigate and prosecute such
international crimes, the ICC and other international
tribunals play a crucial role. But the ICC is a court of
last resort. Together we must build political support
and technical capacity so as to enable the effective
prosecution of sexual violence at the national level.

We also call on the Security Council sanctions
Committee to focus on sexual violence crimes and to
use its powers to combat impunity, and we welcome
the gender provisions contained in the recently adopted
United Nations Arms Trade Treaty.

We commend the contribution of the Team of
Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict, as well as the Justice Rapid Response, which
serves to support the strengthening of the national
capacity to investigate and prosecute such crimes.

Let us not forget the importance of providing
justice for those men and women who are victims of
crimes of sexual violence. The crime itself causes pain,
trauma and psychological stigma for survivors. It is
crucial that services be in place, including access to
emergency contraception and safe abortion. The right
to make decisions about one's own body, life and sexual
health is a basic human right. Survivors must know that
they are not alone and that justice can be done.

In closing, let me commend the Council's crucial
work in advancing the women, peace and security
agenda. But let me also reiterate our expectations that
the Council will make use of its powers in order to
achieve our common goal: to end sexual violence in
conflict once and for all.

