Ms. Kadare (Albania): First, I would like to thank
the United Kingdom presidency of the Council for
convening this meeting on such a critical and urgent
subject.

Albania aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union and I would like to add
the following remarks in my national capacity.

Human trafficking is a global problem, affecting
both developed and developing countries, rich and
poor societies. It is transnational, and its victims are
everywhere. Therefore, it is our joint responsibility to
put an end to this sordid crime and horrendous violation
of human rights.

It is evident that the most vulnerable people are
those caught in conflict: women, children, refugees.
Trafficking in conflict zones is certainly not a new
phenomenon. It is a well known and documented fact
not only in the Middle East, but also in Africa, Asia and
even Europe. During the wars in Bosnia and Kosovo,
sexual violence was systematically used to strike terror
and humiliation into civilian populations. Yet, despite
international awareness and outrage, we still have
an incomplete understanding of human trafficking.
Our capacities to prosecute the traffickers and assist
the victims are inadequate, while the United Nations
system's anti-trafficking efforts are fragmented and at
times overlapping.

We have to admit that, despite our efforts, far from
abating, human trafficking has flourished alarmingly.
Combined with terrorism, it has led to new barbarisms,
unprecedented in their scope and violence. The
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, Boko Haram and
Al-Shabaab are using human trafficking and sexual
violence, with full impunity, as a weapon of terror, but
also as an important source of revenue, with low risk and
extraordinary profit. We cannot allow this to continue.
There is nothing more demoralizing and undermining
for the values we stand for than the culture of impunity.

However, trafficking in situations of conflict is
not limited to the context of terrorism. The different
conflicts raging today are leading to the mass
displacement of particularly vulnerable groups, which
easily fall prey to exploitation and trafficking networks.

Resolution 2331 (2016), which Albania has
co-sponsored, recognizes that human trafficking
represents a threat to international peace and security.
Furthermore, it identifies the complex nexus that
exists between the trafficking in persons, transnational
organized crime, conflict and terrorism. As the first
action-oriented resolution of the Council to address
trafficking in persons in conflict situations, it was an
important step forward.

But awareness-raising and statements of
condemnation are not enough. International coordinated
action is urgently needed. We have at our disposal the
necessary international legal framework - the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and its Protocols, including the Trafficking in
Persons Protocol. It is within that framework that we
need to strengthen our engagement and our cooperation
at the regional and international levels. Intelligence
sharing, financial investigations, anti-money-
laundering laws and judicial cooperation - the whole
arsenal that we have at our disposal should be deployed
to combat human trafficking and dismantle terrorist
networks. Civil society, the private sector and the media
should be our major partners, especially with regard to
the prevention and protection of victims.

Albania remains deeply committed to combating
human trafficking. In line with the Palermo Protocol
and the Council of Europe Convention on Action against
Trafficking in Human Beings, our national strategy in
the fight against the trafficking of human beings and
its action plan are victim-centred and gender-sensitive.
At the regional level, Albania, Montenegro and Kosovo
signed last December a joint declaration expressing
their commitment to ensuring the application of unified
procedures for the identification and protection of
victims of trafficking.

In closing, I would like to reiterate that an integrated
multilateral action is needed to combat this pervasive
transnational crime. Furthermore, we encourage
the Secretary-General to strengthen the synergies
between United Nations agencies and to ensure that
the United Nations system strategically coordinates its
anti-trafficking efforts across its development, peace
and security, and human rights pillars, as well as its
humanitarian action. Albania stands ready to actively
participate in discussions and activities to reinforce
the response of the United Nations in eradicating this
scourge.

