Mr. Fesko (Ukraine): Ukraine appreciates the
initiative of Peru to hold this open debate, as well as
your personal presence, Mr. President, at this time. We
thank Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed
and Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict Pramila Patten, and in
particular Ms. Razia Sultana, for their useful briefings.

Ukraine aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union.

After almost two decades since the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), the women and peace and
security agenda remains as relevant as ever in the face
of increasing violence, extremism and deadly conflicts.
The alarming figures in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2018/250) before us today - noting an increase in
severity and scale of conflict-related sexual violence in
numerous conflict situations around the globe - are
nothing if not testimony to that.

We note with deep concern that sexual violence
has become a routine tactical element of war in many
conflicts. Rape, sexual slavery, forced marriage and
sexual torture constitute abhorrent violations of human
rights and human dignity. In some instances, they
surpass the level of war crimes and reach the scale
of crimes against humanity or a genocidal slaughter.
Victims of those crimes do not just deserve justice,
they are entitled to it. It is a solemn duty of the
Security Council as well as the rest of the international
community to do everything in their power to deliver it.
In that context, Ukraine believes that the Security
Council should continue to pay priority attention to the
due implementation of existing women and peace and
security resolutions, in particular to overcome the gaps
identified in the 2015 global study on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). As a non-permanent Security
Council member in 2016-2017, Ukraine did its best to
contribute to that goal. We proceed from the conviction
that any form of violence against women and girls is
a major impediment to security, the restoration of
peace, the achievement of gender equality and the
empowerment of women and girls.

Concerted international efforts aimed at elaborating
effective steps to address the issue of sexual violence
will reduce the growing magnitude of violence against
all women and girls, including sexual and gender-based
violence, domestic violence and harmful practices. In
that respect, we welcome the fact that the recent sixty-
second session of the United Nations Commission on
the Status of Women addressed the importance of rural
women and girls victims of gender-based violence
having access to justice and quality services.

Ukraine considers the equal and full participation
of women in all activities in the areas of prevention
and resolution of conflicts, peacebuilding and
peacekeeping of the utmost importance. In my country,
the ongoing fulfilment of the 2016-2020 national
action plan for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) is aimed at achieving greater participation by
women in decision-making, in particular in matters of
national security, defence and peacemaking, as well as
ensuring the protection for women and girls, including
preventing and responding to gender-based violence.

TheGovernmentokarainepaysparticularattention
to the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). For
that reason, due to the excellent cooperation with the
UN-Women office in Ukraine, the effectiveness of the
national action plan's implementation was assessed by
international experts. Their contribution will be helpful
in updating the national action plan in line with the
evolving situation, as well as in taking into account the
follow-up resolutions to resolution 1325 (2000). We will
finalize that process by June. A State programme on
equal rights and opportunities, which was adopted by
the Ukrainian Government just last week, will further
strengthen the State's response to gender inequalities,
with a specific focus on women and girls experiencing
multiple forms of discrimination.

The recently adopted State programme for the
restoration and development of peace in the eastern
regions of Ukraine until 2021 is another important
element in overcoming the devastating humanitarian
consequences of the Russian invasion carried out by
the Moscow regime as part of its overall aggression
against the democratic world. It is well known that the
conflict has hit hardest the most vulnerable segments
of the population, particularly women in the currently
occupied regions. It has resulted in widespread human
rights violations, including sexual and gender-based
violence in the war-affected areas of the country,
as outlined in the relevant reports by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights. Those include a thematic report on conflict-
related sexual violence in Ukraine that puts forward a
number of recommendations to the Russian Federation
and Ukraine.

Unfortunately, as of today, Russia continues to
ignore that document, while the Ukrainian Government
remains committed to addressing that challenge. For
example, on our official request, the UN-Women office
in Ukraine, together with the United Nations human
rights monitoring mission in Ukraine, developed a
strategy for preventing and responding to the conflict-
related sexual violence in Ukraine. We intend to
integrate that strategy, or at least some of its elements,
into the 1325 national action plan. We would like to
reiterate our request to the Secretariat to include a
reference to the situation of Ukrainian women and girls
affected by the Russian invasion in Donbas into all the
relevant thematic reports of the Secretary-General.

Finally, let me underline that Ukraine will remain
actively engaged in international efforts aimed at
promoting women's rights, their participation in
peace negotiations and post-conflict reconstruction
and at protecting women from sexual and gender-
based violence.

