Mr. Thapa (Nepal): At the outset, I begin by
commending the presidency of the Plurinational State
of Bolivia for convening today's annual debate on the
women and peace and security agenda. I thank the
Secretary-General and the briefers for their updates
and insights.

The Security Council resolutions on women and
peace and security have aptly underscored the crucial
link between gender equality and international peace
and security. They have succeeded in ensuring women's
engagement as providers of peace and security in
conflict-affected societies. Women can be crucial
agents of change by offering valuable and innovative
perspectives on sustaining peace. Their leadership role
in conflict prevention, active engagement in peace
negotiations and compassionate protection of civilians
as peacekeepers, inter alia, cannot be overemphasized.
Moreover, in the absence of the meaningful participation
of women, attaining the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) will remain a distant dream.

Against that background, I am delighted to share
with you, Madam President, Nepal's successful
experience ofwomen's engagement in sustaining peace.
After signing the comprehensive peace agreement
in 2006, the Government of Nepal established the
Ministry of Peace and Reconstruction with a mandate
to play a catalytic role in Nepal's endeavour to
achieve sustained peace. The Ministry of Peace and
Reconstruction created around 2,800 peace committees
at the local level.
In 2011, Nepal adopted its first national action
plan, for the period of 2011 to 2016, to implement
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008). It was the
first country in South Asia and the second in Asia
to do so. The Ministry of Peace and Reconstruction
coordinated the implementation of the national action
plan, while its oversight was ensured by a high-level
steering committee co-chaired by the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs and of Peace and Reconstruction, with
members drawn from the relevant ministries and civil
society organizations.

Nepal has made explicit efforts to localize
its national action plan, with the introduction of
localization guidelines in 2013. With the mandatory
provision of 33 per cent women's representation in
local peace committees, Nepal's national action plan
has been an example of a transparent, inclusive and
participatory process, with the close involvement of
conflict victims and civil society organizations. This
paradigm has been extensively shared with countries in
the region and beyond. The success of the first national
action plan, which, along with the peace agreement,
catalysed an enhanced the participation of women in
peace negotiations and peacebuilding processes, both
at the community and national levels, has led us to the
soon-to-be-adopted second national action plan, which
focuses on sexual violence, particularly during conflict.

Through its own experiences of its successful
home-grown peace process and its partnership with
United Nations peacekeeping, Nepal has come to
believe that women's increased role in the national
context greatly complements the United Nations
aspiration of a greater role of women at the global level.
In Nepal's case, women's increased representation
in legislative and Government bodies and State
institutions since 2007 has directly contributed to
fostering good governance and inclusive societies. The
mandatory level of 33 per cent representation of women,
guaranteed under the new Constitution for both federal
and provincial legislatures, has qualitatively enhanced
the empowerment and ownership of women in all walks
of national life. At the same time, Nepal has already
seen women assuming the positions of Head of State,
Speaker of the Parliament and Chief Justice of the
Supreme Court. The National Women's Commission
is now an independent and powerful constitutional
body with an comprehensive mandate to monitor and
safeguard the rights and interests of women.

Last year's local elections, in which women secured
nearly half of the leadership positions - beyond the
constitutional guarantee of 40 per cent - are expected
to generate further multiplier effects to ensure the
maximum inclusion and participation of women in
leadership positions, legislation and governance.
Moreover, a 33 per cent quota for certain positions
in Government services, including in security forces,
has been reserved for women. The gender-responsive
budget, introduced in 2006, has now reached over
35 per cent of the total budget. We have done all that in
earnest and will continue to do so.

Our Constitution requires that the President and
Vice-President of the country should represent different
genders or communities and that either the Speaker or
the Deputy Speaker of the Lower House and the Chair
or the Vice-Chair of the Upper House must be women.
That provision made it possible for Nepal to have
women as President and Speaker of the country for
the first time. Women's fair representation in political
appointments, as well as in various constitutional
bodies, has also been constitutionally guaranteed. All
laws of the country are fully aligned with the letter and
spirit of the human rights-based Constitution that we
adopted in 2015.

In conclusion, I want to state that no peace process
will ever succeed without the full, equal and effective
participation of women. As a country emerging from
a successful endogenous peace process, Nepal stands
ready to share its experience and lessons learned
through the constructive engagement of women in
conflict prevention and resolution and post-conflict
restructuring and rebuilding, all geared towards the
timely achievement of the SDGs.

