Mr. Wittig (Germany): At the outset, I would like
to thank Rwanda for organizing today's very important
open debate. My thanks also go to the Secretary-
General and his Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, for
their insightful briefings,

Germany aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of European Union, as well as the
statement by the representative of Canada on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security.

Although the Security Council has clearly stipulated
in the relevant resolutions that sexual violence in
conflict is a serious threat to peace and security,
it remains a neglected and under-reported crime.
The recent annual report of the Secretary General
(S/2013/l49) has brought to light some very disturbing
findings. It shows that sexual violence is used in many
conflicts as a weapon of war by armed groups and, in
some cases, even by the armed forces. More than 30
parties from five countries are credibly suspected of
committing or condoning sexual violence in conflict.
And those are only parties in countries on the Council's
agenda and on which the United Nations had verified
information; the actual figures are undoubtedly much
higher. Especially alarming is the fact that many of the
victims are children. Therefore, the ultimate goal of our
discussion here today must be to find new and better
ways to address that abhorrent crime.

The report before us contains some very good
recommendations in that regard. Let me mention four
points of particular importance to us.

First, we welcome the work of the monitoring
and reporting mechanism and hope it will continue to
work closely with other United Nations mechanisms
to guarantee the best possible concerted actions in
the fight against sexual violence. We also welcome
the dedicated work of Special Representative Bangura
and the fact that she was able to brief the Council
several times in the past months, including on the
situations in Syria and the Central African Republic.
However, the Council should make more use of the
information received and do more to act and hold
perpetrators accountable. It could, for example, release
corresponding press statements, write specific letters
to the Governments concerned and more often refer
specific cases to the Sanctions Committees and, as a
last resort, to the International Criminal Court.

Secondly, the Council should keep the issue of
women and peace and security, including sexual
violence, high on its agenda and make sure that all
the relevant reports, mandate renewals and country
visits by the Council contain specific provisions in
that regard. More women's protection advisers need to
be deployed, including in United Nations assessment
teams and missions.

Thirdly, in security sector reform and in
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes, more focus should be given to the needs
of women and girls, not only as victims but also with
a View to their active participation in reintegration
processes. In peace agreements, sexual violence shall
figure in one important provision: those who have
previously committed or condoned sexual violence
should be excluded from amnesty provisions and
should not be allowed to serve in the relevant official
functions.

Fourthly, Member States and regional organizations
can also do more. Sexual violence shall under no
circumstances be socially accepted. It is of paramount
importance to criminalize sexual violence by law,
hold perpetrators accountable and provide assistance
services and reparations for survivors. In that regard,
we welcome the recent press statement by the African
Union Peace and Security Council and its call for the
development of new strategies to fight sexual violence
in conflict. Also, we are confident that the recent
commitments made in the Group of Eight context to
address impunity for sexual violence in conflict will
have a significant impact.

For my Government, confronting sexual violence
is one of the priority areas in our new national action
plan on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
We actively support the United Nations, Member States
and civil society in their fight against sexual violence.
Personnel of non-governmental organizations, human
rights defenders and journalists who report about
cases of sexual violence, in particular, are often at a
heightened risk of being targeted themselves. They all
need our support to continue their invaluable work in
raising awareness and helping Governments prevent or
ease the consequences of sexual violence.

Let me conclude by saying that the Council should
remain seized of this important issue. It should not and
cannot be separated from the broader security issues.

