Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): Finally, the
voices of women have reached the Security Council. It
is significant that today - United Nations Day - we
are beginning to address, in an open meeting of the
Security Council, not only how conflicts shape the
lives of women, but also how women are coming
together to shape peace and security and what the
Council can do to facilitate women's involvement in
United Nations peacemaking and peace operations.

Yesterday, the Council members heard the
concerns of civil society representatives on this issue
and interacted with them. It was a so-called Arria-
formula meeting. Although intended to be
participatory, it took place behind closed doors and
there were no official records. It would have been so
much better to have had those presentations here in the
Council Chamber.

Nevertheless, the women have spoken; they have
made their recommendations to the Council. The onus
is now on the Council to act. Through today's meeting,
and through the resolution we will be adopting in a few
days, we must send a powerful message that women
need peace and, more importantly, that peace needs the
involvement of women.

We wholeheartedly congratulate Namibia, in
particular Ambassador Andjaba and his team, for their
leadership in organizing these historic meetings of the
Security Council on women and peace and security.
Throughout your presidency of the General Assembly
last session, Mr. President, we saw your commitment to
women's issues. It is gratifying for us to see you
presiding over this important meeting today. These
meetings of the Council are the result of the efforts of
numerous women and their organizations, which have
been demanding for some time now that the Council
formally take up the matter. Today, we pay a tribute to
their dedication and hard work in making it happen.

We thank Secretary-General Kofi Annan for the
important statement he made this morning, in which he
highlighted areas that need attention from the Security
Council. We also acknowledge the contributions of the
two women who addressed the Council this morning.
Ms. Angela King and Ms. Noeleen Heyzer have played
a great role in making women's issues matter in the
United Nations, and no doubt they will continue their
important work.

Bangladesh is fully committed to realizing the
potential of women in promoting peace. We feel proud
to have, in our Prime Minister, Sheikh Hasina, a
woman leader of great vision and courage who is
actively contributing to peace at the national level as
well as globally, spearheading the culture of peace and
non-violence.

Bangladesh is proud to have had the privilege of
taking a pioneering step in the Security Council when
it presided over the Council's first-ever pronouncement
on women, armed conflict and peace on 8 March this
year, International Women's Day. In that statement, the
Council members recognized that peace is inextricably
linked with equality between men and women and
affirmed that women's equal access to and equal
participation in power structures and their full
involvement in the prevention and resolution of
conflict are essential for the maintenance and
promotion of peace and security.

Our work in the Security Council on this issue
must be set in the broader context of the commitments
of the Beijing process, both the 1995 Conference and
the 2000 review, which show us the way forward. The
Council's decisions affect women in situations of
armed conflict. It is therefore only appropriate that
those decisions be made keeping women squarely in
the picture.

We believe that the Council has to take into
account three broad areas. The first is the impact of
conflict on women and girls. As the nature of conflict
shifts in a post-cold-war, globalized world, civilians, in
particular women and children, are increasingly
victims. Women and girls form the majority of refugees
and internally displaced persons. They are in particular
danger of being harmed and abused and of facing
gender-based and other, unimaginable, gross human
rights violations.

As a participant in the Council mission to Sierra
Leone, I have seen at first hand the ravages of war on
women in that country. The Security Council must
demand of all parties to armed conflict that they
comply fully with international law applicable to the
rights and protection of women and girls, and take
special measures in this regard. To respond to their
needs, all United Nations peace operations must
include a gender unit. The human rights components of
peace operations should include women's rights in all
their documents and reports.

At the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration sites, the different needs of women and
men combatants and accompanying family members
must be addressed. The Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court recognized war crimes
against girls and women. The Security Council must
add its voice in ensuring that there is no impunity for
gender-based war crimes.

The second area is the involvement of women in
the peace process. From Burundi to Somalia, and from
Northern Ireland to the Middle East and Cambodia,
women have shown a great capacity as peacemakers.
They have assumed an activist role while holding
together their families and communities. At the grass-
roots and community levels, women have organized to
resist militarization, to create space for dialogue and
moderation and to weave together the shattered fabric
of societies.

We must ensure that women get more avenues to
promote peace, not only at the local level, but also at
the national, regional and global levels. By bringing
their experience to the peace table, women can inject
into the peace process a practical understanding of the
various challenges faced by civilian populations. The
mechanisms that come out of such involvement are
naturally more sensitive to the needs of civilians and
therefore more sustainable and useful.

Women also have a great role to play in
promoting in strife-torn societies a culture of peace,
which lies at the root of lasting peace and
reconciliation. Unless there is a culture of peace, with
women at its helm, long-term solutions will elude us.

I come finally to United Nations peace operations
and women. At the decision-making level and on the
ground there has to be more representation of women.
There has been a demand for more women special
representatives of the Secretary-General. We welcome
that. At the same time, we have to be careful to avoid
tokenism. We should go not only for visibility in the
representation of women, but for representation that is
wider and more effective.

Bangladesh has begun to send its women to peace
operations, with the first five civilian police deployed
in East Timor. The armed forces in Bangladesh have
recently opened their doors to women and will soon be
having women in command positions. As a country that
has contributed over the years to the most difficult
United Nations missions, we shall be doing our part by
sending more women peacekeepers in future.

One area where the United Nations and its
Member States must act urgently is in improving the
training of peacekeeping personnel by fully gender-
sensitizing them. The peacekeepers must never violate
the trust the civilian populations place in them and can
have no impunity for their actions.

We believe that it is an opportune moment for the
United Nations, and in particular the Security Council,
to do much more than it has done so far in promoting
women's issues in peacekeeping. The Brahimi Panel's
report (S/2000/809) is under active consideration. We
have already welcomed its useful recommendations.
We noted, however, that a gender dimension of
peacekeeping and peace support operations must be
highlighted; it is a missing link as far as the report is
concerned.
We support the Windhoek Declaration and the
Namibia Plan of Action on "Mainstreaming a Gender
Perspective in Multidimensional Peace Support
Operations". We believe that the actions identified in
the Declaration can complement and fill in the blanks
in the recommendations of the Brahimi Panel's report.

As I have said, the women have spoken. They
have made it clear that they are willing to shoulder
their responsibilities and take charge of their lives and
peace in their societies. The Council in particular, and
the United Nations at large, has to respond through
concrete actions.

