Ms. Lintonen (Finland): We welcome this yearly
stocktaking meeting of the Security Council on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We also
welcome the fact that the Council has, to an increasing
extent, included a gender approach in its work to
maintain international peace and security. That
approach should be integrated into all United Nations
activities.

The response to conflict is more effective and the
ground is better prepared for sustainable peace and
security when women and men alike are involved.
Women's experiences of war provide them with a
knowledge base that has to be utilized by engaging
with women and by involving them in conflict
prevention, crisis management, peacebuilding and
reconstruction. Women serving in peace operations can
more easily reach out to local women. The
participation of women in peacekeeping operations can
further serve as a positive example for the local
population and contribute to building confidence
between the mission and the local community.

It is important that all those involved in
operations be sensitized to gender issues and
understand the gender dimensions of conflicts. That
can also ensure responses that are more appropriate to
the needs of the local population as a whole and
contribute to the effectiveness of the operation.
Therefore, resolution 1325 (2000) is an issue not only
for women, but equally for men.

There has been progress in the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). We have to admit, however,
that a lot of work still needs to be done. During the
debate on resolution 1820 (2008), one Member State
put it rather bluntly by saying that it was not self-
evident that in all States there was the necessary
political will to implement resolution 1325 (2000).
That political will is needed in order to change deep-
seated traditions that discriminate against women. We
must also remain firm in the fight against impunity.
Amnesties encompassing rape or sexual and gender-
based violence are simply not acceptable. We must
remain determined to do all we can to overcome those
challenges in an open and cooperative spirit.

We will need that political will as actors of the
international community, too. In that respect, the
United Nations system can have a major role to play in

ensuring that women's wider involvement in peace
processes, crisis prevention, management and post-
conflict operations becomes standard practice. In that
regard, the first step is to ensure that resolution 1325
(2000) is fully incorporated into the mandates of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations, as well as
those of special representatives and special envoys.
Consequently, Member States would hold the special
representatives accountable for the implementation of
the elements of resolution 1325 (2000) of their
mandate at the time of their reporting to the Council by
asking what has been done to include women in the
peacebuilding processes that they have led.

We need to join forces and to work at different
levels. We need to start our work at home and consider
what we can do to get more women involved and to
have a gender perspective integrated into conflict
prevention, crisis management and peace building. A
national action plan on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) could be a way forward in that
field.

Finland adopted its national action plan in
September. The national action plan serves as a useful
reminder of what we could be doing better. For
example, Finland is focusing more attention on gender
equality in recruitment for civilian and military crisis
management. We are striving to have more women
involved in crisis management and pledge to support
female candidates for operational leadership positions.

To conclude, I would like to stress that the
guiding principle in the national action plan is that
women should be seen not as victims, but as agents of
capacity and, often, as a driving force, for building
global security. Let us all be guided in our work by the
wise words spoken by the Secretary-General during the
Council discussion on resolution 1820 (2008) in June:

"By creating a culture that punishes
violence and elevates women to their rightful
role, we can lay the foundation for lasting
stability, where women are not victims of
violence but agents of peace." (S/PV.5916, p. 5)
