Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I would like to thank
the Peruvian presidency for organizing and presiding
over this important debate. I also wish to thank Deputy
Secretary-General Mohammed, Special Representative
Patten and Ms. Sultana for their earlier briefings. It is
very encouraging to see a Rohingya woman address the
Security Council for the first time. This is an important
day for us, and I wish to thank everybody who has
made it happen.

It is an understatement to say that Ireland is a
strong supporter of the women and peace and security
agenda. My country has a deep conviction that women
are critical to everything we are trying to achieve in
conflict prevention and resolution. Just last week,
Ireland celebrated the twentieth anniversary of the Good
Friday Agreement, the hallmark of the peace process
in Northern Ireland. The participation of women in the
search for peace was crucial to its success.

When two women from the island of Ireland,
Mairead Corrigan and Betty Williams, received the
Nobel Prize in 1976 for their efforts to bring peace to
Northern Ireland, the Nobel Committee stated that they

"refused to bow to bleak scepticism: they
simply acted. They never heeded the difficulty
of their task: they merely tackled it because they
were so convinced that this precisely was what
was needed. There was no talk here of ingenious
theories, of shrewd diplomacy or pompous
declarations. No, their contribution was a far
better one: a courageous, unselfish act that proved
an inspiration to thousands, that lit a light in the
darkness, and that gave fresh hope to people who
believed that all hope was gone."

Those are the kind of efforts we must continue to
replicate. Women made a critical difference to peace
and conflict resolution in my country, and we believe
that women can do the same elsewhere.

While much policy progress has been made in
many areas, today we are addressing one area where we
remain very challenged - that of addressing conflict-
related sexual violence. We are ashamed that women
and girls are routinely used as a currency of conflict.
The Secretary-General's report (S/2018/250) does not
make for easy reading. It is a clarion call to action for
Member States to double down on efforts to address
sexual violence in conflict.

We in Ireland firmly believe that the role of civil
society at the grassroots level is critical for empowering
women in conflict prevention, which the Security
Council reaffirmed with resolution 2106 (2013). Ireland
is particularly concerned to hear reports of the targeting
of high-profile female human rights defenders through
crimes of sexual violence. Today we urge Member States
to take measures to ensure the adequate protection of
women in the civil society space. Ireland also urges the
Security Council to assume its own responsibility in
that regard and to be consistent and timely in its use
of sanctions against perpetrators of conflict-related
sexual violence.

We all recognize that the majority of victims of
conflict-related sexual violence are marginalized
women and girls, often living in rural areas that are well
beyond the reach of law enforcement and protection.
Rural women are vulnerable to displacement and are
often forced to flee following struggles for the control
of land and resources. Women's physical security
is therefore inextricably linked with their political,
social and economic security. Women bear the brunt of
conflict at every level.

As Chair ofthe Commission on the Status ofWomen,
Ireland was pleased to see the real vulnerabilities of
rural women highlighted in the Secretary-General's
report and in our agreed conclusions, at this year's
sixty-second session, on challenges and opportunities
in achieving gender equality and the empowerment of
rural women and girls. I urge Member States to consider
those powerful agreed conclusions, in conjunction with
the Secretary-General's recommendations on conflict-
related sexual violence.

At the national level, Ireland has incorporated
measures to prevent sexual violence into our second
action plan on women and peace and security. The Irish
Defence Forces have mainstreamed women and peace
and security into their policies, with gender advisers
and gender focal points incorporated into all units. We
have a zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and
abuse, which is very strictly enforced.

Ireland believes that engaging men and boys is
critical to preventing sexual violence in conflict.
Irish Aid works hard and supports non-governmental
partners in delivering such programmes. We are also
one ofthe 14 States that, along with the European Union,
are signatories to the Call to Action on Protection from
Gender-Based Violence in Emergencies. We fully
support the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict. We admire her
work and enjoy excellent cooperation with her Office,
and we will continue to support her financially.

In conclusion, I wish to return to those two women
from Northern Ireland and their Peace Prize day. The
Committee also said on that day:

"It would be simple to maintain that this is
all self-evident and that anyone could say this in
despair at the meaningless sufferings of war. Yes,
but in reality the solution of each and every human
conflict is to be found in the simple and obvious
action of someone taking the first steps on the road
to reconciliation and cooperation."

Those two women from Northern Ireland took those
first steps. We can only hope that others follow
their example.

