Mr. Lucas (Angola): First, we would like to thank
the briefers for their comprehensive presentations.
Our special gratitude goes to Nadia Taha. We praise
Nadia for her courage and strength in sharing with us
a painful experience. Nadia's testimony and plea raise
the fundamental issue of the victims of trafficking and
enslavement, and how to repair the immense injustice
to which they were subjected.

We thank the United States presidency for
organizing this debate, an initiative that expresses
the need to strengthen collective awareness of the
gravity of this phenomenon, which arises from conflict
situations - although not exclusively, it should
be stressed - and to step up efforts, both legal and
operational, to counter trafficking in persons, their
exploitation and enslavement.

It is well known that, as a result of ongoing conflicts
in Africa and the Middle East, but also of situations not
derived from conflicts, modern slavery has attained a
new and disturbing dimension. Thousands of people
have been enslaved by terrorist groups such as the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), Boko Haram,
and Al-Shabaab in central Africa and elsewhere, while
millions of displaced persons and refugees are easy
prey to human traffickers. A situation has emerged in
which States are totally unable to protect their citizens
from egregious violations of their basic human rights;
they are trafficked, sold like cattle and enslaved in a
life of misery and horror.

The idealistic responsibility to protect agenda has
become irrelevant in the face of crimes committed
against vulnerable people caught in the middle of
horrendous conflicts. The estimated number of people
living in slavery worldwide is staggering, making
a mockery of the general and universal prohibition
against that repugnant form of human exploitation. The
situation calls for strengthened global efforts against
human trafficking and slavery, which, when taking
into account the organic connection between the two,
parallels the fight against terrorism.

It is well documented that ISIL promotes slavery
in the regions under its control in Syria and in Iraq.
Its actions against the Yazidis, Christians and
other minorities are consummate examples of the
most backward obscurantism and surely meet the
requirements to be deemed crimes against humanity
and even genocide. Boko Haram has been pursuing
despicable actions, including kidnapping women and
girls for enslavement and sexual exploitation, forcibly
recruiting children as soldiers and feeding sexual
exploitation markets. Like ISIL's, the actions of Boko
Haram may qualify as crimes against humanity, and
call for an energetic response from national authorities
to uphold their responsibility to protect their citizens.
Sexual violence against women, girls, boys and men is
a common war tactic used by all terrorist organizations.
By inflicting unbearable humiliation and destroying
their sense of humanity, terrorists seek to obtain total
compliance from their victims and to make them
accomplices to their heinous crimes.

The central issue in combating such trends is
a solid common framework of measures to counter
trafficking in persons. The most outstanding tool is
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress
and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children, which provide a legal and operational
framework for international cooperation. The recently
adopted 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 70/1) contains provisions
for a commitment on the part ofUnited Nations Member
States to ending modern slavery and human trafficking.
The Security Council recently authorized European
countries to use force to disrupt human trafficking
and migrant smuggling in the Mediterranean. Such
instances demonstrate the international community's
commitment to ending to this modern-day scourge,
which is not an outdated abomination but a shameful
stain on the contemporary human conscience.

The Security Council must, as it is doing today
through this debate and the adoption of presidential
statement S/PRST/2015/25, continue to send a
strong message by qualifying human trafficking
and ensuing enslavement as war crimes and crimes
against humanity and, in so doing, enlarging the
jurisdiction covering this type of crime. Additionally,
the entire United Nations system should be mobilized
and coordinate efforts to tackle modern slavery in
conflict situations. The approach adopted so far in
dealing with conflict situations has been to emphasize
immediate, life-saving humanitarian assistance over
efforts to counter trafficking in persons. However,
with the escalation of this phenomenon increasingly
affecting the lives of vulnerable children, women and
men, it has become imperative to consider this issue
a matter related to international peace and security, in
particular - as the Security Council points out in the
presidential statement adopted today- since trafficking
in persons undermines the rule of law and contributes
to other forms of transnational organized crime, which
can exacerbate conflict and foster insecurity.

In conclusion, the international community must
step up its collective efforts to combat and destroy
the terrorist groups, strengthen the international legal
framework relatedto the fight against human trafficking,
stress the critical importance of States implementing
the relevant Security Council resolutions, and develop
international cooperation to eradicate poverty and
promote economic opportunities as a means to prevent
and eradicate the expansion of this heinous practice.

While important efforts are being pursued to
break up terrorist organizations such as ISIL or Boko
Haram, it is critical that we unite our efforts to protect
vulnerable populations from trafficking, enslavement
and exploitation - the greatest civilizational step
backwards that the contemporary world is experiencing
in terms of respect for human rights and the dignity of
the human being.

