Mr. Mazeiks (Latvia): I thank the Secretary-
General, the Executive Director of UN-Women,
Ms. Yanar Mohammed, Ms. Julienne Lusenge and
Ms. Alaa Murabit for their statements. I also thank
Spain, in its capacity as presidency of the Security
Council, for organizing this important debate marking
the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of the
landmark resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace
and security.

Latvia aligns itself with the statement delivered by
observer of the European Union.

In 2000, resolution 1325 recognized that war
impacts women differently and stressed the need to
increase women's participation in peace talks. No
other Security Council resolution is better known for
its number and name because it was truly a historic
milestone. Today, we can assess what has been achieved
in the past 15 years thanks to a very comprehensive
global study on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), as well as to Secretary-General's latest report
on women and peace and security (S/2015/716).

Significant developments have taken place over the
past 15 years. The normative framework for women,
peace and security has been strengthened by seven
follow-up resolutions to resolution 1325, with the latest
resolution 2242 (2015) adopted this morning, which
Latvia proudly co-sponsored. The empowerment of
women and girls and respect for their human rights, as
well as women's full participation in decision-making
processes, including in conflict prevention and
resolution, have been recognized as crucial contributors
to peacemaking and peacebuilding. There has been
an important change in the way the international
community views and deals with conflict-related
sexual violence.

Despite these positive changes, the global
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) has been far
from complete. The participation of women in peace
processes and post-conflict processes needs to be more
visible and effective. More efforts are necessary to
tackle impunity for conflict-related sexual violence.
Moreover, the current challenges to international peace
and security, such as the changing nature of conflicts,
the growing threat of non-state armed Actors, the use
of new technologies for warfare, and dire humanitarian
crises are too complex and often require comprehensive
solutions. The rights of women and girls have been
particularly violated by the spread of violent extremism.

These challenges affirm the need for the
strengthening of conflict-prevention, early-warning
and early-action mechanisms, especially by the
Security Council. Latvia believes that the findings of
the global study, together with the other two ongoing
United Nations reviews of peace operations and the
peacebuilding architecture, can contribute to the
strengthened United Nations response to conflicts and
the recognition of the special role of women in all areas
of peace and security decision-making. We support the
synergies among all three United Nations reviews.

Reducing the gaps in the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda requires the
commitment of all actors, especially United Nations
Member States. Latvia has incorporated the principles
of the resolution 1325 (2000) in the regulatory
provisions of its national armed forces, as well as in
its predeployment training programmes. Women's
representation among Latvian military personnel,
including among personnel deployed in international
operations, has increased. The implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) has been an important element
of Latvia's development cooperation, for example in
Afghanistan and Iraq. Latvia will continue to develop
a national policy framework in order to address
emerging challenges to achieving gender equality, and
to strengthen the legal framework in order to eliminate
violence against women and girls.

While the guidelines and recommendations of the
global study on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) still need to be assessed, Latvia hopes they will
help boost the women and peace and security agenda in
the future.

