Mr. Vukasinovic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I
should like to begin by thanking Ms. Rachel Mayanja,
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Gender
Issues and Advancement of Women, and Ms. Margot
Wallstrom, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, for their
informative briefings.

Bosnia and Herzegovina fully supports the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), the
provisions of which have been incorporated into my
country's gender action plan. Furthermore, we
emphasize the importance of the full involvement of
women in all efforts for the maintenance and
promotion of peace and security, early peacebuilding
and post-conflict planning, as well as the need to
enhance their role in decision-making processes.

Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2010/173) and the
recommendations contained therein. We also take
positive note of the work of the Technical Working
Group on Global Indicators. We consider that the
proposed set of indicators presents a solid basis for
future work in terms of technical development and
establishing baselines. We are of the view that this
work should be intensified in the coming period.

Taking into account the specific nature of gender-
sensitive indicators, we stress the need for all
quantitative indicators to be accompanied by
qualitative commentary and analysis in order to reflect
a country-specific situation or context. We are also of
the opinion that a clear distinction ought to be made
between the indicators for which data will be collected
by the United Nations system and those for which data
will be collected by Member States. To that end,
Member States should not be overburdened with
additional responsibilities for data collection, and
comprehensive insight into implementation, tracked by
indicators, will be provided.

Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes the idea that
this process should be transparent and pursued in
consultation with relevant stakeholders in order to
include their views on this particular issue. We believe
that the next report of the Secretary-General should
give substantial input with regard to what the agenda,
roles and responsibilities of the United Nations system
and other actors should be in developing an intensified,
efficient and more successful implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) at the global level.

Finally, we should like to reiterate that the set of
indicators is critical not only to the effective
identification of gaps in tracking progress in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and to
parallel ongoing work regarding resolution 1888
(2009), but also to their efficient monitoring and
evaluation. Therefore, it is of key importance that the
commemoration of the tenth anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000) not only mark the progress and
achievements made so far, but also assess the
challenges that have not yet been met, as well as how
achievements and progress will be tracked and
measured in time.
