Mr. Simonovic': Let me first congratulate you,
Sir, for organizing this debate and thank you for
inviting me to participate.

Those of us who have lived it know the terrible
impact of war. While women and girls endure the same
trauma as the rest of the population, they are also
targets of specific forms of violence and abuse
including sexual violence and exploitation. Moreover,
their needs and their potential for contributions have
generally tended to be at the margins of efforts to
prevent armed conflict or to restore peace and rebuild
economies and societies.

The considerations of the Security Council on the
subject of women, peace and security two years ago
resulted in Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), a
landmark in the recognition of the importance of
women's full involvement in all efforts for the
maintenance of peace and security. The need to
increase women's role in conflict management,
peacekeeping and post-conflict peace-building was also
clearly recognized. The study, report and
recommendations of the Secretary-General called for in
resolution 1325, and now before the Security Council,
constitute a very important step forward, with
significant analysis and proposals for action.

While resolution 1325 addressed the vital matter
of economic, social and human rights concerns from
the perspective of the Security Council, the present
report on women, peace and security addresses those
issues in a holistic manner offering a much broader
perspective. We in the Economic and Social Council
have also been eagerly waiting to see the report of the
study that will, in my opinion, require action from
Member States, the United Nations system and civil
society.

I would like to commend the participatory
process of the preparation of the Secretary-General's
study on women, peace and security and its able
coordination by Ms. Angela King, the Special Adviser
of the Secretary-General on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women. I would also like to thank
Ms. Carolyn Harman for her important contribution. It
is my understanding that the United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM)'s study on
the same issues (embargoed until 31 October 2002)
envisaged by its Executive Director, Ms. Noeleen
Heyzer, and prepared by independent experts, will
provide additional complementary information and
recommendations for action.

This past July, the Economic and Social Council
adopted resolution 2002/23, on mainstreaming a gender
perspective into all policies and programmes in the
United Nations system. The Council called for action at
all levels by Member States and all other actors of the
United Nations system, and decided to intensify its
efforts to ensure that gender mainstreaming is an
integral part of all activities in its work and that of its
subsidiary bodies. This builds upon agreed conclusions
adopted by the Economic and Social Council in 1997,
and it is a clear outcome of the decision to establish a
regular sub-item on the subject in the work of the
Economic and Social Council.

In resolution 2002/23 the Economic and Social
Council identified several key elements for progress in
gender mainstreaming that resonate well in today's
deliberations. These include, first, identifying gender
equality as an essential element for the realization of
sustainable development at large, as it is an issue that
cuts across areas of policy; secondly, stressing the need
to include women in planning, decision-making, and
implementation processes at all levels; thirdly,
emphasizing the link between human rights and gender
equality; fourthly, recognizing that men and women are
often affected differently by political, economic, social
and environmental factors, and that policies need to
address this; and fifthly, calling for sex-differentiated
data and indicators as essential elements for accurate
analysis.

It is true that in recent years the understanding of
and commitment to gender equality and gender
mainstreaming has increased significantly. However,
many persistent constraints remain, including
conceptual confusion, inadequate understanding of the
linkages in different areas of work, and gaps in
capacity to address the necessary issues once
identified.

The report and recommendations before us today
on women, peace and security, make a great
contribution by clarifying major findings, challenges
and actions that are necessary in this important area. As
stated by the Secretary-General, "Sustainable peace
will not be achieved without the full and equal
participation of women and men" (S/2002/1154, para. 68). I can assure you that the deliberations today
in the Security Council will be of particular concern to
the Economic and Social Council as well. Relevant
findings on women, peace and security, among others,
represent a valuable guideline for the Council's newly
established ad hoc advisory group on Guinea-Bissau.

Peace and security, and economic and social
affairs, are not just linked. It is important that we
realize that they are different sides of the same coin,
and that on this coin there is the face of a woman.

