Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): I would
like to start by thanking the Deputy Secretary-General,
Ms. Amina Mohammed, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Pramila Patten, and Ms. Razia Sultana for their
pertinent briefings. I also wish to express our sincere
gratitude to Peru for organizing this important debate.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands fully aligns itself
with the statement to be delivered by the observer of
the European Union, as well as that to be delivered
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace
and Security.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2018/250)
and today's testimonies from the briefers describe
in no uncertain terms the gruesome and widespread
prevalence of sexual violence in both conflict-affected
and post-conflict settings. The mere fact that the report
covers one tenth of the United Nations membership
is disturbing in itself. Allow me to focus on three
important aspects: first, the plight of the Rohingya
in Myanmar; secondly, the fight against sexual
exploitation and abuse; and, thirdly, the course of action
to stop impunity.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands adds its voice
to that of today's civil society briefer, Ms. Sultana,
in condemning in the strongest terms the cruelty that
Rohingya women and girls have faced both before and
after fleeing their homes in Rakhine state. We cannot
remain silent about the injustice done, and the trauma
inflicted on, those women and girls and their wider
communities. It is upsetting that now, after Syria and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, a State actor
has once again been listed as being credibly suspected
or responsible for sexual violence in a situation of
armed conflict. That demands a concerted response
from the international community to bring justice and
rehabilitation to the victims of that violence.

There is a mosaic on the third floor of this building
that reads "Do unto others as you would have them do
unto you", which brings me to my second point. While
the report primarily looks at sexual violence inflicted by
armed groups and State actors, we cannot ignore cases
of sexual exploitation and abuse or sexual harassment
committed by those working for, or associated, with
the United Nations. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
reaffirms its total commitment to the United Nations
zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse
and on sexual harassment - a matter that is rightfully
gaining the attention and visibility it deserves.
Masculine-dominated cultures often create
obstacles to upholding zero-tolerance policies. However,
like the Secretary-General, we are determined to
remove those obstacles and work towards true gender
equality. Moreover, by including women and the gender
perspective in prevention, peacekeeping and conflict
resolution, we can diminish sexual violence in conflict,
as well as sexual exploitation and abuse.

My third point is on the course of action to stop
impunity. I would like to echo the words of Special
Representative Patten: sexual violence is avoidable.
The very first recommendation that the Secretary-
General makes to the Security Council in his report is
to include sexual violence as a part of the designation
criteria for sanctions. Sanctions are a tool that could be
more effectively used to deter sexual violence and to
curb and constrain the individuals involved. They have
the potential to protect the safety and lives of millions
of women and girls, as well as boys and men, living in
conflict areas. The recent inclusion of that criterion in
the sanctions regime for the Central African Republic is
a welcome development that needs to be taken up more
consistently. We call on the Council to systematically
and explicitly incorporate and apply sexual violence as a
designation criterion in sanctions regimes, particularly
in those regimes targeting the actors listed in the
report. For those conflict-affected countries for which
no specific United Nations sanctions regime exists, we
urge the Council to consider the adoption of targeted
sanctions regimes that would allow for the inclusions
of a specific designation criterion on sexual violence.

Ultimately, sanctions cannot be an alternative
to prosecution for crimes that are punishable under
international law. It is first and foremost up to Member
States to ensure the prosecution of perpetrators and to
facilitate reparations under international humanitarian
law. Furthermore, it is up to Member States to guarantee
survivor's access to all legal, psychosocial and
medical services, including safe abortion, emergency
contraception and HIV treatment.

Strengthening the capacity of national institutions
is critical to ensuring accountability for past crimes
and prevention and deterrence for the future. In that
context, we recognize the work of the Team of Experts
on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict in
building national capacities to enhance accountability
for conflict-related sexual violence. However, if
national governments prove to be unable or unwilling,
the Council should revert to other means and channels,
such as the International Criminal Court, to make sure
that both State and non-State parties comply with their
obligations under international law.

Let me end by reiterating our strong support for the
work of Special Representative Patten and the vision
she has articulated since assuming office last year.

