Mr. Barro (Senegal) (spoke in French): First
of all, Mr. President, allow me to congratulate your
country, Germany, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council this month and to welcome today's
open debate on the issue of the participation of women
in peacekeeping operations. This is a collective
undertaking that remains dependent on the mobilization
of all actors.

I would also like to acknowledge the high-quality
briefings delivered earlier by Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres; Major General Kristin Lund, Head
of Mission and Chief of Staff of the United Nations
Truce Supervision Organization; and Ms. Lorna Nanjia
Merekaje, Secretary General of South Sudan Democratic
Engagement Monitoring and Observation Programme.

In adopting resolution 1325 (2000) two decades
ago, which still serves as our compass on the gender
dimension in peacekeeping, the United Nations fully
recognized the importance of women's participation
in conflict prevention, management and resolution and
in peacebuilding. Although some very encouraging
progress has been made, the fact remains that the
objectives set are far from being achieved. Women's
participation in peace operations remains relatively low,
accounting for only 5 per cent of military contingents,
8 per cent of formed police units and 28 per cent of
civilian components.

Indeed, one of the essential objectives of the
Action for Peacekeeping initiative and its subsequent
Declaration of Shared Commitments, endorsed by 151
Member States and four international organizations, is
to increase the number of women in areas of operations,
at both the strategic and operational levels. In that
regard, the Secretary-General's uniformed gender parity
strategy is undoubtedly another step in the right direction
However, its success depends on the full involvement of
Member States. We therefore need to promote ongoing
dialogue among the Secretariat and troop-contributing
countries, whose gender policies have made progress
that is - it must be said - rather inconsistent. Such
an approach would enable the Organization to continue
to support those countries, while setting realistic and
achievable objectives for promoting gender equality.
Factors related to the low number of women entering
national defence and security forces in recent times
must be taken into account, including those that do not
allow some countries to increase the number of women
in their contribution to peacekeeping operations in any
quantitative or even qualitative way.

In Senegal, for example, the integration of women
into the defence and security forces is relatively recent.
In addition, it would be right to offer incentives, such
as reducing the length of deployment of female staff,
removing material obstacles to their recruitment and
retention and taking their specific needs into account
in the establishment of infrastructure and services
dedicated to operations. The same applies to the
possibility of considering financial incentives for those
concerned and the need to combat sexual abuse and
exploitation. For its part, Senegal, which has endorsed
the Circle of Leadership declaration on the prevention
of that scourge, fully endorses the zero-tolerance policy
and remains convinced that increasing the number of
women in peacekeeping operations leads to better care
for victims.

The Government of Senegal has put in place a
national policy for the integration of women into its
defence and security forces. The policy is based on
an attractive framework, underpinned by awareness-
raising campaigns that highlight the value of women
in uniform, to help break down certain sociocultural
barriers. The appointment of a female commissioner
to helm the national police force in 2013 sent a strong
message in that regard.

In addition, the 2012-2022 sector strategy on gender,
adopted in 2010, aims to reach the goal of 10 per cent
of women in the armed forces by creating conditions
conducive to the integration, advancement and socio-
professional development of women. To implement
that strategy, Senegal signed a memorandum of
understanding with the Pan-African Centre for Gender,
Peace and Development of the non-governmental
organization Femme Africa Solidarite, in particular to
address the gender dimension in training, especially
in predeployment training. As a result, there has been
an increase in the number of women in Senegal's
defence and security forces and, consequently, in its
contributions to peacekeeping operations, where the
number of women doubled between 2018 and 2019, in
the spirit of resolution 2242 (2015). The prospects are
even more promising with the support of partners, such
as the UN-Women all-female selection assistance and
assessment team training programme, funded by the
United States and Canadian Elsie Initiative for Women
in Peace Operations, among others.

In conclusion, as a major contributor of uniformed
personnel, Senegal reaffirms its commitment to
the Secretariat in its gender equality policy within
peacekeeping operations. I remind members that the
success of that policy depends on adopting an inclusive
approach that takes into account the situation in
Member States.

