Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): Eight years have passed since the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000). Generally speaking, we are
satisfied with the implementation of the resolution by
the United Nations and on the national level by States
throughout the world. However, the situation of women
and girls in conflict zones remains a source of great
concern, as shown in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2008/622) submitted for our consideration today.

Resolution 1325 (2000) has helped a growing
number of women to overcome the obstacles
confronting them along the road to participation in
decision-making processes, supported the promotion of
women's rights and contributed to peace and security
throughout the world. Shortcomings remain, however,
in the implementation of the resolution, especially in
conflict zones.

We recognize that the greatest share of
responsibility for the implementation of the resolution
lies with Member States. Indeed, the United Nations
cannot provide for greater female participation in
peacekeeping operations if Member States do not
ensure that there are sufficient women candidates for
peacekeeping missions. One cannot expect the
promotion of women's rights and their advancement
and protection in conflict areas and in other States if
there are no national strategies for that.

We agree with the statement in the Secretary-
General's report that there is no single agreed approach
for dealing with the issue of the gender gap. We must
take into account the specificities and needs of each
State. We reaffirm yet again that it is the responsibility
of States to adopt effective national legislation to
promote the rights of women, to eliminate the culture
of impunity and to encourage greater participation by
women in decision-making processes. We should also
undertake media campaigns and set up education
programmes to raise awareness of women's rights and
to eliminate cultural discrimination against them.
In terms of the African continent, we are satisfied
to see the commitment shown by African States to
promoting gender equality and empowerment of
women, in conformity with the Constitutive Act of the
African Union. We pay tribute to the progress achieved
so far at the regional level. Indeed, a final draft of
African Union policies for women has been elaborated
with the assistance of civil society organizations. That
final draft will be submitted to the Assembly of Heads
of State and Government in the preparations leading up
to the declaration of the period from 2010 to 2020 as
the African Decade for Women. We should also note
that the recently established African Women's Rights
Observatory is an important tool to ensure follow-up in
the enforcement of women's rights in Africa and to
take into account the need to overcome the gender gap.

Despite all of those efforts by the United Nations,
the African Union and individual States, we are
seriously concerned by sexual violence against women
in conflict areas, whether during conflict or in post-
conflict situations. Effective prevention and response,
in our view, requires comprehensive, coordinated and
multidimensional long-term efforts involving all
stakeholders. We believe that certain measures adopted
by peacekeeping operations in conflict areas are
effective and, to a large extent, contribute to preventing
sexual violence against women. For example, there are
policewomen deployed in conflict zones and 24-hour
peacekeeping police patrols in refugee and displaced
persons' camps.

When we refer to violence against women in
conflict zones, we must bear in mind the violence and
psychological terror visited upon Palestinian women
suffering under Israeli occupation, in brazen violation
of all the principles of international law. We can all
imagine the terrible suffering of pregnant women who
give birth at checkpoints because they are prevented
from reaching hospitals. We can all imagine the
suffering of thousands of women deprived of drugs and
food and whose vital needs remain unmet, including in
the Gaza Strip. We can all imagine the suffering of
women who see their children killed before their eyes,
or women whose children are arrested and then
languish in Israeli jails without being brought to trial. I
mention the suffering of the Palestinian women
because, unfortunately, the Secretary-General's report
made no mention of it.

We believe that a drastic solution to the problem
of violence against women is to resolve conflicts, to
settle them at the very outset, to ensure that peace
prevails, to set up an effective and transparent security
sector, to accelerate development in post-conflict
States and to strengthen the role of women in all fields.
That is something in which the United Nations
specialized agencies can participate by providing
assistance to national efforts towards women's
advancement through the financing of education and
training programmes focused as a priority on women
and girls.

Finally, I wish to reiterate the support of my
country for all of the recommendations included in

paragraph 97 of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2008/622) to accelerate the full implementation of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000).

