Mr. Islam (Bangladesh): We thank the Bolivian
presidency for organizing this open debate. We
appreciate the briefing by the Secretary-General and
his annual report (S/2018/900) concerning progress,
challenges and gaps in implementing the women and
peace and security agenda. We also thank the other
briefers for sharing their insights.

We take particular note of the Secretary-General's
recommendations for further mainstreaming women's
participation in peace processes and in United Nations
peace operations. Bangladesh is currently working to
conclude the preparation of its national action plan,
pursuant to resolution 1325 (2000) and its successor
resolutions. We hope to finalize the process to coincide
with the advent of the twentieth anniversary of
the resolution.

We have often shared at the United Nations our
national experience with women's empowerment in
the aftermath of gaining our independence as a war-
ravaged country in 1971. It was evident from the outset
that without the active and meaningful participation
of our women, our nation-building initiatives would
not result in creating the peaceful, just and equitable
society that our founding fathers had envisaged. The
history of Bangladesh's development trajectory has
been a story of continued forward strides by our women
in every sphere of our society. The photos of two of our
fighter helicopter pilots deployed in the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo - which were still to be found
around the United Nations premises recently - have
been an eloquent testimony to the heights our women
have scaled so far. The deployment of our first all-
female formed police unit in Haiti was a critical step
towards expanding women's participation in United
Nations peace operations.

However, our women and girls continue to face
formidable challenges. It perhaps takes generations
to bring about changes in certain entrenched societal
norms that continue to retard women's advancement in
the true sense. Considering the sea changes we have
witnessed so far, we are aware that any such change
needs to be actively facilitated in order to gain traction
within society in an organic manner.

In that context, the United Nations and its many
partners can indeed act as standard-bearers for
societies in transition. The women and peace and
security agenda has catalysed decisive and forward-
looking initiatives in a number of contexts around the
world towards expanding women's participation in
maintaining peace and security. In Bangladesh, women's
political participation has been ensured through
certain statutory provisions and affirmative action
leading to their vibrant presence in all representative
institutions, from the local to the national levels. The
growing recruitment of women into our armed forces
and other law enforcement agencies will allow us to
reach our shared targets for the deployment of female
peacekeepers in the near future. Our policy approach
to consider gender as a cross-cutting issue across our
national development strategies has reaped dividends
in terms of reaching the gender-related targets in the
Millennium Development Goals, and currently in the
context of the Sustainable Development Goals. In the
course of their empowerment, our women at the grass
roots have emerged as key agents of change and a
preventive force against the spread of violent extremism
and intolerance.

Faced with the Rohingya humanitarian crisis,
we are now currently working with the relevant
humanitarian partners to create safe, inclusive
spaces for the women and girls residing in camps.
The Independent International Fact-finding Mission
on Myanmar has once again brought to the fore the
inhuman brutalities unleashed against the Rohingya
women by the Myanmar security forces and their local
collaborators. The Fact-finding Mission concluded that
rape had been used against many of these women as a
premeditated tactic. In the initial days of the crisis, it
was a race against time to provide necessary medical
and psychosocial services to the victims. The trauma
suffered by these women continues to be exacerbated
in the backdrop of the prevailing uncertainty over the
prospects for their safe and dignified return to their
homes in Myanmar. The victims among the Rohingya
women and their families have every right to seek
accountability for those who perpetrated against them
the gravest crimes under international law.

On our part, we have recently concluded a
framework of cooperation with the Office of the
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict
for addressing the needs of the victims. Our authorities
will remain sensitized to promoting the effective
participation of Rohingya women in decisions affecting
their community in the present and future. We urge
the Security Council to remain seized of the gender
dimension of the crisis in its continued deliberations on
the situation in Myanmar.

In general, Bangladesh remains committed to
supporting the Secretary-General in all his initiatives
to promote the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda, and particularly in giving effect
to his zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and
abuse. As a member of the Group of Friends of Women,
Peace and Security, we shall remain engaged in our
efforts to enhance women's participation in mediation,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and sustaining peace, and
disarmament and arms control.

We acknowledge the critical importance of
preserving and augmenting the gender advisory
capacities in United Nations peace operations through
the allocation of adequate resources. Our delegation
will lend support to pursuing any items on the women
and peace and security agenda identified as unfinished
from the three review exercises undertaken within the
United Nations peace and security pillar in 2015.

