Mrs. Pobee (Ghana): Mr. President, at the outset,
let me express my delegation's appreciation to you and
to the Uruguayan presidency of the Security Council
for convening this open debate on the subject of women
and peace and security, focusing on sexual violence in
conflict as a tactic of war and terrorism.

We thank the Secretary-General for his very
comprehensive report (S/2017/249) and are grateful
for the briefings provided by the Deputy Secretary-
General, Ms. Amina Mohammed, Mr. Adama Dieng
and Ms. Mina Jaf.

We welcome the extensive work done within the
United Nations system in international standard-setting
on conflict-related sexual violence and applaud the
Security Council for its ground-breaking resolutions
that have helped to prioritize this issue. Much, however,
remains to be accomplished in real terms in the areas of
prevention, accountability, prosecution of actual cases
and in addressing the needs of victims.

My delegation is pleased to note that focus is now
shifting from norm-setting to the implementation of
existing legal instruments to combat sexual violence in
conflict. We recognize the fact that Member States have
the primary responsibility for the protection of their
peoples for mass atrocities, including sexual violence
and, consequently, there is a need to strengthen national
capacities to hold perpetrators accountable, to deliver
justice to victims, and to deter future crimes through
relevant legislative and institutional arrangements.

Since long-held cultural perceptions and beliefs
require more than legislation, national laws must be
backed by multi-stakeholder partnerships and networks
at the community level with the active participation of
traditional and religious leaders. The social acceptability
of sexual violence in conflict must not be allowed to
gain ground, normalized or reinforced. We therefore
share the View that sexual violence in conflict does not
arise solely out of the conditions of war, but is directly
linked to the culture of violence and discrimination
against women that already exists in any given society,
and that this must be tackled holistically.

One of the critical gaps in addressing sexual
violence in conflict and in post-conflict situations is
the lack of capacity of peace enforcement officers.
Training in gender sensitivity, the prevention of
sexual exploitation and addressing conflict-related
sexual violence should be mandatory components
of national, military and police training, as well as
of the predeployment training of all United Nations
peacekeeping and civilian personnel.

In situations where peacekeepers themselves are
involved in crimes, they should be made to face the full
rigours of the law to serve as a deterrent. My delegation
wishes to reiterate the importance of adopting survivor-
centric approaches towards victims as a means of
addressing difficulties in reintegration and social
stigma related to their abuse. Adequate funding must
be allocated to specific and targeted programmes,
including appropriate medical and psychosocial support,
education about legal rights and economic reintegration
for victims. Special efforts must be made to incorporate
victims into justice processes and to create space for
them to be effectively heard. In that regard, national
judicial processes must seek to eliminate complicated
or degrading reporting procedures and promptly and
thoroughly investigate reported cases as a further
means of reducing impunity.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to commend
Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, the outgoing Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, for the strides that have been made.
We trust that the incoming Special Representative will
continue to lead in these efforts. We urge the Council
to approve additional resources to be allocated to the
important work they are doing.

