Mrs. Kassangana-Jakubowska (Poland): Let me
begin by thanking the Russian delegation for organizing
this timely debate.

Poland aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union. I would like to
take this opportunity to share with the Security Council
some additional remarks in my national capacity.

In the year after the comprehensive reviews of
United Nations peace operations, the peacebuilding
architecture and the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), concrete commitments were made to advance
women's rights, in particular in terms of their political
participation and leadership in conflict and post-
conflict situations. Yet there is still a lot to be done to
strengthen women's roles in conflict prevention, peace
negotiations and peacemaking processes.

Since it is a primary responsibility ofMember States
to implement the commitments and obligations under
the women and peace and security agenda into national
policies and legislative framework, let me reassure
the Council that Poland remains committed to the
promotion of women's meaningful participation in all
stages of peace processes in its three dimensions - the
political, institutional and financial.

As far as political engagement is concerned,
Poland has been participating in Security Council open
debates on women and peace and security and we have
co-sponsored many of the resolutions related to the
issue, including the most recent resolution 2242 (2015),
which provides a clear road map for the implementation
of the women and peace and security framework. We
commend the work of the Informal Expert Group on
Women and Peace and Security and we are convinced
that its establishment will contribute to further
enhance coordination for gender mainstreaming in

peacebuilding and peacekeeping missions.

In terms of our institutional involvement, we
have appointed a focal point on women and peace and
security. Poland participated in the founding meeting of
the women and peace and security focal points network,
which took place here in New York. We commend Spain,
Canada, Chile, Japan, Namibia and the United Arab
Emirates for their timely initiative. We look forward
to upcoming meetings of the network, which we are
sure will provide a platform for the exchange of good
practices in the area of women and peace and security.
We are also working on our national action plan on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), which will
enable us to better comply with our obligations under
the women and peace and security agenda.

Last but not least, we have also decided to earmark
a minimum of 15 per cent of all our future funding
for the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund for gender
responsive policies, including those addressing the
special needs of women in post-conflict situations. We
believe that a predictable funding mechanism is vital
for the effective implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda.

Apart from Member States responsibilities to
advance the women and peace and security agenda,
we must also acknowledge the role of the civil
society organizations, including women human
rights defenders and women-led non-governmental
organizations, as they play a crucial role at all levels
of conflict prevention, decision-making, mediation and
post-conflict resolution. We are convinced that close
collaboration between Governments and civil society
can significantly scale up the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda.

Let me conclude by highlighting the fact that
women are among the most vulnerable victims in war
and conflict situations, yet they are also often the ones
that trigger peace mechanisms. As the examples from
Liberia or Colombia show, women's movements are
major agents of change in contributing to international
peace and security. It is our moral obligation to
enable their full participation in conflict resolution
and peacebuilding.

