Ms. King: I am particularly honoured today, as
Special Adviser on Gender Issues, to have the
opportunity to speak in this debate, which is so
historic, when for the first time the Council has decided
to devote an entire open discussion to the topic
"Women and peace and security".

It is only fairly recently that the experience of
women and girls in armed conflict has been discussed,
and then discussion has usually concentrated on their
role as victims. Today's debate will show that we have
come a long way in a relatively short time. Your
country's strong leadership, Mr. President, in holding
the landmark May seminar which marked this year's
tenth anniversary of the United Nations Transition
Assistance Group resulted in the historic Windhoek
Declaration and Namibia Plan of Action on
"Mainstreaming a Gender Perspective in
Multidimensional Peace Support Operations". This
achievement has won universal admiration among all
those fighting for women's right to participate in all
aspects of the peace process. It and your distinguished
chairing of the General Assembly's twenty-third
special session, "Women 2000: gender equality,
development and peace for the twenty-first century",
which immediately followed in June, constitute
important steps along the way to considering the
United Nations peace operations from the point of view
of both women and men.

Other important developments have led to today's
meeting. They include the Council's decision to take a
thematic approach to its work; the recognition that the
Council gave - under the chair of Bangladesh - on
International Women's Day, 8 March, to women as
actors in the peace process; the discussion on the
situation of women in Afghanistan, which took place in
April, led by the representative of Canada; and the
Council's resolution 1314 (2000) of 11 August.

The timeliness of this discussion is also
significant. The Secretary-General has just returned
from an area where he undoubtedly had an opportunity
to see at first hand the role women and men should
play in their societies to bring about peace and to
rebuild those societies. The discussion also coincides
with the consideration of the Brahimi Panel's report
(8/2000/809) on peace operations and its
implementation.

There are three broad areas to be considered in
the context of today's discussion: how armed conflict
affects women; how women actually respond to
conflict, the peace process and post-conflict
reconstruction; and how we plan strategically for a
future in which women are equal partners with men in
enhancing our effectiveness in peace operations.

Today I would like to concentrate on the two
latter points, drawing on my experience as Chief of
Mission in the United Nations Observer Mission in
South Africa (UNOMSA).

What do women actually do in conflict situations,
and how do they respond? The Secretary-General has
repeatedly emphasized the changing nature of war. He
has noted that modern warfare is increasingly
conducted within, rather than between, States, and that
the Security Council is now called on to deal with such
conflicts. He has stressed that more and more non-State
actors are protagonists in armed conflict; even children
become involved. The proliferation of small arms and
the ease with which they can be acquired, clearly
shown in the Department for Disarmament Affairs and
Department of Public Information video documentary
"Armed to the Teeth", has also added a new dimension.

The socio-economic fabric of a country has now
to be the major focus of attention. Societal dynamics
thus become a key guide to finding entry points into
resolving disputes. Groups within each society, and
especially women's groups, non-governmental,
religious and other groups, have a major role to play.
Whether these groups were formed before the conflict
or during it is not important. What is important is that
they must be part of all stages of the peace
negotiations, in planning for the future, in rebuilding
and in crafting preventive strategies to avoid conflict.

Often, those of us who have seen the value of
women's participation in peace operations at first hand
are challenged by the sceptics to present empirical
rather than anecdotal findings. In this connection, I am
pleased to report on the results of a joint three-year
effort of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO), my office and the Division for the
Advancement of Women of the Department of
Economic and Social Affairs, a study that was
supported by the generous funding of several Member
States. This study, "Mainstreaming a Gender
Perspective in Multidimensional Peace Operations" has
just been finalized.
The study looks at five peace operations, in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Cambodia, El Salvador,
Namibia and South Africa. It answers the sceptics by
giving objective and empirical findings on what
women staff do in missions; whether and how they
influence the outcomes; and how their participating
equally with men can improve the efficiency of United
Nations peacekeeping. The Windhoek Declaration and
the Namibia Plan of Action were informed by these
findings.

Exactly what does this study tell us? It shows
unequivocally that when there is a critical mass of
women in a mission - at least 30 per cent - local
women are more easily mobilized to join peace
committees. This occurred in South Africa, El Salvador
and Namibia, where women actively promoted voter
education and the rights of individual women to vote.
In other words, women's participation in United
Nations missions empowers local women and may
inspire them to organize for the achievement of a
democratic society.

Women's participation has the capacity to expand
the debate a little further so that it may encompass
more diverse subjects, including those that may be
more relevant to women and children. Women are
frequently less hierarchical in dealing with local
communities and listen more, thereby having better
insights into the root causes of conflict. Local women
are more likely to confide in women peacekeepers on
such matters as rape and other sexual violence. The
presence of a critical mass of women appears to foster
confidence and trust among the local population, and
this is critical to successful operations, such as in El
Salvador. Women are active negotiators and able to see
more clearly issues that affect women differently than
men.

Women's participation in all aspects of a mission
can help to break down stereotypes held by women in
many local communities, especially where women
peacekeepers serve in a broad spectrum of the activities
of a mission. This has had a spin-off effect on the
participation of local women in decision-making
positions. Women political monitors are just as willing
and capable of serving in dangerous or isolated areas as
men, and do so just as effectively.

The study also shows that mixed teams of women
and men, a significant proportion of women team
leaders, women special representatives or heads of
mission, or a conscious effort by a special
representative to seek the best staff, whether women or
men, has a positive influence on the outcome. Women
also respond by participating in the troop-contributing
countries' military and civilian police contingents. The
Department of Peacekeeping Operations has made
strenuous efforts to encourage Member States to send
women on missions, on the basis of equity, as their
presence can assist in defusing potentially tense
situations. Much more should be done in order to
encourage women to enter this service.

What do this and other studies tell us about what
local women do? There is abundant evidence to show
that even when having to flee to safety with their
families or protecting them in refugee or displaced-
persons camps, women take on a number of peace-
building activities.

Women are active at both formal and informal
levels. With few exceptions, women are not present in
formal peace negotiations. However, women have been
part of these negotiations, as we saw in the field in
Burundi, and in Guatemala and South Africa. Somali
women helped to bring the clan leaders back into the
negotiations at one stage and were permitted to join the
negotiations as observers.

Most of the activities, however, take place at the
informal level. Grass-roots women's organizations in
several countries have sponsored peace education;
encouraged child soldiers to lay down arms; organized
groups advocating peace across party and ethnic lines;
organized campaigns against small arms, such as the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) African
Women's Committee on peace and development;
influenced repatriation processes and established
services for returning exiles, such as in Guatemala;
contributed to ending conflict; negotiated the release of
hostages; and established legal support groups to get
recognition for women's rights to land and household
property which may have been in the name of a spouse
killed or "disappeared" in a conflict.

Women at the local level are a rich resource
waiting to be systematically tapped by the international
community. Many aspects of these informal activities
have been encouraged, supported financially and
documented by the United Nations and its agencies. In
this connection, in addition to the work of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
Department of Political Affairs, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Department for Disarmament Affairs should be
mentioned. Special mention should also be made of the
work of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, the United Nations
Children's Fund, the World Food Programme and the
World Health Organization. The United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), the United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) and the
United Nations Centre for Human Settlements
(Habitat) should also be credited with pioneering work
at the national and grass-roots levels. Good practices
have been identified, studied and published, including
the study by the United Nations Research Institute for
Social Development, "Women and Post-Conflict
Reconstruction". The exchange of information on these
practices has enabled the United Nations system to
encourage States engaged in rehabilitation to work in
partnership with and sustain women's groups and civil
society engaged in these essential but often
unrecognized activities. Capacity-building for
leadership and governance led by UNDP and UNIFEM
has greatly facilitated women's ability to play
constructive roles.

These entities are all members of the
Administrative Committee on Coordination's Inter-
Agency Committee on Women and Gender Equality,
which I chair. We have lately formed a Task Force on
Women and Peace and Security to strengthen
collaboration on this critical issue.

This brings me to our vision for the future. The
basic blueprint appears in the Beijing Platform for
Action, the Beijing + 5 outcome document, the
Windhoek Declaration and the Namibia Plan of Action.
It also appears in the many powerful statements from
women's groups that we heard yesterday in the
Council's Arria-formula meeting.

The planning of any mission must include gender
equality aspects. The mandate of the mission and the
guidelines for special representatives must clearly
indicate that gender considerations must be integrated
into the mission's goals and the head of mission be
accountable. Each mission should have a plan for
incorporating gender issues into all aspects of the
mission's work. There should be a gender unit,
adequately staffed and resourced to provide the
necessary backstopping on the mission site, and one in
DPKO for overall oversight. I am pleased to state that
DPKO has established two such units- one in East
Timor and one in Kosovo - and gender focal points in
Sierra Leone and Western Sahara. All sectors of the
transition or rebuilding process should take gender
issues into account. Greater attention must be paid to
ensuring the appointment of women as special
representatives, in accordance with the Brahimi report
and the call by women heads of State and Government
of 5 September. The Council may wish to ensure that
all the reports that it receives on missions contain
information and data on the extent to which a gender
perspective has been introduced and on the number and
level of women working in the various missions.
Working with the agencies on the ground, the political
and development wings of the mission should organize
the mobilization of community groups, especially
women's groups, and expand the pool of skills needed
to sustain the peace process. A roster of such groups
could be kept by DPKO, in collaboration with regional
bodies and agencies. The code of conduct for
peacekeepers should be regularly updated and where
there are infringements, there should be a continuation
of apprehension and discipline. Should it be decided to
appoint a new assistant secretary-general in the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, as proposed
in the Panel's report, strong consideration should be
given to appointing a woman to one of the three
assistant secretary-general posts in the Department.

In closing, may I recall the main finding of the
joint study made by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Division for the Advancement of
Women. It was that the most important lesson learned
is that lessons are not always learned. Lessons from
Namibia and South Africa had little effect on
Cambodia or Bosnia Herzegovina, for example. Gender
equality issues are absolutely essential to the success of
any peace operation. We cannot exclude half the
world's resources from participating in peace.
The fundamental human right to have and to
enjoy equality is a given. It was emphasized by the
Beijing Conference and reaffirmed again in the
Beijing +5 outcome document and even more so at the
Millennium Declaration. There can be no peace
without gender equality and no development without
both peace and equality. Without the equal and fair
participation of women in decision-making positions in
the United Nations and also in Member States, as well
as in this central organ of the United Nations, we will
never achieve the vision outlined in the United Nations
Charter. May this discussion and the decisions that
follow be those in which we demonstrate that, at least
in the area of women and peace and security, this is one
lesson that we have learned and intend to put into
action.

