Mr. Danon (Israel): Israel joins the many
delegations here that have condemned the terrible
terror attacks in Berlin and in Turkey on the Russian
Ambassador. Terror is terror, and we are united with
the rest of the international community in condemning
and opposing such terrible crimes.

Every year, hundreds of thousands of people,
mostly women and children, are trafficked across
borders worldwide, in a crime of humankind against
humankind. It should outrage every person because
it debases our fellow human beings. It should outrage
every community because it erodes societies. And it
should outrage every nation because it funds organized
crime and terrorist groups and threatens international
peace and security. It is worth emphasizing that human
trafficking is a multibillion-dollar industry. While in
the past trafficking in persons, like drug and arms
trafficking, was mostly run by organized criminal
groups, in today's world we are witnessing an alarming
increase in the involvement of terrorist groups such as
Da'esh and Boko Haram.

A year ago, we all had the chance to hear in person
the horrific story of Nadia Murad, a Yazidi refugee
and victim of trafficking, in the first-ever Security
Council debate dedicated to trafficking in persons (see S/PV.7585). In October, in an effort to raise awareness
of the dire situation of Yazidi women and girls, the
Israel Permanent Mission to the United Nations hosted
an event focused on trauma treatment for refugees who
manage to escape the bloodshed in Syria and Iraq. At
that event, we had the opportunity to hear from a young
woman named Marwa Al Aliko, a Yazidi refugee from
Iraq who was captured and trafficked by Da'esh and
forced into slavery before she was able to escape. In
that meeting, Marwa said that

"the Da'esh fighters took us captive and put us in a
small room. Every night the men would come to us
and do as they pleased. After a few days one of the
men bought me and my two sisters and took us to
Syria. Ten days later, they separated us and I was
all alone."
Unfortunately, it seems that the international community
has failed Marwa and her family and friends.

In recent years the Syrian conflict has turned
the Middle East into a breeding ground for human
traffickers. Unfortunately, that is not limited to Da'esh
alone but also extends to the Syrian regime. According
to the 2016 report of the United States Department
of State on trafficking in persons, the actions of the
Syrian Government, as well as Hizbullah, continue to
worsen the problem of human trafficking crimes. We
must condemn those acts and demand that the Syrian
Government uphold its international obligations by
refraining from using child soldiers, protecting women
who have been sold as sex slaves and prosecuting
traffickers, whether they are Government officials
or terrorists.

Israel shares fully in the global concern about this
issue and in the commitment to continuing to fight to
eliminate trafficking in persons. Combating human
trafficking is a high priority for our Government. We
are a party to the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and its Palermo
Protocol on trafficking in persons. In fact, we are fully
engaged in the fight against trafficking in persons
through all four Ps - prevention, prosecution,
protection and partnership.

The first is prevention. We introduced a
comprehensive anti-trafficking law in 2006 and adopted
national plans of action. Eradicating the plague of
trafficking and slavery requires partnership at all levels.
To achieve that, we appointed a national anti-trafficking
coordinator to coordinate efforts between the
Government and non-governmental organizations.
The second is prosecution. We have invested in our
intelligence and law enforcement agencies in order to
identify trafficking networks, prosecute perpetrators
and enforce tough sentences. The third is protection.
We have introduced a network of services to help locate
trafficked persons and provide victims with support.
They are given a safe place to stay in a Government-
funded shelter, free legal aid, a work visa and the medical
and psychological support they so desperately need to
begin rehabilitation. Recently, the special forfeiture
fund for the rehabilitation of victims of trafficking was
activated and allocated funds to more than 45 victims
and five non-governmental organizations (NGOs) for
various rehabilitation purposes, including recovery and
reintegration. And the fourth, and last, is partnership
among all stakeholders, namely, Government, civil
society and the private sector. Our success is largely
due to the valuable partnerships we have formed with
NGOs. They are critical in every phase of the process.

Each one of us has a responsibility. Every nation
must take action by adopting strong anti-trafficking
laws, strengthening enforcement mechanisms and
introducing tougher penalties. Trafficking preys on
those without a voice, and therefore we must be the
voice ourselves. We must be the voice of the man who
is lured by the promise of a higher-paying job, but ends
up toiling in hard labour in horrific conditions under
the threat of violence. We must be the voice of the child
who is told she would have a better life, but is raped and
forced into prostitution. We must be the voice ofwomen
such as Marwa and Nadia and so many others. We must
show them through our actions that they are not alone.

