Mr. Beyani: I would like to thank the Permanent
Mission of Argentina and the other members of the
Security Council for holding this open debate on
the critical issue of displaced women and girls in
the framework of the women and peace and security
agenda. The intersection of peace and security, human
rights and development is critical to dealing with the
issue of internal displacement. We must not lose sight
of the important role that internally displaced women
can play in negotiating peace, ensuring their human
rights and bringing about development in post-conflict
situations.

As part of my mandate, I enter into dialogue with
Governments and the international community alike to
advise on and advocate for the best possible protection
of internally displaced persons (IDPs), and in all my
field missions I pay specific attention to the protection
of internally displaced women and girls. This year
alone, I have carried out missions to Kenya, Azerbaijan,
Cote d'Ivoire, Haiti and Ukraine. Such field missions
are significant in that they provide an early warning
system for the international community through the
Human Rights Council, the General Assembly and, in
this instance, the Security Council itself on the actual
causes, conditions and situations of displacement.

My mandate receives specific support from
United Nations agencies and entities, in particular
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, and I am
grateful for their support and great collaboration. My
work could not be possible without the outstanding
support extended by Member States, both those
working to cope with and to protect IDPs and those
supporting action to improve the lives of internally
displaced persons internationally. I am grateful for
the ever-growing cooperation extended by States to
my mandate. I would also like to highlight the Arria
Formula meeting in May on the protection of IDPs,
co-chaired by Chile and Argentina, which I had the
privilege to address and during which the issue of
internal displacement and threats to international peace
and security were tackled.

We started 2014 with an unprecedented peak in the
number of persons forcibly displaced within their own
countries due to armed conflict, generalized Violence
or human rights violations - 33.3 million internally
displaced persons, the highest figure ever recorded.
In many countries, IDPs are also displaced by natural
disasters, further compounding existing vulnerabilities.
Women and girls account for some half of the world's
IDP population.

Since the 1990s, greater attention has been paid to
the rights and needs of women and girls in emergency
and post-conflict situations and to promoting gender-
sensitive approaches in humanitarian, development
and early recovery response. A wide range of
resolutions - for instance, the landmark resolution
1325 (2000) - but also policies, gender-mainstreaming
efforts and targeted programmes have been adopted in
this regard, and they have increasingly encompassed
internally displaced women and girls.

The 1998 Guiding Principles on Internal
Displacement, which detail the specific rights of
internally displaced women and girls, have been
recognized by the General Assembly and in Security
Council resolutions. The Guiding Principles have
informed the inclusion of concrete and progressive
provisions on internally displaced women in subsequent
instruments, such as the 2006 Pact on Security,
Stability and Development in the Great Lakes Region
and the 2009 African Union Kampala Convention for
the Protection and Assistance of Internally Displaced
Persons in Africa. In 2013, I dedicated my thematic
report to the Human Rights Council to the situation
of internally displaced women, and during this debate
I would like to draw to the attention of the Security
Council to that report.

Despite such positive developments, responses to
internal displacement still do not adequately address
the specific concerns and roles of women and girls.
During situations of conflict and violence, women and
girls flee to escape arbitrary killings, rape, torture,
inhumane or degrading treatment or starvation.
They may have been the victims of such violations
themselves or seen their loved ones attacked and
abused. The experience of my mandate is that women
and girls are targeted as a means of armed conflict - to
destroy and humiliate communities, to manipulate the
demographic composition of communities, for sexual
slavery including enforced concubinage, and at times
enforced sterilization. As IDPs, women experience the
various human rights challenges that are characteristic
to displacement situations and that often place IDPs
at greater risk than other affected populations. Such
challenges include the loss of livelihoods and key
documentation, as well as the lack of effective access
to a number of important rights and services.

In addition, internally displaced women often
face double discrimination, based on being both
an IDP and a woman, and experience human rights
challenges due to the intersection of gender with other
factors such as age, group affiliation such as minority
status, disability and civil or socioeconomic situations.
Displaced women often have to assume new gender
roles that further expose them to gender-based violence,
including physical violence and trafficking. Those
roles include being the only breadwinners and taking
on the increased burden of care for extended families.
Internally displaced women risk their lives, safety
and physical integrity to protect their husbands and
families. They have told me, "If we let their husbands
and male children fetch firewood, food or water, they
will be killed, whereas we may be raped but spared
death".

Other specific protection concerns for internally
displaced women include inequitable access to
assistance and psychosocial support, education,
training and livelihoods; poor reproductive health care;
and exclusion from decision-making processes. The
fact that more IDPs tend to live in urban rather than
camp or rural settings also raises additional challenges
that have detrimental impacts on women and girls. I
first visited cote d'Ivoire a year after the end of the
post-electoral violence. Many IDPs had found refuge in
urban areas, including girls who had been impregnated
during displacement and could not go back to their
communities as a result. However, the inability of
IDPs to continue renting their shelters in those urban
centres, once the cash grant they received to enable
them to stay in urban areas ran out. pushed the most
vulnerable communities, including women and girls, to
the outskirts of the city. Many displaced women and
girls, particularly those belonging to minorities, are at
risk of statelessness.

Pre-existing patterns of discrimination in many
of those contexts are exacerbated during conflict and
contribute to violations of women's rights to housing,
land and property. For instance, during my visit to Sri
Lanka, I was struck by the fact that many IDP women
either lacked proper documentation to their land or had
documents in the name of their deceased husbands or
fathers, preventing them from accessing their land.

To respond to those intricate problems with far-
reaching consequences, we need to look at long-term
solutions. Displacement is not just a humanitarian issue,
but also an issue ofbuilding peace, and constitutes a long-
term development challenge with profound political,
economic, environmental and security implications.
If left unaddressed, protracted displacement generates
further marginalization, inequality, fragility and
vulnerability and erodes women's resilience.

Displacement can overwhelm the institutional
capacities of affected States, which are already dealing
with major conflicts or disasters. Many States have
neither policy frameworks or coordination systems in
place to respond to internal displacement, nor a set of
procedures to bring quick assistance to populations
made extremely vulnerable from one day to another as
they have lost livelihoods, social protection and have
gone through traumatic experiences. States also lack
comprehensive IDP registration systems by age and
gender.

More needs to be done ifwe are to respond adequately
to the specific protection concerns of IDP women. Data
collection disaggregated by sex, age, location and other
key indicators is critical for effective advocacy and the
development of programmes to respond to the specific
needs of IDP women at all stages of displacement,
irrespective of the cause of displacement. National and
international efforts to collect, update, analyse and
disseminate both quantitative and qualitative data on
IDPs, including those outside of camps, displacement-
affected communities and communities at risk of
displacement should be strengthened.

A more preventive approach to sexual and gender-
based violence in the context of internal displacement
is also essential. In that regard, gender-sensitive
training should be provided more systematically to
police and military forces, judiciary personnel and
social workers. A stronger focus on prevention is also
required within the households and communities of
the internally displaced, including engaging men and
boys in those prevention and protection efforts. States
should take all measures to combat impunity for sexual
and gender-based violence, including by investigating
and holding perpetrators accountable. Efforts to reduce
exposure to sexual violence also entails ensuring that
survivors have access to appropriate support, including
reproductive health care and psychosocial services.

Ensuring access to justice and accountability
mechanisms is key when addressing internal
displacement with a gender lens. In addition to
promoting access to criminal and civil justice systems
for IDP women, it is also essential to consider how their
concerns can be addressed through transitional justice
measures such as truth and reconciliation commissions
and reparations. Donor accountability for gender-
equality programming for IDPs is essential and entails
more effective integration of gender issues into donor
practices.

I was heartened by the resilience of IDP women
I met in Ukraine. Many of them were volunteering to
help other displaced persons. Meaningful participation
by IDP women and girls in the development,
implementation, monitoring and evaluation of laws,
policies, programmes and activities that affect their
lives at all stages of displacement is key in the response
to internal displacement. IDP women, as individuals,
have the right to make free and informed decisions
concerning the resolution of their displacement on the
basis of adequate and appropriately communicated
information, participate fully in building peace and
in planning and management of their return, local
integration or resettlement elsewhere. The participation
and leadership of IDP women in finding durable
solutions that address their very specific concerns is
critical.

I would like to thank again Argentina for the
opportunity to address the Security Council today.
