Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French):

Allow me at the outset, on behalf of the Moroccan

delegation, to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
the debate.

My delegation welcomes the report (S/2012/33)
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010)
on conflict-related sexual violence. I also take the
opportunity to thank Ms. Margot Wallstrtjm, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, for her constructive and
substantive briefing and to pay tribute to her efforts to
promote the protection of women against violence in
conflict situations. Our thanks also go to Mr. Herve
Ladsous and to Ms. Amina Megheirbi on behalf of the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security. I
wish to congratulate the NGO Working Group in
particular for its commendable work in raising
awareness with respect to members of the Council.

Our debate today gives us the opportunity to take
stock of the implementation of the commitments made
under resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1960
(2010), as well as the progress achieved in the
implementation of the monitoring, analysis and
reporting arrangements established in line with
resolution 1960 (2010).

The convening of this debate also allows us to
undertake a more in-depth reflection on the
psychological impact and the consequences of conflict-
related sexual violence against women, girls and
children, as well as on the need to identify with greater
determination ways and means of ensuring optimal
protection for the Victims of such violence.

The suffering endured by women during conflict
and the various forms of exclusion and social injustice
that they suffer from within their communities and
families require more resolute joint action and a
stronger commitment to ensure that they benefit from
the maximum level of protection.

The adoption of resolution 1960 (2010) in
December 2010 was one element of a series of
initiatives aimed at bolstering the existing legal toolkit
for tackling conflict-related sexual violence. We
believe that the monitoring, analysis and reporting
arrangements established under that resolution should
allow for the collection of objective, reliable and
credible data on acts of sexual violence. We would also
like to see these arrangements serve as a basis for

comprehensive strategies to counter sexual violence by
strengthening preventive measures, improving medical
and psychological support services, and ensuring
access to justice for victims.

My delegation would also like to commend the
efforts made by the Council to combat sexual violence,
in particular with respect to the preparation of the
terms of reference for women's protection advisers, in
cooperation with the Department of Political Affairs,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General.

The report of the Secretary-General also takes
stock of situations of sexual violence in several regions
of the world and of the measures taken by the parties in
conflict to put an end to those acts by identifying those
responsible, combating impunity of the perpetrators
and masterminds, and making available medical,
psychological and social assistance for victims and
their families.

While it is the responsibility of the parties to a
conflict to put an end to the grave consequences of
sexual violence during conflict for women and girls,
coordinated and sustained action by the United
Nations, through its various organs, agencies and
specialized and programmes, is crucial to progress in
existing initiatives.

The Kingdom of Morocco is convinced that the
effective implementation of Security Council
resolutions on conflict-related sexual Violence also
requires improved coordination among the various
national and international actors involved in the
combat against sexual violence, as well as a more
resolute and sustained commitment on the part of the
United Nations in the area of technical assistance and
capacity-building.

The international community must stand shoulder
to shoulder and act in a spirit of solidarity in
guaranteeing women who have fallen victim to sexual
violence the right to make their voices heard and to
express their suffering, bearing in mind our obligation
to listen to them, protect them and to ensure that such
crimes never again go unpunished.
