Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to express my
appreciation to the delegation of China for organizing
this important debate on women, peace and security. I
would also like to thank the guest speakers for sharing
their experiences this morning.

Women can, and should, play a more important
role in the process of conflict prevention, peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Women are major
stakeholders in each of those stages. Women, together
with children, are most vulnerable and often severely
affected in conflict and instability. Their different
perspectives from those of men and their special needs
must be better reflected in efforts to achieve durable
peace and reconciliation and to rebuild society.

Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), the
Security Council has repeatedly stressed the
importance of women's equal and full participation in
efforts to promote peace. Yet, women have often been
excluded from the peace process owing to the lack of
political will on the part of society and traditional
stereotypes with regard to gender roles. All too often,
gender-based violence and discrimination against
women and girls in the course of conflict hinder their
formal representation in peace talks and in the
rebuilding of society. The challenge, therefore, is how
to utilize the political framework set out in resolution
1325 (2000) to achieve tangible progress in women's
lives on the ground. The report (S/2008/622) of the
Secretary-General provides us with an overview of the
progress made, good practices and existing challenges.
08-57549

First of all, as a sponsor, we welcome the
adoption of resolution 1820 (2008) in June of this year.
The resolution recognized sexual violence as a security
problem and called on the international community to
take concrete steps to tackle widespread sexual
violence against women in situations of armed conflict.
Ending impunity and providing survivors with the
necessary legal protection and remedies will promote
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We hope
that the Secretary-General's campaign to end violence
against women and the inter-agency action against
sexual violence in conflict situations will strengthen
actions by the United Nations system.

Secondly, we are pleased that women are now
more represented in peacekeeping operations, with
full-time gender advisers and focal points. That
facilitates the integration of the gender perspective in
national institutions and governance, the participation
of local women and girls in national decision-making
processes and elections, improved reporting of
violence against women and victims' access to services
such as medical and psychological care. We hope that
the Secretary-General will make further efforts to
appoint more women as special representatives and
special envoys. Ensuring gender-awareness training for
peacekeepers continues to be important in efforts to
make the policy of zero-tolerance effective.

Although we are encouraged by some of the
positive developments, we cannot fail to note that
much remains to be done. To effectively address the
needs of women and girls affected by the pressure of
conflict, we have to adopt a comprehensive approach
to the problem. More effective actions must be taken to
protect them from threats to their safety; but, equally,
stronger measures to empower them are essential in
order to address their needs. Security and judicial
sector reform and the rule of law are important, of
course. But they should be accompanied by basic
social and economic services - such as education,
training, microcredit and access to land and property
rights - to strengthen the economic capacity of
women. What is needed is the human security approach
that we have promoted over the years, the essence of
which is both to protect people's lives and dignity from
serious threats and to empower them to realize their
full potential.

Women should be viewed as being more than just
survivors of conflicts. They can take on the principal
role in fostering reconciliation and peacebuilding
processes. We have provided support through the
United Nations Trust Fund for Human Security to a
number of countries, including Somalia and
Afghanistan, in efforts to involve women in
reconciliation and creating durable peace. For instance,
in Burundi, Japan has been supporting a project
through the Fund aimed at strengthening the economic
capacity of returnees, displaced women and those in
local communities by jointly organizing economic
activities for reconciliation and the coexistence of
women of different ethnic groups.

Such examples offer inspirations to those women
who are struggling for survival every day. I am sure
that there are many more, similar examples of success
throughout the world. I would like to suggest that the
Secretariat compile a list of good practices with regard
to women's participation in reconciliation and
peacebuilding processes and consider preparing a
handbook to be used in a training programme for
peacekeepers and peacebuilding experts. It would also
be useful to practitioners on the ground.

In conclusion, Japan very much hopes that
today's debate will contribute to deepening
understanding of this important and crucial issue and to
reaffirming our commitment to the objectives of
resolution 1325 (2000).

