Ms. Mohammed: The African Union (AU) believes
that the women and peace and security agenda remains
a strong framework that guides our global efforts to
build more peaceful and sustainable societies. Clearly,
resolution 1325 (2000) has set a firm foundation for
women to take an equal role at all stages of conflict
resolution and peacebuilding efforts. That obviously
includes women's representation in peacekeeping
operations as well as during peace talks.

However, 19 years down the line from the adoption
of that landmark resolution, women are still not equally
sitting at the tables of conflict prevention, mediation
and resolution processes. We also note that integrating
women as elements of United Nations peacekeeping
forces remains a slow process. Women represented
only 16 per cent of deployed military observers and
staff officers in peacekeeping operations in 2017, while
in the 32-year period between 1957 - the first time
that a woman officially served in a United Nations
peacekeeping mission - and 1989, only 20 women
served as uniformed peacekeepers. Almost 30 years
later, despite the progress made, the numbers remain
alarmingly low globally.

Against that background, I wish to focus my
intervention on three main areas, as follows.

First, it is important to note that, as of 31 December
2018, African States represented 18 of the top 30
contributors of uniformed personnel to peacekeeping
operations. Almost 50 per cent of all uniformed
peacekeepers come from African Union member
States, and despite the low global representation
of women in peacekeeping, the African region's
contribution was actually 63.4 per cent women in
United Nations peacekeeping.

We continue to make efforts to increase the
numbers, but in order to do so Member States - troop-
contributing countries in particular - need to be
adequately supported. In that regard, we must recognize
the renewed efforts made by our African member
States and the international community, including in
the past year to include practical actions to qualitatively
increase the number of women serving in peace
operations. We must also recognize the African Union
member States that recommitted to gender-sensitive
and women-centred commitments for the 2019 United
Nations Peacekeeping Ministerial pledge.

Nonetheless, the stark reality is that the
international community still needs to better
understand the role of women in peacebuilding
and peacekeeping settings - alongside the gender
dimensions of conflict - if our responses are to be
effective. The joint AU-United Nations fact-finding
missions on women and peace and security led on
the ground in 2017 and 2018 in Chad, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Niger, Nigeria and South
Sudan by the AU Commissioner for Peace and Security,
the Special Envoy of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission on Women, Peace and Security, the
United Nations Deputy Secretary-General, the Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations and the
Executive Director of UN-Women clearly established
that women who have been victims of war and conflict
remain better engaged with female military and
police rather than male officers. If left unconsidered,
that could negatively impact any reconciliation and
peacebuilding process.

In that context, the African Union leadership has
called for all actors to step up their efforts to ensure
that women are full actors on the ground as actors
in uniform and civilians in peace operations. We all
know too well, particularly women serving in conflict-
affected zones, that when women are marginalized
from peace processes on all sides of the spectrum,
durable peace has little chance to take root in post-
conflict societies.

The second point is that the African Union is
championing the implementation of women and peace
and security commitments at the continental level. The
AU is leading efforts to promote and bolster women's
leadership in conflict prevention, mediation and
resolution. The African Union takes action on all those
areas under the "three Ps" slogan - women prevent,
women protect, women participate. In that context, the
AU has launched an action-oriented network of women
in mediation called FemWise-Africa and partnered
with the United Nations under the Joint Framework
for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security to
ensure women's leadership in peace and security with
the African Women Leaders Network.

The African Union has also assigned gender
officers in the various peace support operations to
ensure that women's voices are heard and amplified
and that women participate in conflict-resolution and
peacebuilding efforts. At the policy level, our continent
counts commendable achievements, from inscribing the
women and gender and peace and security perspectives
into the African Peace and Security Architecture to
the overall peace and security programmes. Africa
currently counts 25 countries with national action
plans on women and peace and security, meaning
that African Member States constitute 31 per cent of
countries globally with national action plans.

We have also adopted a code of conduct and zero-
tolerance policy that outlines the AU's position against
sexual violence, exploitation and abuse by peacekeepers
and military personnel. The code is shared with all
troop-contributing countries and is integrated into all
related training. The African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) already has a policy on sexual exploitation
and abuse, and other countries are working on that and
other national strategies.

My third, and last, point is that the African Union,
through the Department of Peace and Security, has
redoubled efforts to address gender inequality and
combat stereotypes in peacekeeping missions. It is in
that spirit of inclusion that the African Union focused
its gender strategy in AMISOM. on addressing some of
the core barriers that prevent women from successfully
participating in peacekeeping operation activities.
By doing so, we aim to ensure that we build a more
balanced peacekeeping environment that is welcoming
to women.

In conclusion, the African Union would like to
encourage Member States and partners to redouble
efforts to close the gaps of the women and peace and
security agenda, notably by reaffirming political
commitments, qualitatively increasing the number
of women leading in peacekeeping operations and
ensuring a welcoming environment. Experience has
shown that women can and must play an active role in
the prevention of conflict, at negotiation tables, during
the stabilization process through peace operations and
in the reconstruction period after conflict. It is our
shared responsibility to make it happen.

