Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I would like to welcome
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Wallstrom, to the
Council and congratulate her on her appointment. My
delegation would like to thank her for her briefing, and
I wish to reiterate Uganda's support for her mandate, as
outlined in resolution 1888 (2009).

I also welcome the timely submission of the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/l73), and in
that regard, would like to thank the Special Adviser to
the Secretary-General on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women, Ms. Mayanja, for her briefing
on that highly technical report. We also thank
Ms. Mayanja for her dedication and positive response
to invitations to carry out technical briefings for
various regional groups to facilitate their deeper
understanding of the report. We congratulate her for
successfully managing the work of the Inter-Agency
Network on Women and Gender Equality, particularly
the activities of the Task Force on Women and Peace
and Security, which resulted in the report.

Resolution 1325 (2000) and its follow-up
resolution 1889 (2009) are considered by Uganda's
Government to be landmark resolutions not only
because of our strong belief in the important role that
women play during and after conflict, but also because,
from experience, we recognize women's undeniably
positive role in conflict prevention and mediation
processes.

We appreciate the substance of the report
presented today. While we have heard that the
indicators contained in the report will require further
technical and baseline development before they can
become operational, we are of the view that the initial
identification of a set of best indicators to track the
progress of resolution 1325 (2000) is in itself a major
milestone. For the Secretary-General to have come up
with such a manageable number of 26 from the initial
2,500 indicators is, indeed, commendable.

The implementation of resolutions is a common
challenge for a number of Member States. At regular
intervals, we will have to ask ourselves whether there
have been positive results from such implementation
and what they are. The existence of a set of best
indicators creates a tangible path that United Nations
Member States can follow in monitoring their
performance.

We have been informed that the set of indicators
contained in the current report of the Secretary-General
was compiled through consultations with the wider
United Nations membership. Uganda finds such
consultation and partnership to be not only positive,
but also crucial because, in our experience, we have
found that the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) is integral to and supplements other policies,
plans and programmes on gender equality and women's
empowerment.

In that regard, we strongly encourage the
Secretary-General to continue to consult with the
Security Council, as well as with the broader United
Nations, in order to come up with a further refined set
of indicators that are acceptable to and well understood
by those who will need to use them. In future, we
would also like to see them used at the global level to
track the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

We look forward to receiving a comprehensive
set of indicators in the Secretary-General's next report
on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), to be
submitted to the Security Council in October.

