Ms. Eckels-Currie (United States of America): I
thank Deputy Secretary-General Mohammed, Special
Representative Patten and Ms. Sultana for their briefings
today. The report of the Secretary-General on the rising
levels of conflict-related sexual violence (S/2018/250)
is chilling. We welcome the discussion today and hope
that it serves as an impetus for the Security Council to
take concrete steps to both ensure justice for survivors
and help prevent these crimes from occurring. I thank
the President for convening today's meeting.

We should all be appalled at the level of sexual
violence taking place in conflicts around the world.
In war zone after war zone, horrific violence against
women is not an unfortunate by-product of conflict but
a weapon of conflict. As the Secretary-General's report
details, and as Ms. Sultana describes in horrible detail,
in Burma, as we speak, the military is using sexual
violence as a tool for ethnic cleansing of the Rohingya
and for terrorizing other ethnic communities across the
country with impunity. And what does that mean? It
means using mass rape, sexual exploitation and sexual
slavery of women and girls - girls as young as 12 or
13 - to drive groups of people out of their homes. It
means using the terror, stigma and shame of rape to
drive families from their country, often from the
only place they have ever known. As the mother of a
precious nine-year-old girl, I find the horror of these
crimes unfathomable.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, sexual
violence is a common tactic used by armed groups to
punish and humiliate people allied with their enemies.
Women and girls are the battlefield on which conflict is
waged. A staggering 27 per cent of Congolese women
have experienced sexual violence in their lifetime.

And let us all understand why women have been
targeted in so many conflicts. It is because violence
against women is violence against families, and violence
against families is Violence against whole communities.
Survivors are stigmatized and isolated, families and
communities are ripped apart, and entire generations
are left less able to find peace and to reconcile with
their communities. Sexual violence is the poisoned root
of societies that are suffering endless conflict, poverty
and dislocation.

It is for this reason that we welcome today's debate.
When we recognize the role of sexual violence in
conflict, we recognize the link between human rights
and conflict. The United States has long urged the
Security Council to address human rights as an issue of
peace and security. Debates like the one we are having
today do that in a powerful and undeniable way. This
linkage should be apparent to anyone who has spent any
time in conflict zones or the refugee camps that house
the survivors. The sexual violence those survivors
experienced is not random; it is calculated and designed
to inflict punishment and fear on a community.

Tragically, we could go on all day about the
different aspects of this problem around the world,
but we are here to discuss solutions. The Council has
sanctions tools at its disposal to punish these heinous
actors around the world, but unfortunately they are
terribly underutilized. For example, last year former
Special Representative Bangura proposed names to the
Council of perpetrators who should be held accountable
for their crimes, but nothing has been done.

It is now time for the Council to use these tools
to hold perpetrators accountable for their actions. It is
now time to end impunity for these criminals and show
survivors and the rest of the world that the international
community will respond. It is now time that Member
States actively develop sanctions designations for
perpetrators of sexual violence in conflict. We can also
designate criminals operating in conflict zones where
we already have United Nations sanctions regimes in
place. Taking those steps will not only end impunity for
sexual violence and conflict; it will also help to deter
future abuses.

The United Nations also has a role to play in
countering violence against women in the field through
our peacekeeping missions. Women talk to each other,
and, more importantly, they understand each other.
We should capitalize on this fundamental truth and do
a better job of recruiting and including more women
in peacekeeping. Unfortunately, only 4 per cent of
uniformed peacekeepers are women. That number is
even smaller in the most dangerous missions, where
women are suffering the most. Deploying more women
peacekeepers will provide valuable insights that male
peacekeepers often cannot obtain.

However, it is not just about numbers. It is also
about the roles that women peacekeepers take on.
Women peacekeepers should be encouraged and
empowered to engage with local communities and
bring value to the work of their missions. Additionally,
research shows that female participation improves
dispute resolution. Women need to be at the table during
peace negotiations. The United Nations should strive to
include female representation in negotiating bodies and
mediating teams.

Finally, the United Nations should ensure that
all peacekeeping training centres around the world
include training to involve women in prevention and
peacebuilding efforts. Without understanding the
concerns of half of the population, conflict can never
be resolved. Sexual violence primarily affects women,
but at its heart it is an issue of human dignity. And it
is an issue of how violations of human dignity - the
denial of human dignity - have an impact on peace
and security. As such, it is a vital issue of concern for
the Security Council. I thank the President once again
for arranging today's debate.

