Mr. Ellinger (Czech Republic): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this important meeting. Last
month, the Secretary-General reminded us in his opening
speech (see A/69/PV.6) at the General Assembly that
not since the end of the Second World War have there
been so many refugees, displaced people and asylum
seekers. It is a disturbing truth that makes it highly
opportune to devote this Security Council meeting to
the precarious situation of women and girls affected
by displacement. In such situations, the increased
vulnerability of women and girls is undisputable. We
therefore greatly value the assistance that the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) is delivering to all in need, including women
and girls, as well as the work of the Special Rapporteur
on the human rights of internally displaced persons
present in the Chamber today.

But the very fact that women and girls are displaced
or have to leave their country means that the State
concerned, the region in question and our international
community have already failed - failed in preventing
crises that force people to flee in fear for their lives and
physical integrity. Therefore, the increasing focus of the
United Nations on prevention is encouraging. Resolution
1325 (2000) on women and peace and security was a
visionary document in that regard, one that perfectly
recognized the role of women in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts, peace negotiations,
peacebuilding, peacekeeping, humanitarian response
and post-conflict reconstruction. Now, 14 years after its
adoption, we have the latest report (S/2014/693) of the
Secretary-General in front of us, showing remarkable
progress based on concrete indicators, but also gaps to
be filled.

The important appeal of the report is the stress
on direct interaction with civil society and women
peacebuilders, as well as the recognition of the important
role of women political leaders, media personnel and
human rights defenders, including the recognition of
the high risks they are running when engaging publicly.
More support and attention must be given to those
courageous women, such as Ms. Allami, who spoke
earlier at this meeting, as they are peacebuilders and
peacekeepers at least to the same extent as the members
of the United Nations missions.

It is a sad reality that next to the well-known
conflict and post-conflict situations that the Secretary-
General examines in his report, we are faced with
new situations where women are threatened with rape,
torture and kidnapping, as well as forced displacement.
That is happening in regions where, just a year ago, few
would have expected such acts could possibly occur.

We have recently heard disturbing accounts of the
lawlessness, violence and brutality of paramilitary
forces in Crimea and eastern Ukraine that affect
severely both women human rights activists and
ordinary women and girls of Ukraine, many of whom
choose to flee their homes. According to the UNHCR
figures of 2 September, there were over 260,000
displaced persons in Ukraine escaping the violence in
eastern Ukraine. Obviously, a large number are women,
girls and children. We are thankful for the concern
voiced by High Commissioner Guterres in relation to
Ukraine.

At the same time, that deteriorating situation should
not get notice only in relation to women internally
displaced persons. Because ofthe high risk environment
in which all women activists, media workers and social
workers now operate in eastern Ukraine, we believe it
deserves the continued attention of the United Nations
and the Security Council, when debating issues such as
women and peace and security.

