Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil) (spoke in French):
I thank you, Mr. President, for having organized
this debate.

(spoke in English)

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General, as
well as Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Ms. Maria Grazia
Giammarinaro and Ms. Lisa Davis for their briefings.

The scourge of sexual violence in conflict continues
to jeopardize the dignity and integrity of vulnerable
populations around the world, predominantly women
and girls. This despicable phenomenon is connected
to a widespread culture of impunity towards sexual
violence that continues to exist in all countries.
Brazil vigorously condemns all acts of rape, sexual
slavery, forced prostitution, forced pregnancy, forced
abortion, enforced sterilization and forced marriage in
the context of armed conflict. These abuses represent
violations of international humanitarian law and may
constitute crimes against humanity. There can be no
excuse or justification for the deliberate use of sexual
violence as a weapon of war, as an instrument of
subjugation or as a tactic of terror.

In the context of the ongoing global refugee crisis,
the link between human trafficking and sexual Violence
in conflict, as recognized recently by presidential
statement S/PRST/2015/25, represents a particularly
serious concern. We welcome the most recent
multilateral initiatives to raise awareness about this
distressing issue. Let me highlight the establishment
by the General Assembly of the International Day for
the Elimination of Sexual Violence in Conflict, to be
celebrated on 19 June, following an initiative led by
Argentina and supported by Brazil from the outset.

The global study on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) revealed in great detail how the impact
of war, including sexual violence, is compounded by
pre-existing gender inequalities and discrimination
against women and girls.

Last March, the International Criminal Court
concluded its first trial that specifically emphasized
the use of sexual violence as a weapon of war, in
connection with war crimes and crimes against
humanity perpetrated in the Central African Republic.

In its agreed conclusions, the sixtieth session of
the Commission on the Status of Women (CSW), which
I had the honour of chairing, strongly condemned
all forms of violence against all women and girls as
impediments to the full achievement of gender equality
and the empowerment of women and girls. Furthermore,
the review theme of this year's session of the CSW was
the elimination and prevention of all forms of violence
against women and girls, including sexual and gender-
based violence.

While acknowledging those positive developments,
Brazil stresses that the most effective way to avert the
use of sexual violence as a weapon of war would be
to intensify political and diplomatic efforts to prevent
and resolve conflicts. A decisive step towards this
goal would be to pursue a gender-sensitive approach to
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding, with
women fully recognized as actors, not just victims. In
that regard, we underline the adoption of resolution 2282
(2016), in which the Security Council encourages the
Secretary-General to promote the gender dimensions
of peacebuilding and calls upon the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) to integrate a gender perspective
into all of its work - an approach that already guides
the PBC.

The Brazilian Government is currently drafting
its first national action plan on women and peace and
security through a joint effort by the Ministries for
Foreign Affairs, Defence, Justice, and Citizenship, as
well as UN-Women and civil society. Policies to protect
women and girls from the consequences of war and to
prevent sexual and gender-based violence, including
sexual violence in conflict, will be a key component of
our national action plan.

Our South-South cooperation agenda is closely
attuned to the need to offer legal, medical, psychosocial
and mental-health assistance to the victims of sexual
abuse arising from war and instability. In Guinea-
Bissau, Haiti and the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo
we have supported projects to assist victims of sexual
and gender-based violence and to uphold criminal
accountability for these serious violations.

In coordination with UN-Women, Brazilian
peacekeepers and civilian personnel undergo rigorous
predeployment training to ensure the highest standards
of conduct and discipline. We fully support the
Secretary-General's zero-tolerance policy concerning
sexual exploitation and abuse, and we emphasize the
need to emphasize preventive measures in that regard.

In conclusion, allow me to reiterate Brazil's
commitment to preventing and combating the heinous
use of sexual violence as a weapon of war. We stand
ready to cooperate with all United Nations bodies
involved in this campaign, including the entities whose
efforts are coordinated by the UN Action against Sexual
Violence in Conflict.

