Mrs. Byaje (Rwanda): Ijoin others in thanking the
Kingdom of Spain for having organized this important
high-level review of resolution 1325 (2000) on the
occasion of its fifteenth anniversary. The choice of
this specific topic demonstrates Spain's continued
leadership and commitment to the protection and
promotion of women's and girls' rights in conflict and
post-conflict situations and, more importantly, of its
eagerness to move beyond rhetoric to concrete action.

Allow me also to thank the Secretary-General and
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of
UN-Women, all of the high-level Government officials,
the members of the Security Council and the members
of civil society for their contribution to this debate.

The adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), as well
as that of subsequent resolutions, was instrumental in
raising our awareness as to the human rights abuses
that women and girls are subjected to in armed conflict
as well as in settings where insecurity prevails. The
current geopolitical landscape in major parts of the
world where violent conflicts are raging, coupled with
the rise of extremism and terrorism, has worsened
the situation and given way to unprecedented, hard-
to-contain humanitarian crises in which women are
particular targets. They not only suffer all sorts of ill
treatment, including rape and sexual violence, but they
are also denied their rights and are routinely scorned
and abused.

This reality became self-evident for Rwandans when
violence reached its peak for the 250,000 rape victims in
the genocide against the Tutsi who were left completely
shattered and scarred for life. Nevertheless, if there is
any silver lining beyond these despicable crimes against
humanity, we can say that the lessons learned from the
genocide against the Tutsi were instrumental in paving
the way for the positive narratives experienced in
Rwanda with regard to women's empowerment and the
advancement of their status.

Their key role in mending the social fabric in the
immediate aftermath of genocide and in promoting
peace, unity and reconciliation not only enabled the
resurgence of peace and socioeconomic development
but also contributed a great deal to the rebuilding of
a shattered nation. Today in Rwanda women have
taken centre stage in sensitizing for peacebuilding and
reconciliation programmes run by the National Unity
and Reconciliation Commission. They are also highly
involved beyond our borders in conflict prevention,
peacekeeping, conflict resolution and peacebuilding,
making the nexus between gender equality and
international peace and security an inescapable reality.

In addition, although it is believed that no country
can fully reach gender equality, Rwanda, driven by
strong leadership and unfailing political will to improve
the status of women, took some ground-breaking
initiatives in the form of commitments that will lead to
tackling this ambitious goal. Indeed, enormous strides
have already been taken, ranging from breaking the
world record for the highest female representation in a
Parliament - at 64 per cent currently - and in other
organs, such as the 43 per cent in the Cabinet and nearly
50 per cent in the judiciary, but also in recognizing
women as critical actors in prevention, mediation,
protection, conflict management and resolution, as well
as in reconciliation processes.

Other than the existing political will enabling
a favourable policy climate and a gender-sensitive
Constitution that respects the principle of gender
inclusion, Rwanda now has a national action plan for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) that was
launched in May 2010 by the Minister of Gender and
Family Promotion and which sought to strengthen the
capacity of women in peace and security processes. In
addition, determined to end the scourge of violence
against women and girls - the worst assaults to human
dignity - Rwanda has adopted a range of policies to
prevent and respond to violence against women and
girls, protect them and severely punish gender-based
violence offenders.

At the institutional level, Rwanda's security organs,
in collaboration with other Government agencies, local
communities and civil society, have launched initiatives
to protect and respond to violence that targets women
and girls. The one-stop centres, which are shelters run
by the national police, offer, inter alia, a wide range
of free services for victims of gender-based violence,
as do gender desks nationwide - in police stations,
army posts and offices of the national prosecution
agency - which have been set up to offer gender-
sensitive services to victims.

In the international arena, Rwanda is among
the leading police-contributing countries for female
police and correctional officers in United Nations
peace-support and peacekeeping missions. These
officers actively contribute to combating and
raising awareness on violence against women in the
communities they serve. Similarly, during the 2015
peacekeeping summit, Rwanda pledged, inter alia, to
deploy an all-women police unit in the United Nations
peacekeeping apparatus. Currently, we have 198 female
officers; next week 33 more will be deployed to the
Central African Republic.
I would like to conclude by noting that this
landmark year of the triple review of United Nations
peacekeeping and peacebuilding together with the high-
level review of resolution 1325 (2000) will continue
spur action worldwide in fulfilling the imperative to
better protect women, especially in conflict and post-
conflict situations. Rwanda has already embarked on
that irreversible path and is committed to developing a
holistic approach to conflict prevention, peacemaking
and peacebuilding, mainly by ensuring the active
participation by and protection of women.

