Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): Allow me to
express my sincere appreciation to you, Madam
President, for the convening of this open debate. My
appreciation also goes to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon; Ms. Michelle Bachelet, Executive Director
of UN-Women; Mr. Lazarous Kapambwe, President of
the Economic and Social Council; and Ms. Orzala
Ashraf Nemat, of the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security.

The tenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace and security
last year provided us with a valuable opportunity to
look back upon our achievements. Substantial progress
has been made, but wide gaps as well as challenges
remain. Women and girls are still the most seriously
affected in conflicts. We welcome the Secretary-
General's report (S/2011/598*), which equips us with a
tool for reviewing the current situation with regard to
implementing resolution 1325 (2000). We also note
with appreciation the Secretary-General's proposal for
a strategic framework as guidance for United Nations
implementation of the resolution. The measures and
targets set out in that framework should be closely
monitored and regularly reviewed. With regard to the
four priority areas and the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), my delegation would like to highlight the
following points.

First, eliminating impunity is critical to
preventing gender-based crimes. We commend the
Council's continued efforts to fight impunity and
uphold accountability for serious crimes against
women and girls. The fight against impunity for crimes
against women and girls has been strengthened through
the work of international tribunals, including the
International Criminal Court. In that regard, we believe
that the ratification of the Rome Statute should be
further encouraged. However, without parallel efforts
at the national level, that will fall short of making
tangible changes on the ground. States need to further
strengthen their justice systems to prosecute gender-
based crimes and improve systems for the protection of
victims and witnesses.

Secondly, women's participation at all stages of
the peace process needs to be enhanced. The exclusion
of women and the lack of gender expertise in
negotiations may lead to irreversible setbacks for
women's rights, leaving crucial issues such women's
engagement in post-conflict governance neglected in
peace accords. Efforts to increase women's
participation in decision-making bodies need to be
sustained. In that regard, my Government expresses its
full support to the timely initiative by the United States
Government on the draft resolution on women and
political participation at the Third Committee of the
General Assembly.

Thirdly, we need to pay greater attention to the
vulnerability of displaced women and girls, given their
particular risk of sexual and gender-based violence. My
delegation welcomes the target set out in the strategic
results framework on the special measures to increase
the security of female refugees and persons internally
displaced by armed conflict, as well as to ensure
multisectoral prevention and response mechanisms for
sexual and gender-based violence in camp and
non-camp settings alike.

My Government believes that the newly
established UN-Women has a central role to play in
coordinating the activities of the United Nations and in
implementing resolution 1325 (2000). The Republic of
Korea has been committed to supporting UN-Women,
in particular its activities in the field of women and
peace and security. To that end, the Korean
Government has significantly increased its financial
contribution to UN-Women, and, in particular,
contributed to the building back better project on
women's participation in peacebuilding.

The momentum generated by the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000)
last year should not be lost. I believe that the strategic
framework, together with the focused commitment
shown by many delegations today, will guide us to
advance our endeavours for women and peace and
security. The Republic of Korea reaffirms its
commitment to implementing resolution 1325 (2000)
in cooperation with the international community.

