Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): We thank you,
Madam President, for convening this meeting on the
escalation of conflicts and violations of international
law that result in unprecedented massive flows of
refugees, stateless persons and internally displaced
persons (IDPs), the vast majority of whom are women
and children. Their situation is further aggravated by
meaningless death, the outbreak ofdiseases, food, water
and energy crises, poverty and heightened vulnerability
due to the breakdown of entire societies.

Hence, in accordance with the landmark resolution
1325 (2000), and resolutions that have followed, the
role for women in conflict prevention, resolution and
recovery is an important consideration for rehabilitation
and recovery processes, ultimately leading to
reconstruction and development. Women often tend to
be marginalized and alienated from those processes,
and therefore must be involved in shaping their own
destinies. That is especially the case when it comes
to the provision of basic survival needs, medical care,
primary and secondary education and opportunities
for economic self-reliance. Therefore, the elimination
of gender-based discrimination, violence and impunity
remains critical to promote the economic and social
empowerment of women. We welcome its becoming a
focus in many recently established comprehensive and
multidimensional peacekeeping and hybrid operations.

At present, at least 3 out of 10 United Nations
peace agreements include provisions on women's
political participation and protection. Mechanisms and
structures must be provided in every peacekeeping
operation so that women can serve as equal partners
in field missions and in all United Nations mediation
support teams. The minimum of 15 per cent set by the
Secretary-General's seven-point action plan on gender-
responsive peacebuilding is a target that we must strive
for.

We note that more women are being appointed as
heads of missions, including as force commanders,
special envoys and chiefs of police contingents. More
than 90 per cent of the mandates calling for police
components in peacekeeping operations address
women's security. The implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) stipulates gender-specific provisions
in all mission mandates, placing gender experts in
the substantive sections of United Nations peace
operations, deploying women protection advisers to
monitor and report on sexual violence and providing
training accordingly. International commissions of
inquiry currently and routinely include gender crime
investigators. Women must therefore be engaged
at every stage to reassert the rule of law and rebuild
society through transitional justice.

The Security Council must consider the full
range of violations of women's rights during conflict,
and peacekeeping mandates should support national
prosecution for serious international crimes against
women.

The Council should focus on its women and peace
and security mandates during at least one of the periodic
field visits in the coming years. Commissions ofinquiry
related to various war-torn zones and UN-Women must
provide regular briefings to the Council.

My country, Kazakhstan, is increasingly engaged
in peacekeeping - starting in 2003 in Iraq and Nepal
and currently in Western Sahara - with further
deployments planned to other missions in the future.
The protection, special treatment and care of women
and girls, together with women's empowerment and
gender-sensitive approaches, are always given due
attention and encouraged by Kazakh peacekeepers.

Over the last decade, my country has witnessed
increased and complex flows of asylum seekers,
refugees, migrants and victims of trafficking, which
also pose a considerable risk to the Governments of
the region. Kazakhstan is both a transit and destination
country and works closely with the relevant United
Nations agencies, including the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).
We have adopted a law on refugees based on the
Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and its
1967 Protocol. The UNHCR Regional Office, in close
cooperation with my Government, contributes to
strengthening regional and international efforts.

Kazakhstan is committed to joining the global
efforts to achieve international peace and security,
including through promoting gender equality and the
empowerment of women and girls - among whom
the most vulnerable are refugees and IDPs. We wish
further success to UN-Women and other relevant
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes.

