Ms. Bachelet: I wish to thank you, Madam
President, for inviting me to brief the Council on recent
developments in the area of women, peace and security.

Today I will focus on advancing resolution 1325
(2000) through women's engagement in conflict
resolution and transitional justice and touch briefly on
some patterns that we have observed in recent post-
conflict elections.

Since January 2011, the United Nations Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women) and the Department of Political Affairs
(DPA) have pursued a joint strategy on gender and
mediation to increase the availability of gender
expertise to mediation teams and the number of women
mediators, observers and negotiators in peace
processes managed by the United Nations.

The Department of Political Affairs has increased
the number of women candidates on its rosters of
mediators to 36 per cent. Rapid-response capacity has
been strengthened. The United Nations Mediation
Support Standby Team has a gender expert for the
second year running. Guidance on how to address
sexual violence in peace talks has been developed, and
Member States are now invited to make active use of
that expertise to render conflict mediation and
prevention efforts more inclusive.
In 2011, we supported mediation training for
more than 200 women leaders and some men leaders
from West Africa, the Balkans, and Central and South-
East Asia.

The West Africa mediation trainings have already
yielded results. In Senegal, participants took action
during last month's elections to create a "women's
situation room for peaceful elections", working to
ensure women's protection in campaigning and voting
and providing early alerts of electoral violations.

In Sierra Leone, participants from the same
mediation training are now being encouraged to take
this situation-room approach in the upcoming elections.
In the current crisis in Mali, participants in last week's
Ouagadougou dialogue on political stabilization
succeeded in ensuring that there is mention of gender-
based violence in the resulting declaration.

Unfortunately, as a rule, the high level of
women's engagement in informal efforts does not
translate into a significant presence or influence in
formal conflict resolution or political dialogue. In some
Arab States, women's contributions to the front lines of
democratization have in the main not yet translated
into leadership roles in decision-making institutions.

On my recent visit to Libya, I met, of course,
with the Government, but also with women leaders
from civil society. They conveyed their perception that
their contributions to the struggle for democratization
had been under-recognized and that they were not
playing the meaningful role they aspired to in the
building of a new, democratic Libya. They raised
concerns in relation to the upcoming elections and
voiced support for sex-segregated polling stations to
counteract pressure to follow family voting patterns.

I reminded them that they must make themselves
relevant to the political process, to demonstrate they
are an important constituency for peace and democracy.

We know full well that in political
transformations, already organized political interest
groups are the most successful at seizing power.
Women's groups tend to be underfunded and are often
poorly positioned to seize opportunities to influence
politics.

Given the current crisis in Syria, this remains a
matter of concern. Women's participation is vital both
in resolving the crisis and in making sure that women's
interests are addressed in agreements moving forward.
12-31060
Women's participation is also needed to improve
reporting on the gender-specific impacts of violence.
To date it has been difficult to obtain information, and
I would urge the Council to be attentive to the gender
dimensions of the crisis.

In conflict resolution, women's participation and
gender expertise provide a firm foundation for
women's post-conflict participation. Both numeric and
substantive representation are needed. To that end,
special measures must be taken.

In Yemen, there is now heightened determination
among women's civil society groups to be involved in
the forthcoming national dialogues. UN-Women, the
United Nations Population Fund and the United
Nations Development Programme are supporting
women's engagement in Yemen's upcoming transition.
I am concerned about the early findings of a joint
United Nations assessment of rising levels of violence
against women and of abduction and early marriage
among displaced populations.

In Somalia, during the Second National
Constitutional Conference, held in February, DPA staff
advised the adoption of measures to ensure that women
represent at least 30 per cent of the members of the
future Interim Independent Electoral Commission, the
National Constituent Assembly and the new Federal
Parliament.

Women should also be supported in terms of their
engaging in other peacebuilding encounters such as
international contact group meetings and donor
conferences. In December 2011, efforts were made to
ensure women's participation in both the Bonn
Conference on Afghanistan and the Washington, DC,
Conference for South Sudan.

However, I would like to stress that women's
participation in such processes should not be dependent
on the willingness of conference organizers to extend
invitations to them.

We need to address the obstacles that women face
in being informed about, and participating in, formal
conflict resolution. An important resource in this
regard is the Council's continued encouragement to
mediators, envoys, advisers and Member States to
bring women into the process of conflict resolution.

By requesting updates about outreach to women's
groups, the Council encourages stronger attention to
gender issues on the part of mediators. In that regard, I
know that mandate renewals for United Nations
missions, such as the recent one for Afghanistan, have
been explicit about the imperative of women's
participation. This can be extended to all types of
national, regional and international engagement
processes designed to support reconciliation.

I would note here that progress has been made in
addressing gender issues in rule-of-law and transitional
justice measures.

As the Security Council noted in January, the rule
of law is "one of the key elements of conflict
prevention, peacekeeping, conflict resolution and
peacebuilding" (see S/PV.6705). Since 2004, the
Council has made reference to the rule of law and
transitional justice in more than 160 resolutions.

As the Secretary-General has said, we have
entered into a new age of accountability. That
accountability must include the effective prosecution
of war crimes against women and adequate redress.

In recent months, we have seen an amnesty law
passed in Yemen, amnesty granted in Mali and blanket
amnesties debated in other settings, including Nepal.
One of the concerns raised by women's groups is that
amnesty for war crimes against women contributes to a
post-conflict environment of impunity for gender-based
violence.

Prosecutions are crucial for the credibility of
efforts to reassert the rule of law after conflict. In that
regard, I welcome the completion of the first case of
the International Criminal Court.

The Council, through its referral mechanism, has
contributed to ensuring the effectiveness of the Court.
In relation to the two ad hoc international courts - the
International Criminal Tribunals for Rwanda and the
former Yugoslavia - in the past year the Council has
established a follow-up body that will take over when
they close. It is important that this mechanism include
a specific review of the lessons learned from the
prosecution of sexual and gender-based crimes. These
lessons should be applied in the work of the
International Criminal Court and in United Nations
peacekeeping missions assisting domestic actors to
prosecute these crimes. UN-Women will work with the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda on such a
review.

While prosecutions of individual perpetrators are
crucial, transitional justice measures can ensure truth-
telling and a process of repair and redress. I draw the
Council's attention to the fact that, in the past two
years, there has been strong gender analysis evident in
the reports of commissions of inquiry. In the past year
alone the commissions established for Libya, Syria and
Cote d'Ivoire have included gender experts and
produced important findings on sexual and gender-
based crimes. The United Nations Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights is to be commended
for this.

What is needed now is implementation and
support for follow-up. The Commission of Inquiry for
Libya found that, in cases of sexual and gender-based
crime, few victims were willing to come forward due
to the severe obstacles to reporting, including stigma,
family pressure and fear of reprisals. The Commission
concluded that sexual violence played a significant role
in provoking fear in various communities. I had a
meeting with one minister involved in that inquiry who
is seeking methods for encouraging people to tell the
truth in ways that avoid their being stigmatized.

I commend the Government and the National
Transitional Council for implementing many of the
recommendations of the Commission of Inquiry by
partnering with the United Nations to address conflict-
related sexual and gender-based violence. In Libya,
UN-Women has provided the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General with a senior gender advisor to
support the efforts of the Libyan authorities and civil
society on women's engagement in the transitional
process.

Reparations programmes are also needed in
transitional justice processes. Reparations for survivors
of sexual and gender-based violence can link redress
for individuals with efforts to eliminate economic and
social marginalization, thus addressing some of the
root causes of violence against women. As the role of
peacekeeping missions grows in the area of rule of law
and support for transitional justice, the Council can
make a major difference to women survivors of
violence by supporting the early establishment of
comprehensive national reparations programmes.

Allow me to register a particular concern about
the instability of legal frameworks on women's rights
in post-conflict countries and the threat of a loss of
gains on women's legal rights.

In March, religious leaders in Afghanistan called
for restrictions on women's rights, including their
mobility and social standing. In countries undergoing
transition, the combination of recent conflict and
weakened social protection threatens to undermine
progress in women's rights. As a matter of principle,
women's rights must never be used as negotiating
instruments or a soft bargaining chip to placate certain
social groups. Particular attention should be paid by
the Council to ensuring that women's rights are not
eroded during mission drawdown.

Country-specific resolutions should encourage
gender-sensitive constitutional and legal reform,
ensuring women's rights and protection. I strongly urge
the Council to support increased numbers of women in
leadership positions, constitution-making processes
and inclusion in the justice and security sector work of
United Nations missions. Women's participation in
political, legislative, judicial and security institutions is
perhaps the greatest resource on offer to promote
peaceful and inclusive transitions.

Throughout this briefing, I have stressed that the
implementation of the Council's resolutions on women,
peace and security requires women's leadership.
Elections are the key means for the legitimate entry of
more women to public office and for bringing women's
issues into policy debates. Therefore, I will now make
a few observations about recent post-conflict elections
before handing over to Under-Secretary-General
Ladsous to elaborate further on this topic.

In the five parliamentary elections held in
countries with United Nations missions in 2011, there
were either small declines or just a modest increase in
the number of women elected. The result was an
average of a low 10 per cent of seats in parliaments for
women. Looking ahead, 10 elections in countries on
the agenda of the Council are expected in 2012. To
increase women's representation, temporary special
measures such as positive action, preferential treatment
and quota systems are required as recommended in the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women.

In conclusion allow me to quickly restate some of
our suggestions to the Council.

First, continued consultations with envoys,
special representatives of the Secretary-General,
advisors and Member States on women's participation
in conflict resolution and political dialogue create an
incentive to engage more women in peace making and
peacebuilding processes.
12-31060
Secondly, more opportunities must be made
available to women to engage in conflict resolution and
peacebuilding forums, and this can be done by ensuring
that women are invited to a wider range of international
engagement processes and donor conferences.

Thirdly, the follow-up mechanism for the
International Criminal Tribunals in Rwanda and the
former Yugoslavia offers the opportunity for a review
of lessons learned from the prosecution of sexual and
gender-based crimes; these lessons can be applied to
future international tribunals and domestic judicial
processes.

Fourthly, country-specific resolutions and mandate
renewals should encourage gender-sensitive
constitutional and legal reform and discourage legal
restrictions on women in the name of reconciliation.

Fifthly, early technical assistance to post-conflict
Governments to support reparations programmes can
help address gender-based inequalities and promote
inclusive and sustainable peacebuilding.

Sixthly and finally, steps must be taken to address
the barriers to women's participation in the upcoming
elections in countries on the Council's agenda.

Once again, Madam President, I thank you for
this opportunity and I look forward to our discussions.

