Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened today's debate on
women and peace and security, with a focus on the rule
of law and transitional justice in situations of armed
conflicts. I should also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his very constructive introductory
statement. I also thank the other speakers - Ms. Pillay,
High Commissioner for Human Rights; Ms. Mlambo-
Ngcuka, UN Women Executive Director; and
Ms. Balipou, representing civil society - for the their
statements, which have made meaningful contributions
to our debate.

The adoption by the Security Council of resolution
1325 (2000) and its subsequent resolutions demonstrates
the Council's continuous concern at the Violence against
women in conflict and post-conflict situations. An
assessment of the implementation of those resolutions
shows that, while they have contributed to promoting
gender equality in prevention, participation, protection,
peacebuilding and restoring the rule of law, as noted
in the report of the Secretary-General before us today
(S/2013/525), much remains to be done. The goal of the
United Nations in those resolutions is essentially that
of freeing women and girls from acts of violence of all
kinds and giving them the place that they deserve in
society - a goal that has yet to be reached.

The events unfolding in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in the Central
African Republic f as Ms. Balipou mentioned - in
Syria and elsewhere around the world, where women
continue to be the special target of violence committed
by men, show that there is still a long way to go to protect
women in situations ofarmed conflict. Togo nonetheless
welcomes the fact that the United Nations, through
its peacekeeping operations, has made the protection
of civilians an essential element in the mandates of
peace missions. The deployment on the ground of
gender advisers arises from that determination to help
the victims and guide them to the appropriate support
services. My country would like to see the deployment
of such advisers mainstreamed throughout all missions,
with the staffing and resources that they need.

As we all know, Violence against women will not end
until those who commit and order it are found, arrested,
tried and sentenced. The fight against impunity cannot
be a matter of mere words; it must see be a commitment
by all political actors and parties in a crisis to work
to eradicate the culture of violence against women and
girls, especially rape, which has for some time been a
weapon of war.

This issue is at the centre of the majority of
Security Council debates, but we are still far from a
solution. The United Nations must stress the fight
against violence by supporting, through appropriate
mechanisms, the Governments of countries in conflict
situations or emerging therefrom to address the issues
of Violence and impunity. We believe that restoring
judicial institutions and providing them with more
human and financial resources could contribute to
deterring serious violations of human rights and to
effectively punishing their perpetrators. The adoption
of national laws to repress such acts is also necessary.
Truth, justice and reconciliation commissions, which
have had a positive impact in such processes, must
serve as a framework for justice for all - justice that
establishes truth and repairs the damage.

It goes without saying that the fight against impunity
can be waged only in the context of a rule of law that
establishes effective transitional justice and promotes
the effective participation of victims, including women,
in the country's reconstruction. Unfortunately, with
regard to participation, the fact is that women have
played a minor role, if they have not been totally
sidelined, in peace talks and reconciliation and in
political and economic activities. As an illustration, in
2012 women comprised fewer than 8 per cent of the
members of negotiating delegations in peace processes.

The Secretary-General's report also indicates
that in the context of economic recovery and access
to resources during and after conflict, women have
also played a very limited role. My country believes
that women should enjoy, in peacetime and in conflict
situations, all economic and social rights, inheritance
and property rights, and access to basic services,
especially in areas of health and education.

However, we acknowledge the efforts of some
countries that have integrated gender issues into their
national legislation by setting a quota for women in
elected positions and high-level decision-making, as
is the case in such post-conflict countries as Timor-
Leste, Afghanistan, Liberia, Haiti and the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo. Rwanda, of course, sets the most
progressive example in that respect. Togo encourages
the United Nations to assist countries that have not
yet done so to integrate into their national systems the
experience of those who have managed to increase the
role of women in peace processes and post-conflict
reconstruction.

Women will not be protected in any lasting way until
in-depth legal and judicial reforms are undertaken by
countries emerging from armed conflict. Fortunately,
a number of countries have undertaken reforms in
accordance with the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women and other
relevant international legal instruments. Clearly, the
best way to protect women and fight effectively against
the effects of armed conflict on the lives of people in
conflict is to take measures to prevent the outbreak of
conflicts.

My delegation welcomes the fact that resolution
2122 (2013), which was adopted earlier today, focuses
on various aspects of the fight against violence against
women. We hope that it will have a positive impact on
the ground, in particular through its implementation by
all countries.

