Mr. Baati (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to thank the United Kingdom presidency for organizing
this resumed open debate under the theme, "Towards
the successful implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda: moving from commitments to
accomplishments in preparation for the commemoration
of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000)".

I would also like to sincerely thank the Secretary-
General and the Executive Director of UN-Women, as
well as the African Union Special Envoy on Women,
Peace and Security, for their informative briefings.
I appreciate the contents of the annual report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/800) on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), including its commitments
and recommendations, which Tunisia supports and is
keen to implement.

I also thank the representatives of civil society
for their important contributions to discussing
this topic. We agree with them that now is the time
to act and effectively implement the texts of the
adopted resolutions.

The empowerment of women and their participation
in decision-making are pillars ofTunisia's policy, as they
are important to social cohesion and society's ability to
meet security, economic and development challenges.
Based on our beliefin the important role that women play
in times of peace, conflict or war, Tunisia has therefore
sought to engage constructively in all international
efforts to consolidate peace and security, including by
participating in peacekeeping operations throughout
the world and ensuring women's participation in them.
We also played a role in the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000) during our non-permanent membership of the
Council in 2000.

On 8 August 2018, Tunisia adopted a comprehensive
national action plan on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) and subsequent relevant resolutions.
That was the culmination of efforts that began in
2016 with the establishment of a national committee
made up of Government, constitutional and civil
society representatives, and more than 50 per cent
representation of women.

Conflicts directly affect women and girls, who are
exposed to abuse, violations and inequality. Tunisia
has therefore participated effectively in initiatives and
efforts to settle conflicts and contain their devastating
effects on women and girls. We are also committed
to implementing international and regional laws on
gender equality.

Tunisia is currently sparing no effort to implement
the Sustainable Development Goals of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, especially Goal
5 on gender equality in duties and rights, pursuant
to our national action plan, which promotes women's
participation at all decision-making levels. Tunisia
attaches particular importance to programmes for
the training and capacity-building of women in order
to prevent and resolve conflicts, achieve sustainable
peace, safeguard society from extremism and terrorism
and ensure human rights in practice and in culture.

In conclusion, the national action plan and
the aforementioned sectorial plans are part of a
comprehensive approach that Tunisia adopted following
its independence. Those efforts have seen renewed
momentum since 2011 in ensuring gender equality, the
empowerment of women and the rejection of all forms
of gender-based violence and discrimination.
The full version of my statement will be made
available online.

