Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank you, Madam President, for having
organized this open debate and for your presence here,
which shows your commitment to this issue. I would
also welcome the statements by the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative on Sexual Violence in
Conflict, Ms. Bangura. We welcome the Secretary-
General's report (S/2013/149) and would like to
highlight its clear, concise and strategic nature. We
also welcome Ms. Keita Diakite', and we take note of
and appreciate the presence of the Deputy Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Korea.

We would like to take this opportunity to express
our appreciation for the work of the Office of the
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
We commend Ms. Bangura for her efforts since taking
up her responsibilities, including the services provided
by the United Nations Team of Experts on the Rule of
Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict. We fully support
the recommendations contained in the report.

My country aligns itself with and supports the
proposal to establish an appropriate monitoring
mechanism within the Security Council on the problem
of sexual violence in conflict.

In 2012, the United Nations stated that, whatever
the geography of conflict and its structural causes, from
Cote d'Ivoire to Mali and from Libya to those affected
by the earthquake in Haiti - in every instance - over
70 per cent of those displaced were been women and
children. We know that women in camps, women
refugees and displaced women are particularly at risk
of becoming victims of violence, exploitation and
poverty. However, just as clearly, we do not accept that
that should be their fate.

We note that the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees has introduced a
robust policy on women refugees, has prepared action
guidelines for the protection of women refugees and
will continue to include the gender dimension in its
assistance and protection work.

However, with the same firmness with which we
require comprehensive protection for Victims, we
would like to say that it is vital that women be included
in all decisions that affect their lives, as participation
promotes protection.

Resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace
and security, together with other Council resolutions,
signified and still represents a huge breakthrough. In
that resolution, the Council recognized the fundamental
role that women played in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts and in peacebuilding. It underlined the
importance of effective and equal participation by
women in the maintenance of peace and security and
the need to include women, under equal conditions,
in decision-making processes for the prevention and
resolution of conflicts.

However, UN-Women recently announced that, of
the 585 peace agreements signed between 1990 and
2010, only 16 per cent mentioned women. Seventeen per
cent refer to gender equality, and only 3 per cent make
any reference at all to gender-based sexual violence.

We are aware that there is much more to do. It is
terrible and painful to acknowledge that women and girls
have been and remain the main victims of violence in
armed conflicts, specifically of sexual and gender-based
violence. It is particularly serious that such violence
is often abetted by the indifference and complicity of
those responsible for protecting civilians - and women
and children - who may include members of a State's
armed and security forces, peacekeeping operations or
non-governmental organization volunteers working in
the field.

That is why we agree with the idea that all
peacekeeping mandates should explicitly include
the gender perspective in the protection of civilians
and incorporate specific guidelines on preventing,
eradicating and punishing all forms of violence against
women, with a focus on human rights, as well as a full
and multidimensional understanding of that scourge.
We also support the idea of a special adviser for all
peacekeeping missions in the area of human rights for
women and gender and ensuring the resources necessary
to effectively implement the Council's resolutions and
incorporate follow-up mechanisms for the analysis and
presentation of reports on violence against women,
particularly sexual violence. The impact of conflicts on
women is not only determined by the nature or level
of the conflict, but also by the particular role of each
women

It is also true that the general needs of women must
be recognized, as that is fundamental in meeting the
specific diverse and multifaceted needs of women. We
must understand the local and cultural context, which
is crucial to understanding and responding to conflict-
related violence.

We agree with the need for security-sector reform,
which should include training in human rights,
particularly the human rights of women and children,
and take into account the need to prevent sexual
violence.

We encourage the training of peacekeepers, both
civilian and military and police, and the strengthening
of the human rights component, particularly with
regard to women's and children's human rights, as well
as comprehensively addressing the various forms of
Violence against women, particularly sexual violence.

We agree with the need for a human rights focus
in disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, as
well as in mediation, ceasefire, peace and preventive
diplomacy processes, with an intensified focus on
women and girls. In that respect, we believe that women's
participation in all consultation and decision-making
processes should not be the exception, but rather the
rule. As women, our role in conflicts is not passive, nor
is it exclusively or necessarily that of Victims.

Allow me to refer to work that has been carried
out in my country, known as "Cracks in the Silence",
by the women's organization CLADEM, which has
investigated sexual Violence against women during
the period of State terrorism in my country. The
investigation helped to reveal the sexual crimes
committed during that cruel and painful period. It
showed that those crimes had been broadly suppressed
and made invisible; not only because seeking justice
for individual crimes of sexual violence as individual
cases and crimes against humanity - they are not
like crimes of torture or abuse - was a difficult and
complex process, but because it was also necessary to
confront and overcome enormous cultural, political
and institutional obstacles in determining the criminal
responsibility of the perpetrators of the crimes and
reparations for the Victims.

In that context, the recommendations issued by the
Human Rights Committee to Argentina on bringing
the crimes of the recent dictatorship to trial covered
gender-based crimes as well. The Committee noted
that the State party should continue to make rigorous
efforts to prosecute those cases in order to guarantee
that serious human rights violations, including those
crimes that deprived women of their right to liberty and
a life free of violence, not go unpunished.

We can also cite, in that connection, the
recommendations made by the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women with
regard to proactive measures to publicize trials and
punishment for sexual violence perpetrated during
dictatorships or conflicts.

One can say, without exaggeration, that, during
times of conflict, very few women have been able to
chronicle the sexual Violence ofwhich they were victims.
That was clearly seen when the International Criminal
Tribunal for your country, Madam President, pointed
out in the Akayesa case, that cultural sensitivities have
a bearing on the discussion of intimate matters. That
case, which related to sexuality, revealed the pain, the
reticence and the inability of the women concerned to
reveal details of sexual violence of which they had been
victims.

We also know that feelings not only of guilt, but
also of humiliation, contribute to silence. Internalized
social shame takes hold of women who have been
victims of sexual violence, because sexuality is
considered an intimate and private domain. To speak
publicly about such things indicates that everybody
knows that the victims have been humiliated, violated,
raped and forced to submit.

On the other hand, the generalized indifference
in investigating acts of violence against women
leads directly to impunity, increasing the situation of
insecurity and fear among women.

In that respect, the Commission to Clarify Past
Human Rights Violations and Acts of Violence That
Have Caused the Guatemalan Population to Suffer
indicated in its final report that the absolute impunity
protecting those responsible for sexual violations
increased women's insecurity and contributed to the
Victims' not reporting the facts.

We cannot explain why sexual violence against
women and sexist and gender-based violence has
occurred with growing and overwhelming frequency
in armed conflicts, unless we also add to the equation
the inequality between men and women, gender
stereotypes and the reproduction of hierarchical and
discriminatory relationships in which women find
themselves materially subordinate and symbolically
devalued in various times and cultures.

Women do not become victims by Virtue of who
they are, or as the result of nature or fate. Women are
particularly susceptible to becoming victims ofviolence
in conflict most especially because we are already
Victims of discrimination during peaceful times.

In conclusion, allow me to refer briefly to sexual
violence in conflicts and to the autonomous nature,
specificity and separate nature of sexual crimes, and
how they should be viewed differently from other
crimes such as torture or cruelty.

It is apposite, because as we have seen in recent
conflicts, specific and systematic forms of sexual
violence are carried out against women, young women
and girls. In that connection, I would like to share with
the Council the testimony of a social activist who, for
the simple act of thinking and saying that the world
is unjust and unequal, was disappeared, tortured and
raped during the recent civilian military dictatorship
in my country.

"During torture, one discovered that we had
resources to withstand very high thresholds of pain,
somehow to survive and to live. However, rape is
something else. It affects other elements - and
they know it because, in addition to the evident,
there is an immeasurable amount of inner pain that
is not seen like the bruises left by the blows or the
burns from the electric shocks, but it is there. It is
as if one's body freezes or becomes that of another
person, not only at the time but for ever, for life."

We have made progress in jurisprudence. We have
made progress in recognizing rights. We must now
bring about real equality and the effective eradication
of all forms of violence against women.

I think that remembering, truth, justice and
reparation - I say that to you, Madam President, in
particular - is the only way to put an end to impunity.
Certainly, Rwanda, Argentina and all countries that
have suffered extreme violence know that remembering
is the basis for moving forward in order to prevent the
repetition of such events today, tomorrow, yesterday
and forever.

