Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to all those who opened
today's debate for their assessments and information.
In particular, we would like to welcome Ms. Michelle
Bachelet in her new post as Under-Secretary-General
for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
and Executive Director of UN Women. We anticipate
that the activities of that entity will help to strengthen
and enhance the effectiveness of the United Nations on
gender issues.

In the 10 years since the Security Council adopted
resolution 1325 (2000), that instrument has become an
effective reference for protecting women in conflict and
enhancing the role of women in the prevention and
settlement of conflict and in post-conflict recovery.
Regrettably, women and children continue to be victims
of deliberate attacks, including terrorist acts and other
violations of international humanitarian law. Recent
developments in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
have demonstrated how tragic the problem of sexual
violence continues to be.

At the same time, the diverse nature of violence
means that due attention must be paid to all its
categories. The theme of women and peace and
security should not be reduced to individual
manifestations alone. Just such a balanced approach
formed the basis for resolution 1325 (2000).

We are gravely concerned at the killing or
wounding of women and children, including through
the indiscriminate and excessive use of force.
Frequently, such crimes go unpunished. We believe
that the Council should without question review such
cases.
The manifold crisis situations in which women
suffer require that they be addressed not only by the
Security Council, but also by the General Assembly,
the Peacebuilding Commission, the Human Rights
Council and the Commission on the Status of Women,
within their respective mandates. We believe in this
context that it is important to avoid duplication and to
seek complementarity among the relevant functions of
those bodies. Given their range, limiting gender issues
exclusively to the Security Council would create
imbalances from the standpoint of system-wide
coherence and would undermine the effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

We are grateful to the Secretary-General for
preparing the report before the Council (S/2010/498). At
the same time, we believe that the indicators that it sets
out still need to be verified against the realities and
practice in terms of their effectiveness vis-a-vis full
realization of the potential of resolution 1325 (2000).
The effectiveness of the indicators should be considered
again after they have been validated by the United
Nations system and following the relevant report of the
Secretary-General. While they are being validated, the
indicators should be used in a measured way and only in
situations relating to the implementation of 1325 (2000),
as provided for by the presidential statement adopted
today (S/PRST/2010/22).

In commemorating today 10 years since the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), we should
emphasize that much still needs to be done. Our
partners in the Council and the relevant agencies and
mechanisms of the United Nations system should give
greater attention to how to involve women in
implementation by enhancing gender equality when
establishing peacekeeping contingents and in other
relevant issues in mission mandates. Clearly, such
issues will need to be approached on the basis of the
characteristics of each specific situation.

We are convinced that clear efforts by the
Security Council, within its mandate, to implement
resolution 1325 (2000) will ensure that the resolution's
effectiveness is preserved and enhanced in coming
decades. Russia intends to actively contribute to that.

