Mr. Cardi (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statement delivered on behalf of the European Union
and wishes to add the following remarks in its national
capacity, which are also supported by the Kingdom of
the Netherlands, in the light of our cooperation related
to the upcoming split mandate on the Security Council
for 2017-2018.

More than 350,000 people crossedthe Mediterranean
Sea in 2016; nearly 5,000 died or disappeared in the
crossing. Italy remains committed to saving lives at sea
and has rescued more than 350,000 people since 2014,
while actively working to disrupt the business model of
traffickers. Italy has provided the bulk of the vessels for
the European Union's Operation Sophia.

Human trafficking, particularly in conflict
situations, targets the most vulnerable, including women
and children, who often belong to religious minorities.
It must be addressed through a comprehensive approach
at the national, regional and international levels.

At the national level, Italy is focused on prevention,
victim protection, anti-discrimination measures,
strengthened law enforcement and judicial cooperation.
Our legal framework is victim-centred, human-rights
oriented and gender- and child-sensitive. In February,
we approved a national action plan on combating
trafficking in human beings.

At the international level, Italy promotes a holistic
approach that focuses on addressing the root causes,
finding political solutions to international crises,
promoting international cooperation and devising
accountability measures.

Accountability is fundamental. Italy is committed
to bringing to justice individuals proved guilty of such
crimes. Thanks to victims' identifications and the
testimonies of survivors, a week ago Italian authorities
convicted the culprits responsible for a shipwreck off
the coast of Libya in April 2015, which caused more
than 700 deaths. The perpetrators were sentenced to 18
years in prison.

Italy is also committed to the full implementation
of the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime, signed in Palermo, and its Protocols,
including the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and
Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children, which are key to bolstering international
cooperation. We urge their universal ratification
and implementation.

Italy welcomes the greater involvement on the
part of the Security Council in this topic. The trends
reported by the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2016/949) and the reports of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), the International
Organization for Migration and the Special Rapporteur
on trafficking in persons all highlight the security
implications of the issue. We believe that the time is
right to step up the Security Council's engagement in
the following directions.

First, Italy will follow up on the Spanish initiative
to keep the Security Council alert as to the link between
human trafficking and violations of human rights. We
will encourage efforts by the Council to condemn
the exploitation of women and children, and we will
support its ability to look into the connections with
transnational organized crime and terrorism.

Secondly, we look forward to the Secretary-
General's recommendations on strengthening synergies
among United Nations agencies and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict. As foreseen in resolution 2331 (2016), which
was adopted today and which we co-sponsored, we
believe that the Security Council should take advantage
of the opportunity for the two Special Representatives
to brief the sanctions committees about trafficking and
abuses committed against women and children.

Thirdly, we underscore the importance of training
for United Nations personnel in conflict situations.
Peacekeepers and police units must be trained to
rapidly identify situations where there is a heightened
risk of trafficking, especially that involving the most
vulnerable individuals. In that regard, I underscore
our expertise in holding training courses for police
units, with a focus on the protection of human rights
and gender-based violence. So far, we have trained
more than 10,000 units at the Centre of Excellence for
Stability Forces Units in Vicenza.
Lastly, with regard to financial flows from
trafficking, existing mechanisms to curb money-
laundering and terrorism financing can play an
important role in monitoring migration routes and in
pre-empting trafficking, from the outset of conflicts
and regional crises. That, in our view, would improve
our capacity to identify victims, save their lives and
provide them with effective assistance.

