Ms. Mejia Velez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I offer my condolences and those of my Government
to the people of Germany, Turkey and Russia for
yesterday's terrorist attacks. There is no justification
for terrorism.

This debate and resolution 2331 (2016), adopted this
morning, as Ms. Nadia Murad Basee Taha reminded
us in her moving briefing, takes place 12 months
after the Security Council's first debate on this item
(see S/PV.7585), convened by the United States. The
holding of this meeting reflects the importance that the
international community attaches to the issue, but it also
lays bare the tremendous challenges we still face. As
obvious as it may sound, human trafficking is a crime,
tragic and brutal in its disproportionate effects on the
most vulnerable: women and girls, migrants, refugees
and internally displaced persons. If any conclusion can
be reached today, it is that, as the Secretary-General
said, prevention must be one of our priorities.

Preventive strategies, such as actions to prevent
terrorism and violent extremism, cannot be developed
in isolation. We are facing a phenomenon that requires
joint, collaborative responses based on international
cooperation, with full respect for human rights and
in the framework of agreements on the protection of
civilians, and must be supported by civil society.

With a long internal conflict like ours, we in
Colombia have understood that women and girls play
a fundamental and proactive role in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts, as well as in building stable
and lasting peace. That is why we must ensure their
rights in a safe and supportive environment. In the
peace agreement that is starting to be implemented,
with the support of the Security Council, guaranteeing
the rights of women and girls has become a common
purpose in the work of all the institutions that have been
collaborating and incorporating a gender perspective
into their various programmes. Legislation, particularly
law No. 1719 of 2014, condemns and specifically
addresses the crime of human trafficking committed
during armed conflict.

In 2016, the Secretary-General, in his report
on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2016/361),
underscored that, of all peace processes referred to in
the report, only Colombia has systematically addressed
gender issues, pursuant to resolution 1325 (2000) and
resolution 1820 (2008). That is especially true regarding
reparations for suffering, particularly providing for
compensation and restitution, but also with regard to
ensuring non-recidivism and to preventive measures,
notably by creating and promoting a culture free of all
forms of violence and discrimination, in keeping with
international obligations.

Colombia is facing an enormous challenge, but it will
continue to make strides towards our common purpose.

