Mr. Sanabria Valderrama (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): Like other speakers who have preceded
me, I would like to thank the presidency of Uruguay
for organizing today's debate, which is going to help
to focus attention on one of the main and systematic
violations of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law, namely, sexual violence
in conflict.

I would also like to thank the Deputy Secretary-
General for her briefing and to express my gratitude
for the statements made by Mr. Dieng and Ms. Jaf.
They have set before us a very difficult reality that
requires action and determination on our part. I would
also like to take advantage of this opportunity to pay
tribute, as others have done, to Ms. Zainab Bangura for
her excellent work. We worked with her over a period
of years with a view to strengthening the instruments
needed to combat the scourge of sexual violence in
conflict, and we welcome her successor, Ms. Pramila
Patten. Under Ms. Patten's leadership and that of the
Secretary-General, the next five years will provide us
with a historic opportunity to make the fight against the
worst forms of exploitation one of the priorities at the
heart of all United Nations priorities.
Spain will decisively support all efforts aimed at
preventing sexual violence and human trafficking for
sexual exploitation purposes. We want to ensure that
the perpetrators of such crimes are brought to justice
and serve their sentences. We wish to contribute to the
reintegration of the victims and to the elimination of
any possible stigmatization. We all know that those
goals are not in the exclusive hands of any one of us,
but they are in the hands of all of us together. Acting
together with perseverance and firmness we can make a
difference, which is why it is important to ask ourselves
today what a body such as the Security Council can do
in the immediate future and what the rest of the United
Nations membership can contribute.

Last December, Spain promoted the adoption of
resolution 2331 (2016). Many elements of the resolution
expanded the already extensive body of norms relating
to combating sexual violence, and new pathways are
opening up on which we can work in the immediate
future, such as addressing the use of sexual violence as
a tactic of war or terrorism, the impact of violence on
men and boys, and the fight against stigmatization. In
that context, I would like to highlight four points.

The key aspect that we need to improve in the
implementation of resolutions on sexual violence in
conflict is making good use of the specialized expertise
of the panels of experts of the sanctions committees,
national experts in combating violent extremism,
mediators and negotiators in peace processes, officials
working at border posts, and military and police
personnel deployed in United Nations missions.
Irrespective of whether we are referring to the national,
regional or international level or whether we are
referring to the humanitarian sphere, the security sector
or the political and diplomatic arena, it is only when we
are working in a consistent and coordinated manner in
all of those areas that we will achieve better results.
That specialized knowledge, enriched by an ongoing
dialogue with civil society, will also contribute to the
development and improved implementation of early-
warning mechanisms, which could help prevent an
outbreak of an armed conflict. Undoubtedly, that is the
best investment we can make in favour of international
peace and security. Spain has strengthened its extensive
training of security-sector personnel, providing
training to such countries as Palestine and Colombia,
and contributes to the United Nations initiative against
sexual violence in conflict.

The second pillar of any action should be guided
by the fight against impunity. In that context, we have
to look at all the mechanisms that can improve the
preservation of evidence, so that responsibility can be
decided in national legal bodies or at the International
Criminal Court.

Thirdly, the victims should be at the heart of any
measure undertaken. We must do more in terms of
support and socioeconomic reintegration for survivors
and the children they bear as a consequence of sexual
violence. We have to ensure that they get the recognition
and reparations they deserve in whatever context they
find themselves.

Fourthly, I would like to highlight that it is not
just a question of forging peace by relying on training
and expertise in the area of gender-based and sexual
violence. Rather, it is essential that there should be
the equal participation of women in the peace and
security sectors, in the contingents deployed and at the
negotiating table.

Just a week ago, in Alicante, we held the first
meeting of the network of women-and-peace-and-
security focal points, which we launched in New York
in September. One of the subjects dealt with was the
structural barriers to equality in the sphere of peace
and security. Not one country has achieved satisfactory
numbers. Spain is convinced that expanding the role
of women is essential to combating sexual violence
in conflict and sexual exploitation and abuse. For that
reason, we support deepening the debate on specific
measures needed to increase the participation of
women in all areas. Much remains to be done. Debates
like today's have to remind us of that fact and motivate
us if we are to make progress.

