Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank Rwanda
for convening this open debate on women and peace
and security. Your presence here, Madam President,
shows your country's strong commitment to addressing
the scourge of sexual violence in wars and in situations
of armed conflict. We welcome Vice-Minister Cho
Tae-yul's attendance at the Council debate today.

We are grateful to the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive briefing to the Council. The Secretary-
General has placed women's protection issues high on
his agenda and has put the power of the United Nations
behind the efforts to combat heinous acts of violence
against women.

Women bear the brunt of wars and armed conflicts.
Today, 90 per cent of the casualties in conflicts and
wars are non-combatants, of whom 70 per cent are
women and children. Moreover, women are left out
of peacemaking, stabilization and reconstruction
processes.

Women and girls are targeted deliberately. Sexual
and gender-based violence in situations of armed
conflict affects the dignity not only of victims and
survivors but also of families, communities and
societies. It causes moral and psychosocial injury and
is used as a tactic of war to force the displacement of
populations and to illegally acquire natural resources.

Resolution 1325 (2000) recognized that
disproportionate impact on women and introduced
remedial measures. Member States have resolved
to collectively oppose and fight the unconscionable
practices of rape, sexual slavery, commercial sexual
exploitation, forced pregnancies, enforced sterilization
and other forms of sexual violence.

We welcome Special Representative Zainab Hawa
Bangura's exhaustive briefing today. We pay tribute to
her for her solid work and for the passion with which she
pursues her mission. We appreciate the presence and
testimony of the representative of the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security. Civil society
has a crucial role in protecting the rights of women in
conflict situations.

The United Nations does much to deal with the
protection of women in situations of armed conflict.
We all know that that is not enough. Much more needs
to be done. It is imperative to continue to mainstream
the gender perspective into peacekeeping operations.
As the largest troop-contributing country, we can
testify to the fact that the appointment of gender
advisers in the field has served a useful purpose.
That practice must be strengthened. We are proud of
our women peacekeepers, who have served as police
officers, doctors and nurses in peacekeeping operations
in Asia, Africa and the Balkans. We have made gender
sensitization a mandatory part of the training of our
peacekeepers.
Over the years, the Security Council has paid
close attention to the cause of protecting the human
rights of vulnerable groups in situations of armed
conflict. The issue of women and peace and security
has been integrated into the Council's country-specific
resolutions. That increased emphasis has resulted in
a normative framework that is reflected in a series
of resolutions on women and children, as well as the
creation of the posts of special representatives of the
Secretary-General to deal with the issues of children
and sexual violence. The Secretary-General has
reflected those concerns in various reports. Over time,
communication among the field offices, the Secretariat
and the Council has also improved.

Such mechanisms and measures have provided
relief and justice to the affected populations, but
it is a long haul. In that context, we support Special
Representative Bangura's call to all parties to conflicts
to immediately put an end to violence against women
and make specific, time-bound commitments to ensure
the non-recurrence of such acts, under the appropriate
monitoring mechanisms.

The six-point priority agenda of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General is a good way
to address impunity, empower women to seek redress,
strengthen the international political response and foster
national ownership. Moreover, the full implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) will meaningfully address
the plight of women and will elevate their status to
equal partners in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts, post-conflict reconstruction, peace and
security. Women should participate in recovery and
peacebuilding, as well as transitional justice systems.

The Council has set a good example by sending
strong signals that sexual and gender-based violence is
unacceptable. We should give due credit to the Security
Council for transforming the protection of women in
armed conflict situations from a soft to a hard issue.
Full compliance with international humanitarian law, an
end to impunity, and accountability for the perpetrators
of crimes against women, including in transitional
justice mechanisms, are now widely accepted norms of
international law.

In order to give more credence to its actions, the
Council must be ready to take targeted and graduated
measures, through the relevant Sanctions Committees,
against perpetrators of sexual Violence. We endorse
the Secretary-General's recommendation of applying
specific sanctions against parties to armed conflict that
use sexual violence as a tactic of war.

We believe that the Member States concerned
bear the primary legal and moral responsibility for
preventing and addressing sexual violence. We urge the
Special Representative to continue to work closely with
Member States and regional organizations to ensure
that such concerns are addressed.

The continued appointment of trained gender
and women protection advisers and the provision
of multisectoral assistance and services for victims
have proved beneficial. Adequate resources must be
allocated for that purpose.

We support the Special Representative's call to
strengthen national institutions in order to provide
sustainable assistance to Victims of sexual violence.
Technical assistance may be provided, on request,
to concerned States for reforming and rebuilding the
judicial, legislative and electoral sectors, as well as
for the economic, social and political empowerment of
women.

In conclusion, I would say that punitive measures
do not provide all the answers. We must invest in
consciousness-raising, dialogue and engagement.
Societies in conflict must address the root causes,
resolve their differences and avoid hurting their own
communities and nations or fellow human beings
across borders. Humanity and humanitarianism, not
primordial barbarism, must prevail.

