Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): Kazakhstan thanks
the German presidency for highlighting our attention
on preventing conflict-related sexual violence. We
commend Secretary-General Guterres for the insights
drawn from his annual report (S/2019/280) and Special
Representative Patten for the overview of her mandate
and work. We also thank the Nobel Peace Prize laureates
and other briefers for their passionate plea to us, as well
as their horrifying analyses of that scourge in different
parts of the world.

Kazakhstan endorses the recommendations
contained in the Secretary-General's annual report.
Despite the robust normative framework and the
progress achieved, we need to collectively reflect on
how to prevent conflict-related sexual violence from
increasing at the alarmingly high levels as it presently
does. At the same time, we have to take measures
to ensure that sexual violence is not used as a tactic
of war or aggravated by human trafficking, which
can become a source of income for armed groups,
terrorist organizations and transnational organized
crime networks.

That scourge requires concerted and well-
coordinated cross-national interventions with a One
United Nations approach. All efforts of the United
Nations Action Against Sexual Violence in Conflict
and the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict require improved coordination
with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
INTERPOL and regional and subregional organizations.
We also need initiatives and cooperation for prevention,
information-sharing and documentation, assistance for
victims, legal support, the training of security forces,
new orientations for the legal, judiciary and criminal
justice systems and exchanges of best practices in
combating sexual violence.

Our deliberations today make it clear that the
international community should ensure accountability
for sexual violence in conflict and bring a resolute end to
impunity. The Security Council sanctions committees
should therefore include, where appropriate, sexual
violence as a designated criterion for sanctions against
individuals and organized networks, including non-State
parties to conflicts. Regional organizations and
Member States, which have the primary responsibility
for responding to sexual violence and strengthening
the law enforcement system, should harmonize their
national legislations with United Nations standards.

Conflict-related sexual violence affects every
aspect ofa survivor's life and leads to the stigmatization
of victims and the devastation of physical and economic
security, especially of displaced and rural women.
We therefore need a survivor-centred approach,
which should include full, competent and speedy
psychological support, health care, legal assistance
and socioeconomic reintegration. Cooperation with
religious leaders, civil society and local communities
is most important if we want to change extremist
narratives, shift the stigma of sexual violence to the
perpetrators, promote education and create awareness
around the empowerment of women.

Kazakhstan strongly believes that preventing
sexual exploitation and abuse by peacekeepers should
be an absolute priority, along with the United Nations
zero-tolerance policy on such offences. All troops and
police contingents should have full training prior to and
during deployment. We support the greater recruitment
of well-qualified women military and police officers
and the deployment of women protection advisers to
peacekeeping missions.

Our country integrates all elements of the women
and peace and security agenda, including on conflict-
related sexual violence, in our national legislation, with
new strong pro-women policies. Training on gender
equality for the armed and security forces and women's
deployment in United Nations peacekeeping operations
are priorities for Kazakhstan's national peacekeeping
training centre.

At the regional level, we are supporting
Afghanistan with a multidimensional approach of
conflict prevention, accompanied by humanitarian and
development assistance, by strengthening the security
and development nexus. At the international level, we
are contributing to the United Nations Trust Fund to
End Violence against Women, which funds projects in
post-conflict settings.

To conclude, we welcome today's adoption of the
milestone resolution 2467 (2019) and are pleased to
inform the Council that Kazakhstan will today present
our concrete pledges to accelerate our implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda by the
anniversary in 2020 at the high-level companion event,
hosted by Germany and the United Kingdom. We
will be fully engaged, together with the international
community, in promoting the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the new agenda for peace
to protect women's dignity and gender empowerment.

