Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia): Estonia aligns itself
with the statement made by the observer of the
European Union.

We would like to thank the Secretary-General and
all the briefers for their contributions. We welcome the
focus of our discussion on the full implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and its related resolutions.

The issue of women and peace and security was
brought to the Council's attention 19 years ago, owing
to the concrete realization that women needed to be
included and addressed if its objective of ensuring
peace and security was to be effectively achieved.
Since then, the Council, together with all stakeholders,
has continued to develop the normative framework for
the consideration of the women and peace and security
agenda, improving data collection and identifying
tools to implement resolution 1325 (2000). Yet, as the
Secretary-General notes, the divide between rhetoric
and reality remains stark. The approaching twentieth
anniversary of the women and peace and security agenda
is therefore the moment to focus on further action and
continue to build on what we have established to date.

In marking the anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), we also need to keep in mind
the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration
and Platform for Action, which addressed women and
armed conflict as one of its 12 critical areas. We should
aim to achieve greater synergies among those agendas.
After all, the realization of all human rights for women
and girls and ensuring gender equality are also the
cornerstones of the full and effective implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda, including
the full and meaningful participation ofwomen in peace
processes and ending gender-based violence, including
conflict-related sexual violence.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2019/800)
summarizes in detail our achievements and
shortcomings, as well as a number of concerning
trends. Those include record levels of political violence
targeting women, persistent patterns of sexual violence
and continuing violence against women peacemakers
and human rights defenders.

As an incoming member of the Security Council,
Estonia will continue to pay special attention to the
women and peace and security agenda. We welcome the
recommendations of the Secretary-General addressed
to various stakeholders, as laid out in his latest
report. We need to ensure the continued systematic
implementation of Security Council resolutions, and we
need to ensure the availability of gender-disaggregated
data, gender analysis, gender expertise, leadership and
accountability in implementing resolution 1325 (2000).
We need to be able to better monitor and track progress.
We welcome the work of the Informal Expert Group
on Women and Peace and Security in support of the
integration of the women and peace and security agenda
in specific country contexts and thank UN-Women for
its support in that regard.

Perpetrators of sexual violence need to be held to
account. Support to the survivors of violence, including
by ensuring comprehensive health services relating
to sexual and reproductive health and rights, as well
as psychosocial support, are crucial in that regard.
Sexual violence needs to be consistently established
as a stand-alone designation criterion for sanctions.
We should continue to strengthen the participation of
gender advisers and women's protection advisers in
United Nations missions. Estonia is currently preparing
its third action plan on women and peace and security.
We believe that it is a key tool to guide and accelerate
action to implement resolution 1325 (2000).

The overarching aim of the twentieth anniversary
in 2020 should be the full and effective political
commitment to action. The inclusion of all stakeholders,
in particular women, human rights defenders and
grassroots organizations, is crucial in that respect.
While all of us can provide critical support, the main
difference in the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) will, in large part, be made by dedicated people
working in the field, who often face risks and threats
to their security. We remain ready to work with the
Council and all partners to bridge the gap between
rhetoric and reality and to implement the objectives that
we jointly set in 2000.

