Mr. Martins (Angola): Let me too join other
colleagues in presenting our most heartfelt condolences
to the Russian Federation for the terrible act that ended
the life of the Russian Ambassador to Turkey.

Let me welcome and thank the President of the
Government of Spain, His Excellency Mr. Mariano
Rajoy Brey, for presiding over this very important
debate, and the Spanish delegation for selecting this
critical issue of contemporary life as a central theme in
the programme of work of its presidency in the month
of December.

We are grateful to the Secretary-General; the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Hawa
Bangura; the Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yury Fedotov; and our
two briefers and activists for Yazidi women's rights,
Ms. Ameena Saeed Hasan and Ms. Nadia Murad Basee
Taha, for their poignant testimonies on an issue in which
the Council sometimes needs to hear directly from
the people involved in order to more clearly seize the
importance of taking measures on time and measures
that take action and count in combating such practices.

Trafficking in human beings is clearly a gross
violation of human rights and an infringement on the
dignity and integrity of human beings. This type of
crime is on the increase, having become a large source
of income for organized crime worldwide, in parallel
with drugs and arms trafficking. The basic approach to
countering the phenomenon involves the commitment
of countries and the international community to
improving the socioeconomic conditions of the most
vulnerable and guaranteeing the fundamental rights
of all of their citizens. A collective effort is crucial in
order to upgrade the fight against trafficking in persons
by gathering the support of all nations, communities,
institutions and individuals as an essential prerequisite
to successfully addressing the problem.

Trafficking in human beings in conflict situations
leads to sexual slavery, to the trade in women and girls,
to forced marriage and to the most appalling human
rights violations. Those tactics are used by terrorist
groups such as Al-Shabaab in Somalia, Boko Haram
in Nigeria, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in
Syria, the Lord's Resistance Army and other armed
and terrorist groups in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Modern slavery is one of the most significant
human rights tragedy ofmodern times, with multiplying
effects in conflict situations, particularly in Africa and
in the Middle East.

The Security Council, as we are doing today
through this debate and the adoption of resolution 2331
(2016), decided to continue sending a strong message
concerning that egregious violation of human rights, by
qualifying the trafficking and the issue of enslavement
as war crimes and crimes against humanity and
broadening the jurisdiction covering that type of
time. In addition, the United Nations system has been
mobilizing and coordinating efforts to combat modern
day slavery in conflict situations.

Trafficking in persons takes place in countries and
regions of Africa and the Middle East, Latin America
and the Far East, with people being recruited for a
life of exploitation and slavery in Europe, the United
States of America and elsewhere. Moreover, criminal
networks recruit desperate people, including children,
in search ofa better life, thereby raising the imperative
need to consider the phenomenon as an issue related
to international peace and security, as expressed in the
fourth preambular paragraph of the statement by the
President ofthe Security Council, adopted 16 December
2015, which notes that

"trafficking in persons undermines the rule of
law and contributes to other forms of transnational
organized crime, which can exacerbate conflict
and foster insecurity" (S/PRST/2015/25).

Responding to increased awareness of the
phenomenon, Angola has adopted legislation related
to criminalizing trafficking in human beings by
developing specific mechanisms to prevent and combat
that type of crime. The aim is to step up the fight
against trafficking and ensure assistance, recovery,
rehabilitation and reintegration for victims. In addition,
justice reform, executive programmes and legislative
measures have been adopted to support victims.
Legislation has been updated, including the adoption
of new penal code provisions to respond to Angola's
current problems in this area.

Effective partnerships among agencies responsible
for preventing and combating this scourge are being put
into place, while the Minister for Social Reinsertion has
created shelters throughout the country for the victims
of human trafficking. Angola has acceded to the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and its Additional Protocol to Prevent, Suppress
and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children, as well as other relevant international
conventions and instruments related to the eradication
of child and forced labour and to slavery.

In conclusion, further work is needed in all of our
countries. Without a comprehensive regime to combat
the trafficking in persons and protection of victims,
we need to build on the experience of others who have
made the most progress. To this end, Governments
must deploy efforts to prevent, punish and eradicate
trafficking in persons as well as to ensure the physical
safety of victims, while ensuring that legal systems
contain provisions that address the needs and give due
compensation of the victims.

