Mr. Biagini (Italy): At the outset I would like
to commend the Peruvian presidency for convening
today's debate, in particular for the angle it has
chosen. I also thank the briefers for their insightful and
informative contributions.

Italy aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union and with that by
delivered by the representative of Canada on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security.

Our concerns about the use of sexual and gender-
based violence have deepened for two reasons: first, the
widespread and systematic use of sexual violence by
terrorists and violent extremist groups and, secondly,
the increased vulnerability of migrants, in particular
women and girls, to trafficking for the purposes of
sexual and other forms of exploitation. Women and
girls fleeing conflict must be afforded safe passage and
protection, including from sexual and gender-based
violence, while in transit and at their final destinations.

It is for those reasons that last year Italy promoted
the adoption by the Council of resolution 2388 (2017),
which further explored the nexus between trafficking
in persons and conflict-related sexual violence, as
outlined in resolutions 2242 (2015) and 2331 (2016),
with a special focus on the trafficking of children in
conflict situations. We encourage the Security Council
to continue to monitor those issues and ensure follow-
up to those resolutions.

Conflict-relatedsexualviolencecanbepreventedand
more effectively addressed through the empowerment
of women, gender equality and accountability for the
crimes perpetrated. First, empowering women is key
to any strategy that aims to help women take control of
their lives and prevent them from falling prey to sexual
violence in conflict. In keeping with the Secretary-
General's commitment to women's leadership and
gender equality, as a vital element of its prevention
agenda Italy launched the Mediterranean Women
Mediators Network. As we all know, the Mediterranean
region, key to international peace and security, is
currently facing several threats, including violent
extremism and transnational organized crime, human
trafficking and humanitarian emergencies.

In that environment, women can help countries
prevent conflicts and strengthen national reconciliation
processes by ensuring a gender and inclusive perspective
on issues, such as security, justice and governance,
which are often the root causes of violent conflicts. The
goal of the Network is to increase the number of women
involved in peacemaking efforts and facilitate the
appointment of women mediators and special envoys
at the local and international level, in particular in the
Mediterranean region.

With regard to accountability, prevention fails
if there are no consequences for sexual and gender-
based violence. At the national level we must assist
Governments in strengthening accountability for
such crimes. That is the approach we are taking, for
example, with the Centre of Excellence for Stability
Police Units in Vicenza, which provides high quality
training and specialized courses for peacekeepers on
the prevention and investigation of sexual and gender-
based violence. At the global level, the Statute of the
International Criminal Court expressly lists various
forms of sexual and gender-based crimes as underlying
acts of both crimes against humanity and war crimes.
In that regard, we welcome the recent surrender of Al
Hassan Ag Abdoul Aziz Ag Mohamed Ag Mahmoud,
wanted for crimes against humanity and war crimes
in Mali, including rape, forced marriage and sexual
slavery. If properly supported, including by the
Council, justice can become a relevant deterrent for
human rights violations.

The Council can also do so by imposing targeted
sanctions against individuals who have committed
sexual violence. For example, in January 2017 sexual
and gender-based violence was included as a standalone
designation criterion in the renewal of sanctions in
the Central African Republic. The Security Council
could certainly deter such crimes by imposing targeted
sanctions. However, it is necessary to ensure that
sanctions are effectively implemented in order to
increase the cost of allowing or using sexual violence
in conflict. Only when the cost of the weapon of
sexual violence becomes visibly more expensive to its
perpetrators will there be a significant step towards the
eradication and prevention of the scourge.

