Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Ugandan delegation
for organizing this Council meeting on the topic of
post-conflict peacebuilding. The complex nature of the
tasks that face States going through the "hot" phase of
a crisis requires a balanced strategy for carrying them
out, one based on the interconnectedness of security,
social and economic development and human rights-
related issues. A holistic approach is needed, based on
united, objective and predictable logistical and
financial sources, effectively pooled stabilizing action,
close coordination, taking regional contexts into
consideration and the maximum possible use of the
potential of regional organizations.

That is how we view the Secretary-General's
report on peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of
conflict (S/2010/386). Many of its ideas and proposals
are rational, in our view.

It is clear that peacebuilding activity must be
based on the principle of national responsibility for
approaches to implementing it. The success of
peacebuilding efforts in the Middle East, Afghanistan,
Africa, Haiti and Timor-Leste results from taking into
account the interests and priorities of the host
countries. Any assistance from the international
community, regardless of the form it takes, should be at
the consent of national Governments, with respect for
the principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity.

It is important to be mindful of the specifics that
apply to each individual State. A key component of
successful post-conflict peacebuilding is strengthening
national and social potentials.

Undoubtedly, the United Nations has a special
role in coordinating international post-conflict
rehabilitation efforts. We understand well that such
action implies a great many difficulties and requires
coordinated efforts on the part of the United Nations
Secretariat, programmes and funds, from Member
States, regional organizations and international
financial institutions. Such difficulties include, as the
report discusses, fragmented and insufficient
coordination, irrational division of labour among
peacebuilding stakeholders and shortcomings in
financing mechanisms.

That is why we support the Secretary-General's
efforts to bolster, in accordance with the existing
mandate, the coordinating role of the United Nations in
key peacebuilding areas. They include combating
organized crime and drug trafficking, incorporating
post-conflict needs-assessment practices, international
civil capacity reviews and the creation and training of
United Nations teams of experts, while observing the
most equitable possible geographical representation.

Many early peacebuilding tasks now fall to
United Nations peacekeeping operations. While
carrying out their main mission - the advancement of
the peace process - United Nations peacekeepers play
a critical role in establishing conditions conducive to
the provision of larger-scale peacebuilding assistance.
We should bear in mind, however, that peacebuilding is
a lengthy and multifaceted process, far exceeding the
time taken by peacekeeping operations.

We attach great importance to the Peacebuilding
Fund as an emergency financing mechanism that
promotes the involvement of long-term reconstruction
and development mechanisms. We support our position
with an annual contribution to the Fund of $2 million.

We continue to study the Secretary-General's
report on women and peacebuilding (S/2010/466). A
number of its ideas and proposals are of clear interest
and can be put into practice. Excessive haste, however,
is not a good idea here. As the report indicates, the
implementation of its proposals will require a review
of a whole range of procedures as well as changes to
programme planning. We stand ready to continue to
work on the Secretary-General's proposals.

We endorse the adoption of the presidential
statement prepared by the Ugandan delegation.

