Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would first like to express my deep
appreciation to the President of the Government of
Spain, the Secretary-General, the members of the
Security Council, every Member of our Organization
and the staff of the Secretariat, who have voiced
their outrage and sympathy over the terrorist act that
killed Ambassador Andrey Gennadievich Karlov
of the Russian Federation. We greatly appreciate
their solidarity.

The crime of human trafficking has been a
dangerous element in a number of current conflicts,
and its link to terrorism is particularly worrying.
One of the most shocking examples of it has been the
violence inflicted by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant on ethnic and religious minorities, including
Yazidis. Terrorists have captured thousands of Yazidis,
enslaved their women and children, forced them into
marriage and abused them sexually. Yazidis and other
minorities fleeing terrorist oppression and atrocities
have been forced to abandon their homes, and many
have been killed. Through, for instance, its resolutions
2195 (2014), 2199 (2015) and 2253 (2015), the Security
Council has repeatedly called attention to the closely
interlocking relationships between the various forms
of transnational organized crime and terrorism.
In December of last year, the Council adopted a
presidential statement (S/PRST/2015/25) on the issue of
combating human trafficking.

We have taken note of the efforts of the United
Nations, including its Office on Drugs and Crime, to
prevent and combat human trafficking, including by
providing States with assistance through its agencies.
That work deserves all possible support. Russia has
traditionally supported consolidating the efforts of
States, United Nations entities and international and
regional anti-trafficking organizations. The Russian
Federation is party to the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime and its Palermo
Protocol, and is a member of the Group of Friends
United against Human Trafficking. We have supported
the development of the Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons since its beginnings and taken
an active part in it. The international community
has established a number of mechanisms capable of
helping to qualitatively improve States' cooperation in
preventing and combating human trafficking.

The transnational groups involved in this criminal
activity today are constantly adapting their methods and
in many cases working with the terrorist underground,
for which the proceeds from human trafficking are
now a source of funding. This is often accompanied
by kidnappings, sexual violence and drug trafficking.
Partly for that reason, States have decided, during the
seventy-second session of the General Assembly, to
conduct an assessment of the progress that has been
made in implementing the Global Plan of Action. We
hope that the review will enable us to update it in
the light of the new challenges and threats that have
emerged, including the issue of human trafficking
in armed conflict. In that regard, we would like
to emphasize that when considering this topic it is
important to keep to the established purviews of United
Nations entities. For instance, based on its mandate for
the maintenance of international peace and security, the
Security Council should deal with the issue of human
trafficking only as it relates to situations on its agenda.
If not, such efforts might lead to the creation of parallel
mechanisms that could end up having a negative impact
on the effectiveness of international efforts in that area.

There are no universal recipes for combating
human trafficking, and every State must decide its own
policy and come up with the best possible measures at
the national level. Technical assistance with capacity-
building in this area is particularly important for

countries in situations of armed conflict. In that regard,
one particularly topical issue is protecting the victims
of human trafficking in armed conflict situations and
assisting them with particular regard for their age and
gender. That means providing social, psychological,
economic and medical help, as well as access to justice.

The crimes committed by terrorist groups result
in the most disgusting kinds of human trafficking.
We would like to once again strongly condemn the
barbarism of such radicals and affirm our solidarity
with the victims of terror. We once again urge the
international community to jettison its short-term
geopolitical interests and unite firmly in the fight
against terrorism under the coordination of the United
Nations. That is the only way we can defeat terrorism
in all its manifestations, including human trafficking.

We reject the insinuations in the Ukrainian
delegation's statement as inappropriate, unfounded and
in some places simply ridiculous.

