Mr. Traore (Guinea) (spoke in French): Mr.
President, on behalf of my delegation, I should like to
thank you for convening this public debate, which
deals with an extremely important and topical issue:
women and peace and security. I should like also to pay
tribute to the Secretary-General and to thank him for
his excellent report and for his statement.

The various conferences on women - in Mexico
in 1975, in Nairobi in 1985, in Beijing in 1995 - and
the Windhoek Declaration and Plan of Action of 2000
provided the basis for our resolution 1325 (2000). That
resolution deals with the impact of armed conflict on
women and girls, their role in conflict prevention and
resolution, and their contribution to peace-building.

The resolution calls on the various players to
shoulder their responsibilities for implementing the
recommendations relating to gender issues in general
and to the situation of women in armed conflict in
particular.

Recently, in this very Chamber, as a prelude to
this meeting, we held a public debate on follow-up to
resolution 1325 (2000). At that meeting, Ms. Heyzer
ended her statement by telling us of a message from a
l3-year-old girl who had been kidnapped in northern
Uganda by the Lord's Resistance Army. She said:

"I want to go to school. I want to rebuild my life.
How can you help me?" (S/PV.4589, p. 8)

At our meeting today, we must be able to find an
answer to that question. That is why my delegation is
pleased that the report takes account of such important
factors as socio-cultural considerations; protecting
women and girls from armed conflict; their
participation in peace processes, including in
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration; and
gender equality. This is an indication of the importance
that the international community attaches to the
suffering of women and girls in armed conflict and of
its resolve to end that suffering.

We endorse the recommendations in the report,
and we would like also to emphasize that the new intra-
State nature of conflicts has given rise, inter alia, to
problems relating to the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons and to the failure to respect international
humanitarian law and human rights.

In this context, my delegation believes that the
following aspects must be thoroughly studied:
prevention, education, health, coordination and
cooperation, women and girl soldiers, and socio-
economic considerations.

It is our hope that the forthcoming meeting on
women and small arms and the conference to be held in
Chile in November on women in peacekeeping
operations will provide useful outcomes.

We welcome the coordination within the United
Nations system as part of the follow-up to resolution
1325 (2000), and we believe that there should also be
coordination between the organizations concerned and
the various actors.

My country is ready to make its contribution on
the basis of the experience we have acquired on the
ground through the Guinean branch of the Network of
African Women Ministers and Parliamentarians
(REFAMP), supported by the Mano River Union
Women's Network.

We also encourage the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Special Adviser on
Gender Issues in their efforts to prepare a guide on the
multidimensional aspects of peacekeeping operations.
We hope that the guide, once completed, will be made
available to Member States.

I should like to point out also that the end of war
does not mean the restoration of peace. Once peace has
been restored, it must be strengthened if it is to be
lasting. That means that adequate financial resources
have to be made available and decisive action taken by
the international community. In this connection, we
welcome the fact that last year the United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) earmarked
$14 million for the question of women and peace and
security.

Lastly, I think that we can draw inspiration from
the ideas voiced here so that we can work more
effectively to find a solution to the ills that afflict
women, who are our daughters - including that young
Ugandan girl - our sisters, our wives, our mothers and
our grandmothers.

