Mrs. Pejanovic' Durisie (Montenegro): As we are
approaching the twentieth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), I would like to thank the
Bolivian presidency for organizing today's open debate
on promoting the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda through women's political
and economic empowerment and for preparing an
informative concept note (S/2018/904, annex).

My country fully associates itself with the statement
made by observer of the European Union, as well as the
statement on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women,
Peace and Security. I would, however, like to make
some additional remarks in my national capacity.

Women around the world are systematically
underrepresented in decision-making, not only in the
political arena but also in economic and wider social
spheres. In many places they have fewer resources and
are even deprived of fundamental rights in a number
of sectors, such as education, health, the economy and
the media. Women are often marginalized, made to feel
vulnerable and victims of violence and exploitation in
different contexts and environments. That is a fact,
in spite of the common knowledge and available data
showing that societies are stronger when the rights of
women and girls are respected, when women are valued
and empowered and when they have leading roles in
ensuring security and peace, as well as in political and
economic activities.

The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/900) shows that the current level of
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda still falls short of the mark. Today's debate is
an opportunity to learn more about the successful cases
of the inclusion of women and the various positive and
negative experiences related thereto. In that manner, we
will be able to consider which practical measures should
be taken to further promote gender equality, the role
of women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts
and the construction of stable, more economically
developed and fairer societies, and, on that basis, to
commit ourselves to do more.

Women's voices are not heard on a number ofissues
that concern their lives and the lives of their families
and communities. We must support their ability to
influence policies that promote the peacebuilding
and development agenda and reduce inequality.
Montenegro has a comprehensive approach to gender
equality at the national level, with a focus on three
priorities: first, increasing the political participation of
women; secondly, combating violence against women;
and, thirdly, supporting the economic empowerment
of women. We are striving to create an efficient
framework for the systematic improvement of the
position of women and girls in Montenegro. However,
work in individual countries is not enough to address
and overcome these shared challenges. That is why we
are trying to contribute to efforts at the international
level aimed at delivering on this important agenda.

Montenegro supports international efforts to
implement resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace
and security. In cooperation with UN-Women and
other international stakeholders, we have implemented
mechanisms for following-up and monitoring the
implementation of the resolution. At the moment, we
are preparing the next national action plan for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), for the
period 2019-2023, building on the progress made and
lessons learned. We actively participate in the work of
the agenda of the Women, Peace and Security Focal
Points Network, as well as that of the Mediterranean
Women Mediators Network.

In line with our NATO commitments, we have
contributed to the NATO Trust Fund for Jordan,
which aims at increasing female representation and
supporting the recruitment of female officers and
gender training. We have also sent an experienced
gender adviser, responsible for advice and operational
support on the implementation of the resolution 1325
(2000), to NATO headquarters. A number of female
officers in our armed forces were trained and certified
as regional instructors for the implementation of the
gender agenda in international peacekeeping missions
and operations. We support the United Nations actions
against conflict-related sexual violence, and we
highly value the importance of training peacekeeping
personnel on preventing sexual exploitation and
abuse. We also joined the European Union's Spotlight
Initiative to end violence against women and girls,
which is to be implemented worldwide together with
the United Nations.
The women and peace and security agenda is
having an effect on global policymaking. We should
spare no effort to open up real opportunities for women
and girls in schools, businesses, military ranks and
peace processes. Montenegro is fully committed to
this agenda. Increasing the participation of women
in politics and the security sector is a process that is
showing certain positive results, but we should be more
committed to women's empowerment in economic
spheres. Enabling half of the world's population to
contribute to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development by serving their communities
is the way to make real achievements when it comes to
sustainable development and peace.

