The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Afghanistan, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Benin, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Iraq, Ireland, Israel,
Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Mauritania, Mexico, Myanmar, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, the Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Romania, Rwanda,
San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Tonga, Tunisia and the United Republic of
Tanzania, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend invitations under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Srgjan Kerim, President of the General Assembly;
Major-General Patrick Cammaert, former Division
2

Commander of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo; and
His Excellency Mr. Yukio Takasu, Chairman of the
Peacebuilding Commission and Permanent Representative
of Japan.

It is so decided.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 18 June 2008 from the
Permanent Representative of South Africa, in which he
requests that His Excellency Mr. Ramtane Lamamra,
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union, be invited to participate in the consideration of
the item in accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure. Unless I hear any
objection, I shall take it that the Council agrees to
extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure to His Excellency Mr. Lamamra.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite His Excellency Mr. Lamamra to take the
seat reserved for him at the side of the Council
Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2008/403, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Canada,
Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Latvia, Lichtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
the Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway,
Panama, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea,
Romania, San Marino Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the
United Republic of Tanzania and the United States of
America.

I should like to draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2008/364, containing a letter
dated 4 June 2008 from the Permanent Representative
of the United States transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.

I should like also to draw attention to document
S/2008/402, containing a letter dated 16 June 2008
08-39069
from the Charge d'affaires of the Permanent Mission of
the United Kingdom transmitting the report of the
Wilton Park conference, held from 27 to 29 May, on
"Women targeted or affected by armed conflict: what
role for military peacekeepers7".

With the forbearance of my colleagues, I would
like to make introductory remarks on behalf of my
country in my national capacity. As I hear no objection,
I shall proceed; I promise to be brief.

Thank you all for joining us; I would especially
like to thank the Secretary-General for his leadership. I
should like to commend you, Mr. Secretary-General,
for your commitment to increasing the number of
women candidates for United Nations Special
Representative and Special Envoy positions. When I,
along with the members of the Women Leaders
Working Group, first began looking at this issue, we
realized that in the 60 years of United Nations
peacekeeping, only seven women had held the post of
Special Representative to the Secretary-General. You
immediately took the lead in helping to address that,
Mr. Secretary-General, and today Margrethe Loj of
Denmark is now the Special Representative for Liberia.
We applaud you for your commitment, and we look
forward to working with you on that critical issue.

I also want to commend all of you here today, my
fellow Council members, and I want to thank those
who have travelled from afar to show their dedication
to the important issue of ending the use of rape and
other forms of sexual violence as instruments of
warfare. Rape is a crime that can never be condoned.
Yet women and girls in conflict situations around the
world have been subjected to widespread and
deliberate acts of sexual violence. As many here are
aware, for years there has been a debate about whether
or not sexual Violence against women is a security
issue for this forum to address.

I am proud that today we can respond to that
lingering question with a resounding "yes". This world
body now acknowledges that sexual violence in
conflict zones is, indeed, a security concern. We affirm
that sexual violence profoundly affects not only the
health and safety of women, but also the economic and
social stability of their nations.

The draft resolution before us establishes a
mechanism for bringing those atrocities to light.
Specifically, the draft requests that the Secretary-
General prepare an action plan for collecting
08-39069

information on the use of sexual violence in situations
of armed conflict and then report that information
periodically to the Council.

We already know of the unimaginable brutality
against women that exists in some parts of the world.
In Burma, for instance, soldiers have regularly raped
women and girls as young as 8 years old. I must note
that what is also tragic in that country is that instead of
being allowed to take the office of the elected leader of
Burma's Government, Aung San Suu Kyi is marking
her birthday this very day under house arrest. We
cannot forget, as we examine that issue, other women
activists who struggle for freedom in violent
environments.

We are concerned about the issue of women
affected by violence across the world, in places such as
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Sudan and
many others.

As an international community, we have a special
responsibility to punish perpetrators of sexual violence
who are representatives of international organizations.
Last year, there were reports of sexual exploitation and
abuse by United Nations peacekeepers in several
United Nations missions and by staff at the United
Nations Mission in Liberia. The encouraging news is
that steps have been taken to address that. One of the
perpetrators is serving a sentence in his country, and
several other cases remain under investigation. That
situation should serve as a model for all countries
contributing troops to United Nations operations.
While the individual perpetrator is ultimately
responsible for the abuse, Member States are
responsible for disciplining and holding their troops
accountable.

Finally, we must work together to provide the
necessary protection and assistance to victims of sexual
violence. In recent years, the United States has
provided more than $40 million to protect women and
girls in Darfur and to provide for sexual violence
prevention in response projects worldwide. We have
also addressed the issue of sexual violence by devoting
$528 million over the last seven fiscal years to fighting
human trafficking, another grave abuse of human
dignity that is all too frequently committed against
women and girls, especially in conflict situations.

One of the most important ways in which we must
measure the value of our international community is by
how effective we are in protecting, and providing justice
3
for, the most vulnerable of our members. When women
and girls are preyed upon and raped, the international
community cannot be silent or inactive. It is our
responsibility to be their advocates and their defenders.
We are taking an important step today that will enable
us better to meet that goal, and I want to thank you all
for being here to show your strong support.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
that they should limit their statements to no more than
five minutes in order to enable the Council to carry out
its work expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy
statements are kindly requested to circulate the text in
writing and to deliver a condensed version when
speaking in the Chamber.

I welcome in particular the participation today of
the Secretary-General, His Excellency Ban Ki-moon,
and I invite him to take the floor.


