Baroness Verma (United Kingdom): I would like
to thank the Secretary-General, the Executive Director
of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and
the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) and civil
society speakers present here today for their leadership
on this agenda. We welcome resolution 2242 (2015),
which was adopted today. It makes clear that leadership
and accountability for implementation are required
by all actors. We echo our thanks to the Spanish
Prime Minister for working with us on this important
resolution. I strongly echo the call for everyone here
to make meaningful and practical commitments to
fully implementing resolution 1325 (2000). The United
Kingdom firmly believes that the fifteenth anniversary
must represent the start of a new era on women and
peace and security. Let us begin that change today. I
will, therefore, announce eight areas where the United
Kingdom will act.

First, in arranging all future peacebuilding events
hosted by the United Kingdom, we will identify women
involved in the conflict and shine a torch on them to
ensure that their voices are heard. We will promote the
active participation of women in such peacebuilding
discussions through political and/or financial support.
We will also provide support, including lobbying, at
the highest levels, to ensure that women's voices are
represented in wider peace processes, negotiations and
State-building. We will also provide support at the local
levels so as to build the capacity of women to participate
effectively.

Second, the United Kingdom will contribute
$1 million of start-up funding to the Global Acceleration
Instrument for Women, Peace and Security and
Humanitarian Action to help address the global deficit
in funding for the implementation of the resolution. We
will also provide additional funding of over $800,000,
each year for two years, to support new research at the
Centre for Women, Peace and Security at the London
School of Economics, bringing total Government
funding from the United Kingdom for the Centre to
over $3 million.

Third, the United Kingdom will ensure that all
future relevant military doctrine is gender-sensitive. By
November 2016, all United Kingdom troops deployed
on overseas missions will receive training on women
and peace and security and on preventing sexual
violence. We are reviewing the external training we
provide through our peace support operation training
centres with a view to delivering additional training on
women and peace and security and on preventing sexual
violence to overseas troop-contributing countries.
The review will also help to develop train-the-trainer
packages, which can help further disseminate this
work. We are expanding and strengthening the pool of
gender advisers within the Ministry of Defence.

Fourth, conflict prevention and early warning
remain at the heart of this agenda. The United Kingdom
will ensure that, by September 2016, all our early
warning and joint conflict analysis and assessment
tools are fully gender-sensitive. Next, over the next
five years, the United Kingdom will drive forward
the preventing sexual violence in conflict initiative.
We will tackle impunity for sexual violence crimes,
while ensuring widespread implementation of the
international protocol on the documentation and
investigation of sexual violence in conflict.

Fifth, we will encourage greater support for
survivors, including children and men, and we will
work with other Governments to deliver a more effective
multilateral response.

Sixth, the United Kingdom will champion the road
map to action to protect women and girls in emergencies
and help secure positive outcomes for women and girls
at the World Humanitarian Summit in 2016.

Seventh, the United Kingdom will continue to
provide technical and other support to help other
Governments develop, implement and measure the
impact of their own action plans on resolution 1325
(2000). We will also help Iraq and Afghanistan
implement their action plans.

Finally, the United Kingdom will ensure that
our overseas work to counter violent extremism
includes upstream activity targeted specifically at
women. Women will be at the centre of the delivery
of programming of overseas extremism work, both
nationally and locally.

We strongly support the recommendations
for the United Nations on women and peace and
security set out in the three major reviews this year,
and we will work with others to ensure that they are
implemented. Just as we, Member States, must deliver
on our responsibilities, the roles of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the Department of Political
Affairs, the United Nations Development Programme
and many other United Nations entities are critical to
move matters forward at Headquarters and in the field.
In conclusion, the United Kingdom will pledge to
update the Security Council on our commitments at
the annual debate on this agenda item and, to that end,
I call on others in the Chamber today to join in our
ambition and do likewise.

