Ms. Miintefering (Germany): May I begin with
a quote:

"I would like to state here, and I believe that many
agree with me on this issue, that we women do not
owe a debt of gratitude in the traditional sense of
the expression."

Those words were uttered by Marie Juchacz almost
100 years ago, on 19 February 1919, in the German
Parliament - during the first German democracy
immediately after the introduction of women's suffrage.
As the first woman to speak in Germany's Parliament,
she boldly continued:

"It will not occur to us to deny our femininity
because we have entered into the political arena
and are joining the fight for the rights of the
people. There is no part of the new governmental
programme that we women are not interested in."

That is precisely the way things are today, 100 years
after this speech - also and especially internationally.
Foreign and security policy can and must no longer take
place without women in the twenty-first century: neither
in national parliaments, nor in the United Nations, nor
in its international peace missions. The United Nations,
as a central, rules-based, multilateral regulatory
framework, was created more than 70 years ago, after
two world wars. For us, women are more important
than ever before - and not only with a view to our own
history, but to a common and peaceful future.

That is why I wish, first of all, to offer my sincere
thanks to Bolivia, the current holder of the Security
Council presidency, for this open debate on resolution
1325 (2000). I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General and the Executive Director of UN-Women,
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, for their important
statements, as well as Ms. Randa Siniora Atallah, in
her capacity as a civil society representative.

We cannot afford to talk about peace and women
and security in the twenty-first century without women
sitting at the table as equal partners. They must be
actors and shapers ofpeace and security policy, and not
just recipients of political decisions. We cannot afford
to neglect women's potential for promoting security,
stability and sustainable peace, as still remains the
case today.

The adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) was a
milestone, and a new generation of our countries' sons
and daughters has grown up in the intervening years.
A great deal has happened since that time. We may
be taking small steps, but we are making progress.
Therefore, it is decisive for us now to continue
addressing this topic in view of the crises and conflicts
in the world and to build steadily on experiences and
successes and drive them forward with vim and vigour.
In response to our European partners, it might not be
the same procedure as before, but we will do our best.

Germany aligns itself with the statements to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union and
the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security. We also support
the statement to be delivered by the representative of
Ghana on behalf of the Group of Friends of the African
Women Leaders Network, in which Germany serves as
Vice-Chair.

Allow me, above and beyond that, to mention three
of Germany's priorities with regard to women and
peace and security.

First, we will place the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) at the heart of our work as a member of
the Security Council during the period 2019-2020.
We look forward to working closely together with
Peru as we take over as Co-Chair of the Informal
Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security. We
will build on Sweden's excellent preparatory work
and raise the profile of the Group's recommendations
still further. We will give civil society a voice that is
heard in the Security Council, including women human
rights defenders.

Secondly, we will continue to lend our full support
to the important work of the United Nations to prevent
and eliminate conflict-related sexual violence. We will
use the annual open debate on that issue during our
presidency in April 2019 to strengthen the normative
framework of the Security Council with respect to
conflict-related sexual violence. We look forward to
working with all members of the Security Council,
especially with our French friends. This year's Nobel
Peace Prize laureates - Nadia Murad from Iraq, who
now lives in Germany, and Dr. Denis Mukwege from
the Democratic Republic of the Congo - underscore
in their work how important the fight against conflict-
related sexual violence continues to be.

Thirdly, and lastly, Germany intends to achieve
tangible progress regarding the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) by 2020 - the twentieth
anniversary of the resolution. We will continue to draw
on the important and practical exchange of experiences
in the focal points network. I am most delighted that we
are due to hand over the presidency of that network to
Namibia in 2019, especially since it is one ofthe driving
forces behind resolution 1325 (2000). Moreover, we
will continue to lend political and financial support
to the African Women Leaders' Network, as well as
with regard to the establishment of national chapters as
soon as possible, such as in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

We are talking here about resolution 1325 (2000),
namely, the decision adopted unanimously by the
Security Council in October 2000. It is important to
ensure that we strengthen women at all sociopolitical
levels - locally, regionally and globally. I firmly
believe that women can do anything, but they must also
be allowed to do so.

