Mr. Sparber (Liechtenstein): We welcome the
second report of the Secretary-General entitled "Sexual
violence in conflict" (S/2013/l49), which updates us on
the widespread use of sexual violence as a method of
warfare in various situations. Let me also commend
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Hawa
Bangura, and her office, for their great dedication in
operationalizing and implementing important mandates
deriving from resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and
1960 (2010).

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered by the representative of Canada, who will
speak on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women,
Peace and Security, in particular with its call for
increased accountability for acts of conflict-related
sexual violence, which is best done by enhancing
support for the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in establishing the monitoring,
analysis and reporting arrangements on conflict-related
sexual violence mandated in resolution 1960 (2010). We
also support the Secretary-General's recommendation
to put in place an appropriate Security Council
mechanism or procedure for systematically monitoring
commitments by parties listed in the annex ofits report.

There is a clear and obvious link between the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons and
gender-based violence in conflict and post-conflict
situations. There is ample evidence that small arms
facilitate a vast spectrum of human rights violations,
including rape and other forms of sexual violence.
Liechtenstein therefore welcomes the fact that the Arms
Trade Treaty includes the risk of gender-based violence
and violence against women and children as one of the
criteria that exporting States need to consider before
authorizing an arms export. We are particularly pleased
that the risk assessment provided for in the Treaty not
only covers small arms and light weapons, but also
ammunition, munitions, parts and components.

We agree with the Secretary-General's statement
that States are primarily responsible for holding
individuals to account for sexual and gender-based
violence. However, when national jurisdictions are
unwilling or unable to fulfil their responsibilities in
that regard, the International Criminal Court (ICC) in
particular has a complementary role to play. Bringing
to justice the perpetrators of sexual violence is an
important step for Victims seeking to move on with their
lives. We are therefore pleased that the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, has
made the fight against sexual violence a focus of her
work. The fact that crimes of sexual violence play a role
in nearly every case under investigation and prosecution
by the Court speaks both to the startling prevalence of
sexual violence in armed conflicts today and to the
emphasis placed by the ICC on holding perpetrators of
those crimes accountable. The voluntary surrender to
the ICC by Bosco Ntanganda, whose name has been
associated with sexual and gender-based crimes in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for many years, is
an important message for victims - in the end, justice
will be done.

Delivering justice for victims of sexual violence
also includes reparative justice. Liechtenstein is a proud
donor to the ICC's Trust Fund for Victims, which adopts
a gender perspective in all its activities and conducts
programmes specifically aimed at assisting victims of
sexual and gender-based violence. Having been ordered
to provide reparations for the victims of Thomas
Lubanga Dyilo, in the light of the sexual violence
those victims have suffered, the Trust Fund will now
for the first time fulfil the promise of reparative justice

contained in the Rome Statute.

My delegation is a long-standing supporter of the
consistent mainstreaming of the Council's thematic
agenda into its country-specific work. In partnership
with Switzerland, we have supported the publication
of the 2010 Women, Peace and Security Handbook by
PeaceWomen, which has just been released in a second
edition. To increase its usability, we made the handbook
available as a mobile application. The handbook
makes the complex women, peace and security agenda
accessible by breaking it down into specific topics. In
addition, an overview of the Council's most relevant
previously agreed language has been included so as to
ensure that the Council integrates its own decisions on
women, peace and security into its country-specific
work. It could thereby serve as a practical tool for the
drafters of Council resolutions. We hope that Council
members will continue making good use of it.

