Ms. DiCarlo (United States): My delegation
would like to welcome you, Mr. President, to the
Council today. You can be assured of our full support
during this busy month. We would also like to express
the gratitude of the United States for the cooperation
that we received from fellow Council members during
our presidency.

The United States believes that the Council's
continued focus on woman and peace and security is
critical, and we are very appreciative that the
delegation of Viet Nam has organized this important
debate today. We thank Deputy Secretary-General
Migiro for her presence and welcome the message of
the Secretary-General that she has conveyed to us. We
were also pleased to hear the comments of
Ms. Mayanja, Ms. Alberdi and Ms. Amin, and thank
them and Deputy Secretary-General Migiro for their
commitment and all their efforts to improve conditions
for women in conflict situations.

In his recent report (S/2009/465), the Secretary-
General notes that while much has been done in
response to resolution 1325 (2000) in the nine years
since its adoption, armed conflict continues to have a
devastating impact on women and girls, all too often
leaving them wounded, traumatized, sexually
assaulted, socially and economically marginalized or
without political power. The United States is in
complete agreement with the Secretary-General on the
key points. Member States must renew their
commitment to resolution 1325 (2000) and intensify
their efforts to implement its provisions. We strongly
support the Secretary-General's proposals for action
and resolution 1889 (2009), which we adopted today.

We have heard many times in this Chamber that
more women should be included in peace processes
and post-conflict deliberations. If a sustainable peace is
to be achieved in any post-conflict situation, a peace
agreement must take into account the concerns of those
most harmed by conflicts, but more often than not
women are excluded from peace negotiations and
peacebuilding efforts. In fact, the United Nations
Development Fund for Women points out that since
1992, only 2.4 per cent of signatories to peace
agreements have been women and women's
participation in negotiating delegations has averaged
about 7 per cent.

Women have often led the call for peace in
conflict-torn societies. Let us recall the example of
Liberia, whose grass-roots women's organizations had
a direct and visible impact on peace negotiations and
post-conflict reconstruction efforts. The activism of
those groups on behalf of the welfare of the average
citizen helped to break the impasse produced by
leaders of warring factions in the struggle for political
dominance. However, to do that, those Liberian women
had to travel to Accra, Ghana, and demonstrate outside
the seat of negotiations. Women should not have to go
to such great lengths to be heard.

The Secretary-General rightly notes that Member
States should ensure that women participate in
decision-making. He adds that the international
community should pursue a strategy to ensure women's
participation in all peace processes, including by
providing appropriate training and capacity-building
programmes towards that end.

Resolution 1325 (2000) emphasizes the
responsibility that all States have to put an end to
impunity and prosecute those responsible for crimes
against humanity and war crimes, including those
relating to sexual violence and other assaults against
women and girls. Resolution 1820 (2008) established a
clear link between maintaining international peace and
security and preventing and responding to the use of
sexual violence as a weapon of war.

Last week this Council took decisive action in
addressing the sexual violence that all too often
follows in conflict's wake, by adopting resolution 1888
(2009). The resolution sends an unequivocal message:
violence against women and children will not be
tolerated and must be stopped. The Council made it
clear that ending impunity is essential, if a society
wracked by conflict or recovering from it is to come to
terms with abuses committed against civilians in the past
and to prevent such outrages from occurring in the future.

The United States looks forward to the complete
and rapid implementation of resolution 1888 (2009).
That includes the resolution's call to appoint a Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to lead,
coordinate and advocate for efforts to end conflict-
related sexual violence. As Secretary of State Clinton
said in this Chamber when the resolution was adopted:

"It is time for all of us to assume our
responsibility to go beyond condemning this
behaviour and take concrete steps to end it, to
make it socially unacceptable, to recognize it is
not cultural; it is criminal." (S/PV.6195)

The Secretary-General emphasizes that we need
to increase the number of women who serve as
mediators, special representatives, special envoys and
peacekeepers around the world. My Government
commends the Secretary-General for his leadership and
his efforts to increase the number of women in senior
United Nations positions. We hope that these
appointments will continue to increase. We also
commend Member States such as Jamaica and India for
ensuring that women figure prominently in their
peacekeeping contingents.

We join others in the call for more systematic
United Nations reporting on women's participation and
inclusion in peacebuilding and planning, and we
request the Secretary-General to continue to appoint
gender advisers to United Nations missions and to
develop a set of indicators to track implementation of
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1889 (2009).

The United Nations must do all it can to keep the
issue of women and peace and security in the spotlight,
especially as we look to the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000) and the creation of a composite
gender entity, an entity that the United States strongly
supports. We must all work together to ensure that half
of the world's population is accorded fully equal rights
and fully equal opportunities, and we must work to end
Violence against women, which destroys the very fabric
of societies and hinders stability and lasting peace.

Thank you again, Sir, for providing this occasion
to address this important issue.

