Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would like
to begin by thanking the Egyptian delegation for having
convened today's briefing on the goals and outcome
of the high-level joint African Union-United Nations
solidarity mission to the Federal Republic of Nigeria
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo from 19 to
27 July.

I commend the participation of the Deputy Secretary-
General, Ms. Amina Mohammed, Ambassador Tete
Antonio, Permanent Observer of the African Union to
the United Nations; and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
and the Executive Director of UN-Women, whom we
welcome. I thank the Deputy Secretary-General and
Ambassador Tete Antonio for the quality of their
respective briefings, which were very comprehensive
and rich.

The African Union and the United Nations had
every reason to conduct a joint visit to these two large
African countries - which have quite rightly been
qualified as giants of the continent, given their size,
demography, economic weight, rich cultural diversity
and extraordinary biodiversity - in order to promote
truly sustainable and inclusive development. Indeed,
looking at the situation of the countries visited, and
many other cases, we are convinced that the women and
peace and security approach is one very useful method
out of several used to respond to crises and to build the
resilience of the States and the communities in question
when faced with a wide array of traditional challenges
as well as new threats.

It should be recalled that resolution 1325 (2000) was
inspired by Africa. As just mentioned by Ambassador
Antonio, the resolution was inspired by Namibia.
That is why the configuration of the mission, which
combined the extraordinary female leadership of the
United Nations with that of the African Union, beyond
the purely symbolic, seems to be a fine example of
cooperation between the United Nations and the pan-
African organization. That cooperation is very useful
in order to address adequately the many challenges
to peace, security and development in Africa. The
Senegalese delegation would therefore like to warmly
congratulate the initiators of the mission who, as our
briefers explained, was rich in teachings.

We would like it to be just as rich in terms of its
impact both on policymakers and on the targets of those
policies, namely, the women in those countries and, in
particular, those directly affected by the security and
humanitarian crises. This is a model of concerted action
that constitutes one further step in the implementation
of resolution 2242 (2015), adopted by the Council
in October 2015, 15 years after the aforementioned
pioneering resolution 1325 (2005). The visit highlighted
the crises in the countries visited in terms of the place
and the role of women in the future of their societies
and countries, especially in times of conflict.

My delegation would like to note with satisfaction,
in view of the content of this high-level mission, the
desire to align and create consistency on a practical
level among the Sustainable Development Goals and
the African Union Agenda 2063 and its Peace and
Security Architecture.

Finally, a great deal of information was gathered on
the ground, and positive interactions were enjoyed by
the joint mission, both in Nigeria and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in particular with the highest
authorities of those countries, as well as with women
victims of conflict and crises, such as the high school
students of Chibok. We remain convinced that the
information and the interactions will strengthen the
work of the networks set up to better address the issue
of women and peace and security at all levels.

Senegal echoes the appeal of the Deputy
Secretary-General for the increased mobilization of
the international community in favour of these two
countries, the central African subregion, and Africa in
general. Next month, the Security Council and the Peace
and Security Council of the African Union will hold in
Addis Ababa their eleventh annual consultations. I see
no better opportunity to follow up on the visit.

