Mr. Kavanagh (Ireland): Ireland welcomes this
opportunity to address the Security Council on the
issue of women and peace and security. I would like to
express my appreciation to you, Sir, and to the People's
Republic of China for convening this open debate and
facilitating discussion of the international community's
response to Security Council resolution 1325 (2000).
The concept paper (S/2008/655) provided by your
presidency of the Council has lent valuable assistance
to States in preparing for today's debate.

I have the honour to speak today on behalf of the
Human Security Network, a cross-regional group of
countries comprised of Austria, Canada, Chile, Costa
Rica, Greece, Ireland, Jordan, Mali, Norway, Slovenia,
Switzerland and Thailand, with South Africa as an
observer.

Eight years after the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), we warmly welcomed the adoption by the
Council earlier this year of resolution 1820 (2008),
which a number of Human Security Network members
were pleased to co-sponsor. The horror of gender-based
violence, particularly rape and other forms of sexual

abuse has repeatedly been brought to the attention of
the Security Council. It demands an urgent and
effective response from the international community.
In recognition of that, Ireland has chosen to focus on
gender-based violence as the main theme of our term as
Chair of the Human Security Network, a position we
will hold through May 2009.

Resolution 1820 (2008) builds on the foundations
laid by resolution 1325 (2000) in emphasizing our
collective responsibility to work to combat sexual
violence in situations of armed conflict. The Security
Council reiterated its deep concern that acts of sexual
violence in situations of armed conflict "continue to
occur, and in some situations have become systematic
and widespread, reaching appalling levels of brutality"
(resolution 1820 (2008), ninth preambular paragraph).

Recognizing the ongoing and urgent need for full
and effective implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his useful report on that topic (S/2008/622). The report
is encouraging in that it records significant progress
towards implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
Nevertheless, it also highlights the extent of the work
yet to be done in that area. It emphasizes the need for
the international community to redouble its efforts to
promote full and meaningful implementation of the
resolution. Action is also required to ensure delivery of
the United Nations System-wide Action Plan on
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), as
previously highlighted by Slovenia on behalf of the
Human Security Network in a statement to the Security
Council in October 2006.

The implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) is
not, in Ireland's view, a matter solely for the Security
Council or, indeed, for the United Nations system. All
Member States must take responsibility for the
implementation of the resolution through their own
national activities. The development of national action
plans is a key means by which Member States commit
themselves to fulfilling that responsibility. Only
through such a process can countries assess activities
already carried out in that area and commit themselves
to tackling outstanding issues identified.

In a national capacity, Ireland, for its part, is
currently developing its own national action plan and
we intend the process to be guided by the experiences
of women and men in countries emerging from
conflict. To that end, we hope to work in partnership
with Liberia and with Timor-Leste in a process of
cross-learning. While we recognize the need for
diverse approaches in different contexts, we hope that
the collaboration will result in a concerted effort in all
three countries - Liberia, Timor-Leste and Ireland -
to effect real, immediate and meaningful change for
women who have experienced conflict and who can
and should be stakeholders in State-building and
peacebuilding.

The continued prevalence of gender-based
violence in conflict is a cause of great concern to the
Human Security Network. It is a grave violation of all
accepted standards of conduct and a challenge to our
common humanity. We believe that the international
community must act, in accordance with resolutions
1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008), both to eliminate
instances of such violations and to ensure that victims
have full and meaningful access to justice and that
impunity for the perpetrators of such crimes is
combated.

We recall that the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court specifically defines rape
and other forms of sexual violence as war crimes and
crimes against humanity. The Human Security Network
urges the Security Council to work together with
relevant stakeholders to ensure the prosecution of such
crimes and to eliminate the impunity with which they
are perpetrated.

As part of a comprehensive approach to seeking
sustainable peace, justice, truth and national
reconciliation, we stress the need for the exclusion of
sexual violence crimes from amnesty provisions in the
context of conflict resolution processes.

Women are highly active and effective in
informal peace processes. The challenge lies in
ensuring their participation in formal processes where
peace agreements are negotiated. The members of the
Human Security Network are committed to supporting
meaningful steps to promote and enhance the role of
women in peace processes and to integrate gender
equality more effectively in that context. Such
measures will strengthen the legitimacy of decision-
making processes, which are so vital to the creation of
durable foundations for peace and prosperity.

Resolution 1325 (2000) was born of a recognition
of the particular impact of war on women and of the
fact that this heinous impact required special attention
and action on the part of the international community.

As is highlighted regularly in frequent reports provided
to the Council and also in the media, that need
continues. It will take increasingly vigorous and
relevant action to mitigate and eliminate the
consequences of war on women. To be successful, the
process must facilitate the leadership role of women in
conflict resolution and peacebuilding without
detracting from the shared responsibility for results
that rests on all of us, irrespective of gender.

In conclusion and in that context, on behalf of the
Human Security Network and on behalf of Ireland in
our national capacity, I wish to commend the Council's
continuing attention to that urgent and vital task.

