Mr. Logar (Slovenia): Let me begin by stating
Slovenia's full alignment with the statement delivered
by the European Union earlier today. We also join others
in welcoming the adoption of resolution 2122 (2013).

As stated by some briefers and several speakers
before me, women and girls are particularly vulnerable
in conflict and post-conflict situations. It is therefore
also extremely important to discuss the gender
aspects of the rule of law and transitional justice
in the light of the three elements of resolution 1325
(2000) - participation, prevention and protection.

Rebuilding justice and the rule of law is critical
to any post-conflict transitional process burdened by
the legacies of mass atrocities, serious human-rights
violations and a weakened judicial infrastructure.
A gender perspective, as well as the participation
of women, should be injected into those processes.
Transitional justice processes should address the full
range of conflict-related violations of women's rights.
As particularly vulnerable victims in conflict-affected
situations, women experience grave consequences
from breakdowns in the rule of law, in the form of a
range of violations including, but not limited to, sexual
and gender-based Violence. In that context, Slovenia
particularly welcomes the reference to the need for
access to a full range of sexual and reproductive health
services in the resolution adopted today (2122 (2013)).
Addressing abhorrent Violations by ensuring access
to justice, formal and informal, as well as full rights
of redress, is essential to the process of reconciliation
and lasting peace. Importantly, preventing impunity for
the perpetrators of such crimes decreases the chance
that they will recur in the future. Furthermore, the
representation of women should be ensured in the
justice sector. Eliminating Violence against women
and violations of their social and economic rights is
a prerequisite for ensuring their full participation
in recovery. Gender-sensitive legal and institutional
reforms that conform with international standards are
therefore needed.

The primary responsibility for the prosecution
of conflict-related crimes, including Violations of
women's rights, belongs to States. However, while
the principle of complementarity enhances national
capabilities to prosecute such crimes effectively, more
efforts must be made to improve criminal justice at the
national level. The international legal framework for
judicial assistance to countries should be strengthened.
That includes extradition between States in order
to support the effective prosecution of international
crimes at the national level. Having recognized that
legal gap, Slovenia has been working together with the
Netherlands and Belgium on an initiative to consider the
possibility of adopting a new international instrument
for mutual legal assistance and extradition for the
effective investigation and prosecution of the most
serious crimes of international concern by domestic
jurisdictions. We intend to continue our activities in
that regard in the framework of the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,
and invite other States to join the initiative.

The role of international criminal courts and
tribunals, in particular the International Criminal Court
(ICC), remains crucial to the establishment of the rule
of law, especially in cases where States are unable or
unwilling to pursue accountability for serious crimes.
Moreover, the contribution of international criminal
justice, including the ICC, to the field of gender
discrimination and crimes of sexual violence has been
and will continue to be momentous. As stressed by
ICC Prosecutor Bensouda in a panel on international
criminal justice at a strategic forum held last month
in Bled, Slovenia, the ICC should also be seen as an
investment in the future of women and humankind
as a whole. To that end, Slovenia will continue to
firmly support the International Criminal Court and
international instruments regarding individual criminal
responsibility, and calls on States to accede to or ratify
the Rome Statute and its amendments.
We also consider it important that the topic under
discussion today be addressed by regional organizations
as well, as important stakeholders in the task of ensuring
peace and security.

With regard to the issue of women and girls and the
justice sector, Slovenia is supporting a project aimed at
improving the status of juvenile offenders, particularly
girls, and strengthening thejuvenilejustice sector in the
Afghan province of Herat. Activities envisaged for 2013
and 2014 will include the psychological rehabilitation
of underage girls in prison and their reintegration
into society, and awareness-raising campaigns for the
general public on the situation of imprisoned minors,
as well as expert training for officials in the judiciary.

