Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to thank the United Kingdom for
having taken the initiative of holding this ninth open
debate on women and peace and security. I would also
like to welcome the Secretary-General here today and
to thank him for the presentation of his first report on
implementation of resolution 1820 (2008). More
broadly, we welcome his determined commitment to
this issue. My delegation, of course, completely
supports the statement that will be made by the
Permanent Representative of Sweden on behalf of the
European Union.

The Secretary-General's assessment of sexual
violence is, unfortunately, definitive. Sexual violence
is widespread and often systematic, and is sometimes
even used as a weapon of war in several regions and in
many situations on the Council's agenda. The United
Nations has a special and critical role to play in
responding to this phenomenon. In many instances, it
has specific tools to assist national authorities in
supporting the victims of sexual violence, prosecuting
and trying suspects, and arresting those who are guilty
of such crimes. The Organization also has the
responsibility to encourage relevant authorities to act
to that end.
At the initiative of France, the fight against
sexual violence was a high priority of the Security

Council's annual visit to Africa in May. Because we
believe in the value of deterrence in the struggle
against impunity, we argued with the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for five officers
accused of perpetrating sexual violence to be brought
to justice. Earlier this week, the Council noted with
satisfaction that judicial procedures had been launched
against those individuals and that they had been
removed from their command duties. That is an
important message in the fight against sexual violence
and impunity. The United Nations and the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo played an important role in
achieving that outcome. The Council will continue to
monitor the matter closely.

France also welcomes the significant institutional
progress that was achieved two days ago with the
adoption of resolution 1882 (2009), which, inter alia,
extends the reporting and monitoring mechanism of
resolution 1612 (2005) to sexual violence committed
against children, regardless of whether or not child
soldiers are involved. The extension will allow the
Security Council and the international community to
focus greater attention and response on this widespread
phenomenon, which targets girls in particular.

In his report (S/2009/362), the Secretary-General
notes that many interesting initiatives have been
undertaken to address the gravity of the situation. We
must strengthen those initiatives and ensure the
dissemination of good practices. The role of
peacekeeping operations is essential in that respect,
and I welcome the presence here of female police
officers deployed in those operations. To the extent
possible and necessary, peacekeeping operations must
develop ambitious strategies to address sexual
violence. They must engage in dialogue with the
parties to armed conflicts, and their components -
primarily gender and human rights advisers, as well as
special representatives of the Secretary-General -
must take every opportunity to make the parties aware
of their obligations in this area and to encourage them
to change their behaviour. We hope that the parties'
response to the issue, or lack thereof, will be reflected
in the Secretary-General's next report so that we can be
better informed and assess to the best of our ability the
international community's action and progress with
respect to the scourge.
France welcomes the work undertaken by the
sanctions committees on the matter under consideration

today. Pursuant to the commitment it made in
resolution 1820 (2008), the Security Council must
systematically consider the relevance of including
sexual violence among the triggers of sanctions during
the establishment or revision of the committees'
mandates. When the criteria are met, it will be up to the
committees' experts to raise the matter.

In that regard, we recall the role of France,
alongside the United Kingdom, Belgium and the
United States, in the inclusion by the sanctions
committee on the Democratic Republic of the Congo of
the names of four members of the Forces
democratiques de liberation du Rwanda on the list of
those targeted for individual sanctions.

France welcomes the set of recommendations
proposed by the Secretary-General to strengthen our
action against sexual violence. We are ready to play an
active role in any initiative to promote Security
Council action on those recommendations as soon as
possible. For our part, we believe that the
implementation of the following proposals, referred to
by the Secretary-General in his statement, is of special
importance.

First, the Secretary-General should submit to the
Council an annual report on the implementation of
resolution 1820 (2008). We invite him to formulate
proposals on the modalities for the Security Council's
consideration of measures taken by parties to a conflict
to meet their obligations, including in the fight against
impunity, and its identification of appropriate steps in
response.

Secondly, a commission of inquiry should be
established. France endorses the concept of creating a
commission to investigate and advocate the most
effective mechanisms for prosecuting those who
commit sexual violence. The commission's competence
should be limited to sexual violence, and its work
coordinated with peacekeeping operations mandated to
counter sexual violence. In that respect, we would be
interested to learn more about the criteria that led the
Secretary-General to propose that we focus initially on
three geographical situations. We are ready to discuss
that and should like the Secretariat to explain how it
foresees extending that mechanism in its future phases.

The third and last proposal that I wish to
highlight is that of appointing an official to lead the
fight against sexual violence throughout the entire
United Nations system. We strongly endorse that
proposal.

In conclusion, I reiterate France's full
commitment to fighting sexual violence against
women. The Council can rest assured of our full
commitment to that issue within the Security Council
in the months to come and of our resolve to pursue our
efforts to strengthen the role of women in conflict
prevention and settlement and in rebuilding peace in
the context of the follow-up to resolution 1325 (2000),
which we will be discussing shortly and concerning
which there remains a great deal to be done.

