Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you very much, Sir, for
convening today's debate on this important topic.
I thank the Secretary-General for his useful report
(S/2018/250), as well as Ms. Amina Mohammed,
Ms. Pramila Patten and Ms. Razia Sultana for their
valuable briefings.

Our discussion today focuses on preventing
sexual violence in conflict by empowering women
and ensuring gender equality and access to justice. In
that regard, I would like to mention three main issues:
first, the links among sexual violence, conflict, violent
extremism and terrorism; secondly, addressing the root
causes of sexual violence in conflict; and, thirdly, the
importance of ensuring justice for survivors of sexual
violence during conflicts.

First, with regard to the links between sexual
violence, conflict, violent extremism and terrorism,
this year marks the tenth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1820 (2008), which acknowledges that
conflict-related sexual violence is athreatto international
peace and security and requires an international
response. It also acknowledges that sexual violence is
being used as a war tactic. The report of the Secretary-
General confirms that once again by documenting the
continuation of the targeting of victims on the basis of
their ethnic, religious or political affiliation with the
aim to forcibly displacing them, which is tantamount to
ethnic cleansing. The report also mentions instances of
such acts being perpetrated in Congo and the Central
African Republic, and elsewhere against the Rohingya.

Based on resolutions 2231 (2015) and 2253
(2015), and taking into the account the Council's
acknowledgement that sexual violence in conflict
is a war tactic and a tool used by some terrorist and
extremist groups, such violence also constitutes an
element of the political economy of terrorism that
is used in recruitment and financing. The Security
Council should hold accountable all perpetrators of
such crimes and end their impunity. It should also
further include in the mandates of peacekeeping and
political missions tasks related to the empowerment of
women in conflict and on holding the perpetrators of
crimes of sexual violence accountable following the
end of conflict, including referring such crimes, which
amount to war crimes or crimes against humanity, to
appropriate tribunals.

Secondly, with regard to the root causes of sexual
violence in conflict, last year we all witnessed a
retreat by extremist and violent terrorist armed groups,
which led to new challenges in the areas that had been
liberated from terrorism, including the need to hold
to account those responsible for sexual violence and
to reintegrate survivors. Sexual violence is still used
as a means to force people to leave their land and to
sexually exploit women and girls. It is perpetrated even
by those responsible for refugee camps and by refugee
smugglers. In such circumstances, the impunity
enjoyed by perpetrators prevents displaced persons
and refugees from returning to their homes and places
of origin in safety and dignity. It also exacerbates and
prolongs crises. We agree with the Secretary-General
that the best way to prevent sexual violence is to protect
basic freedoms and human rights, support economic
empowerment and fair political participation, build
national capacity and provide assistance to the survivors
of sexual violence, in particular women and girls who
are marginalized or economically disadvantaged.
At the regional level, the State of Kuwait hosted
the International Conference for Reconstruction of
Iraq, where it announced its contribution of $1 billion
in the form of loans and investments. We did so because
we believe that the areas liberated from the terrorist
Da'esh organization must be rehabilitated and provided
support for comprehensive development in order to
achieve sustainable development for women and girls,
as well as national reconciliation and social justice.

Thirdly, with regard to sexual violence in conflict,
the State of Kuwait attaches particular importance to
addressing the consequences of sexual violence on
survivors by providing them access to justice. We now
have in place a robust normative framework that enables
States to address sexual violence in conflict, beginning
with resolution 1820 (2008), as well as other related
resolutions, such as resolution 1988 (2011), which
established the position of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and led to improved coordination
among relevant entities, as well as resolution 1960
(2010), which established a mechanism to monitor and
report on sexual violence in conflict.

We support the close cooperation between Member
States and United Nations Action against Sexual
Violence, aimed at compensating survivors, providing
access to justice, respecing their culture and affording
them the psychological, physical and social assistance
they need. The root causes of sexual violence in conflict
are numerous, as are its forms and victims. Ensuring
justice is a multidimensional issue that requires a
multidimensional response to address the short- and
long-term psychological, physical, economic and
social consequences of sexual violence. We stress the
importance of treating survivors and their children as
victims first, as opposed to viewing them as being loyal
to armed or terrorist groups. The national capacities of
the Member States in dealing with such crimes must
be reinforced.

In conclusion, while we speak of the importance
of ensuring justice for the survivors of sexual violence,
we would be remiss if we did not commend the steps
taken by the Secretary-General in the implementation
of the zero-tolerance policy towards sexual exploitation
and abuse. We take note of the special measures taken
with regard to protection from sexual exploitation and
abuse mentioned in the Secretary-General's report.
The United Nations commitment to those measures
will enhance its credibility and promote wide-ranging
efforts to eliminate sexual violence.

