Mr. Grant (Canada): I am pleased to speak first on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and
Security, an informal network of 51 interested Member
States chaired by Canada, representing all five regional
groups of the United Nations. I will then make brief
remarks in my national capacity.
On the seventeenth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), the Group reaffirms its
unwavering support for the Council's work on this
important agenda. Despite an increasingly robust
normative framework on women, peace, and security,
we emphasize that real, tangible progress lies in
implementation. In that regard, much remains to be
done. We applaud the countries that have established
or renewed national action plans in the past year. We
reiterate that such plans must be coupled with sufficient
resources to deliver results. Such implementation will
also directly contribute to the realization of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, agreed to by all
Member States.

We wish to thank Spain for its initiative to
establish the Women, Peace and Security National
Focal Points Network and for organizing the first
substantive meeting in Alicante and its follow-up in
New York. We look forward to Germany and Namibia
chairing the Focal Points Network in 2018 and 2019,
respectively. Furthermore, we wish to highlight
regional initiatives which can multiply efforts towards
more effective implementation.

The Group welcomes the Secretary-General's
leadership on conflict prevention and sustaining
peace and notes that the effective implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda directly
contributes to these objectives. Indeed, we know that
gender-based violence and the repression of women's
human rights is correlated with the outbreak of
conflict We also know that women's participation has
a positive impact on the credibility and durability of
peace agreements. Therefore, it is all the more essential
to include gender considerations and the meaningful
participation of women in early warning, mediation and
conflict resolution efforts, as well as the mainstreaming
of gender-specific language and the human rights of
women in peace agreements. A greater role for women
also needs to be ensured in post-conflict peacebuilding
and economic recovery.

This approach should also apply to the Security
Council's work in preventing and addressing conflict. In
this regard, we welcome the ongoing work undertaken
by the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace
and Security to facilitate a more systematic approach
to the Council's agenda, including in resolutions,
statements, reporting and visits to the field, as well as
regular input from civil society. Indeed, we recognize
the importance of engaging with and supporting civil
society in delivering real impact on this agenda.
The Group highlights the need to further the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda in United Nations peacekeeping, both in terms
of women's participation and gender expertise and
mainstreaming into doctrine and all planning documents.
Women play an indispensable role in peacekeeping and
their participation at all levels is key to the operational
effectiveness of missions. We must therefore redouble
efforts and engage in new and creative thinking to
resolve persistent gaps and structural barriers to female
participation and leadership. Separately, peacekeeping
operations need to be equipped with appropriate
gender-responsive conflict analysis and expertise. We
are deeply concerned that cutting, downgrading and
underresourcing gender advisors and women protection
advisors positions may cripple the ability of peace
operations to fulfil these critical tasks.

We must also ensure that United Nations
peacekeepers themselves are not part of the problem
and condemn cases of sexual exploitation and abuse.
We welcome recent initiatives by the Secretary-
General, including the conclusion of the sexual
exploitation and abuse voluntary compact with Member
States, the establishment of a Circle of Leadership and
the appointment of a sexual exploitation and abuse
victims' rights advocate. Still much more needs to be
done to tackle this scourge, ensure accountability and
fundamentally reconfigure our collective approach to
make it victim centred.

Unfortunately, sexual violence also remains
prevalent in situations of armed conflict worldwide.
The Group condemns in the strongest terms such acts,
which constitute a grave violation and abuse of human
rights and international humanitarian law, and raise
barriers to the full achievement of gender equality,
peace and development. To end impunity, perpetrators
must be brought to justice, and victims and survivors
must be assisted in a comprehensive manner in order
to fully recover from these violations and be able to
reintegrate in their societies.

We are also appalled by acts of sexual violence,
including rape, child, early and forced marriage and
enslavement, including those committed by terrorist
groups, such as Da'esh. In this regard, we welcome
the recent adoption of resolution 2379 (2017), on
accountability for the acts committed by Da'esh
in Iraq. It is our hope that this is the first step in a
process to ensure more comprehensive accountability.
We highlight the importance of including specific
expertise on gender and sexual violence to ensure
the documentation of sexual violence as part of these
efforts, as well as a focus on reducing stigma associated
with survivors of sexual violence in conflict.

Indeed, a gendered approach is critical to facing new
and emerging challenges, such as violent extremism.
We support the engagement of women's leadership and
the incorporation of a gender lens into the development
of strategies to prevent and address violent extremism,
and recognize Women's Alliance for Security
Leadership as a dynamic network of independent
women-led organizations that are locally rooted and
globally connected. Such an approach recognizes the
role of women in developing resilience, the impact of
violent extremism on women and the reality of women
joining violent extremist groups. We also welcome the
establishment of the Group of Friends of Preventing
Violent Extremism, co-chaired by Jordan and Norway,
which stresses the need for full participation of women
and youth in efforts to prevent violent extremism.

To conclude the Group of Friends statement, we
believe in the transformational potential of the women
and peace and security agenda. We remain committed
to working with the United Nations and all Member
States for its full realization.

(spoke in French)

Allow me to make a few additional remarks in my
national capacity.

There is no doubt that progress has been made in
implementing the women and peace and security agenda,
however, it has been slow and many challenges remain.
We must consider doing things differently and we must
challenge ourselves to move beyond incrementalism.
Canada is committed to finding opportunities to
create and support transformative solutions for gender
equality in conflict situations. We will defend women's
voices and human rights. We will challenge narratives
that undermine women's ability to contribute, lead and
shape solutions. We will collaborate with civil society,
Member States and the United Nations to reinvigorate
the implementation of this important agenda. Finally,
we will continue to demonstrate our commitment to
transparent and regular reporting on the progress made
in the implementation of our national action plan on
women and peace and security, which is currently
being finalized, to ensure that we are making progress.

In the context of our feminist foreign policy, Canada
is taking concrete actions to advance the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda.

(spoke in English)

We recognize that women are key actors in conflict
prevention and resolution and peacebuilding. Peace
and security is one of the cornerstones of Canada's
Feminist International Assistance Policy, which puts
gender equality at the centre of international assistance
programming. In support of this policy, Canada will
dedicate $150 million over five years to support local
organizations that advance women's rights in developing
and fragile States. Last year, Canada also provided
$1.5 million to the Women's Peace and Humanitarian
Fund, which supports women's organizations working
on the front lines of conflict prevention and resolution.
We strongly urge others to support this Fund to ensure
that women's and girls' voices are heard.
We know that by failing to mainstream gender
perspectives in peace operations, we will fail to
effectively respond to the needs and interests of local
women and girls. At the United Nations Peacekeeping
Defence Ministerial Conference, which Canada
will be pleased to host in Vancouver om November,
mainstreaming gender into our discussions and
reflections is of the utmost importance. We are
challenging the panellists and participants to suggest
and present innovative solutions to integrating gender
perspectives in peacekeeping. Canada continues to
demonstrate its commitment to supporting women's
participation in peace operations. We are working
to increase the proportion of Canadian women
peacekeepers, including police officers deployed to
peace operations, and have been at the forefront of a
United Nations training initiative aimed at increasing
the number of women police officers deployed.

Canada is also a strong advocate for the full
implementation of the United Nations zero-tolerance
policy on sexual exploitation and abuse. Our Prime
Minister recentlyjoined the Secretary-General's Circle
of Leadership and signed the voluntary compact on
eliminating sexual exploitation and abuse. We are
also providing funding to the Office of the Special
Coordinator on Improving the United Nations Response
to Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and to the Trust
Fund in Support of Victims of Sexual Exploitation and
Abuse, and we strongly encourage all Member States to
do the same.

The question of accountability resonates strongly
for Canada. Under our first national action plan,
Canada submitted five annual progress reports on the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda in Parliament, which helped to take stock of
the progress achieved and record lessons learned. The
progress reports also allowed us to identify shortfalls
and highlight emerging good practices, all ofwhich have
been useful in the development of the second action plan.
We wish to thank civil society and national indigenous
organizations, which provided invaluable input into
this action plan, which will be launched shortly. We
look forward to collaborating with our domestic and
international partners in its implementation.

