Mr. Normandin (Canada): First, Mr. President,
on behalf of Canada I thank you for taking the
initiative of this open debate. It is important that it
mark the beginning of a more concentrated effort on
the part of the Council to combat and prevent sexual
violence.

Such violence, especially against women and
girls, continues at alarming levels in many conflict and
post-conflict situations, including as a deliberate
weapon of war. It is high time that all involved in the
maintenance of peace and security stepped up to
address this issue.

Sexual and other forms of violence against
civilians in conflict-affected situations can, in many
circumstances, constitute a threat to international peace
and security. It is more than clear in the Sudan, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes
region, for example, that sexual Violence is a security
problem requiring a security response. It is imperative
that the issue be addressed by the Council.

Resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security, adopted in 2000, calls for special measures to
protect women and girls from rape and other forms of
sexual abuse, and emphasizes the need to end impunity
for war crimes, including those relating to sexual and
other violence against women and girls. Eight years
later, there remain significant challenges to the full
implementation of those commitments.

Let us reaffirm our commitment to the equal
participation and full involvement of women in the
maintenance and promotion of peace and security,
including in peace processes, and remind ourselves of
the need to take concrete measures to increase their
role in decision-making with respect to conflict
prevention and resolution.
Canada was pleased to co-sponsor three weeks
ago a conference on the role of military peacekeepers
in addressing sexual violence. Participants in the
conference came from military, police, civilian and
diplomatic backgrounds. Among the conclusions that
emerged very clearly were that peacekeeping missions
need clear and strong mandates from the Security
Council; that doctrine must be developed to provide
guidance to the missions; and that the Council's
monitoring of sexual violence and efforts to address it
must become more systematic.

Canada has called on the Council repeatedly to
establish a mechanism to monitor the integration of
resolution 1325 (2000) into its daily work. We reiterate
that call today. In relation to this, information on
Violence against women and girls, including sexual
violence, should be systematically included in all
relevant reports of the Secretary-General to the
Council. Rigorous data collection and monitoring
would increase the Council's capacity to develop
effective peace support mandates that better address
this violence, including by way of prevention.

(spoke in French)

Canada welcomes the most recent renewal of the
peacekeeping mandate of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo in resolution 1794 (2007), which gives the
Mission a more explicit mandate for action to eliminate
sexual Violence. Unfortunately, the notable absence of
equally strong provisions regarding sexual violence in
resolutions 1795 (2008) on cote d'Ivoire and 1812
(2008) on the Sudan, both adopted after resolution
1794 (2007), demonstrate that inconsistency in the
Council's approach to sexual violence in mission
mandates continues.

Canada believes that a report by the Secretary-
General to the Council including recommendations to
improve the United Nations response would be useful.
The report should draw on the full breadth of expertise,
including from the United Nations Action against
Sexual Violence in Conflict and from
non-governmental organizations. An independent
expert could be appointed to lead the study.

Impunity for sexual violence against women and
girls and men and boys is rampant in conflict
situations. Canada urges countries to cooperate with
regard to the four conflict and post-conflict situations
being addressed by the International Criminal Court -
namely, those in the Darfur region of the Sudan, the
Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Uganda - to ensure that perpetrators of
serious international crimes are held responsible.

In that regard, as co-Chair of the Group of
Friends of the Great Lakes Region, Canada strongly
urges the early implementation at the domestic level of
the binding Protocol on the Prevention and
Suppression of Sexual Violence against Women and
Children adopted in December 2006, which demands
the guarantee that sexual violence in the region shall be
punishable both in time of peace and in situations of
armed conflict.

In conclusion, Canada is resolved to actively
support the efforts of the Security Council to combat
sexual violence in conflict situations. We encourage the
development of a doctrine to address and prevent
sexual violence. It should now be abundantly clear to
all that the systematic use of sexual violence as a
weapon of war requires an effective, timely and
commensurate response by the Security Council.

