Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): I thank the South
African presidency of the Security Council for
convening today's important and timely open debate
on women and peace and security. I express my warm
appreciation to all the briefers as well as civil society
representatives for their determined efforts aimed at
championing the women and peace and security agenda.
We also welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution
2493 (2019) today, which we fully endorse.

Despite commendable strides, we witness the lack
of opportunities for women to assume leadership roles
in times of conflict and peace alike. As the Secretary-
General underscored in his recent report (S/2019/800),
ensuring the meaningful participation of women in
all phases of United Nations-backed peace processes
remains a challenge. While, on the one hand, this is
due to violent conflicts becoming more complex and
fractured with the proliferation of non-State actors,
there is, on the other hand, an existing gap between
intentions and the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda in many key areas.

Supporting the six proposals in the Secretary-
General's recent report, we make the following five
additional recommendations.

First, greater focus should be given by troop- and
police-contributing countries to providing special
gender-sensitive training and to including more women
in their national deployments to field missions. This
approach must be accompanied by the appointment
of gender specialists in every peacekeeping operation
unit, including human rights, rule of law, security
sector reform and humanitarian units.

Secondly, Member States should fully implement
the Secretary-General's policy of zero tolerance for
infractions by United Nations personnel.
Thirdly, efforts should be redoubled to support
women in grass-roots organizations working for a
culture of peace, community-based reconciliation and
an end to all forms of impunity. Women must be given
leadership training to raise political awareness and
conduct peace education, as well as to engage in social
reconstruction and integration activities.

Fourthly, women should be involved in the
management and security of camps for refugees and
internally displaced persons, especially women and
girls, and assist in the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process.

Fifthly, women should be increasingly engaged in
the women and peace and security agenda for conflict
prevention and resolution and in transformative change
across the three pillars ofthe United Nations. Likewise,
Member States should decisively mobilize the Council's
Informal Expert Group on Women, Peace and Security;
the Women's Peace and Humanitarian Fund; the
Women, Peace and Security Focal Points Network; and
the Peacebuilding Commission's gender strategy.

Kazakhstan strongly believes that the education
of women and girls, especially in rural areas, should
be provided as a key to true progress on women's
empowerment to bring about social transformation.

Last year, together with the European Union
and the United Nations Development Programme,
Kazakhstan launched an education programme to train
Afghan women in Kazakh universities. This month, the
first group of 30 women began an eight-month English-
language course leading to admission to Bachelor's,
Master's and technical programmes in four very eminent
Almaty-based institutions. It is our principled position
that Afghanistan should not be Viewed as a source of
challenges but as one of opportunities based on its
economic integration into Central Asia and through
connectivity and investments in regional infrastructure,
trade and transit-transportation projects. As part of the
country's rich human capital, women must be active
in these processes, and we are privileged to be able to
help. We encourage and appeal to donor countries to
allocate more scholarships for women and girls from
conflict-affected countries.

Kazakhstan is working to achieve the highest
world standards in gender policy and strengthen the
role of women in its sociopolitical and economic life
by formulating new strong pro-women policies in its
2050 Strategy. The aim is to achieve gender parity in
decision-making at all levels.

In response to the Secretary-General's call to
achieve greater gender balance in peacekeeping
operations, Kazakhstan has since 2018 begun deploying
women peacekeepers to the United Nations Mission for
the Referendum in Western Sahara and United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon. We plan to increase this
number further.

In conclusion, Kazakhstan pledges its unfailing
support to ensure that women can be powerful catalysts
and agents of transformation on all fronts.

