The President: Under rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representatives
ofAfghanistan, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Bangladesh, Botswana, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Croatia,
Egypt, Estonia, Fiji, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Mexico, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nigeria, Papua New Guinea, the Republic of Korea,
Slovenia, Spain, the Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Turkey and Tunisia to participate in this meeting.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Ms. Michelle Bachelet, Executive
Director of UN-Women, and Mr. Herve Ladsous,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
to participate in this meeting.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Ms. Bineta Diop, President and
Founder of Femmes Africa Solidarite, to participate in
this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional
rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Mari Skare, Special
Representative for Women, Peace and Security of
the Secretary General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization, to participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2012/732, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on women and peace and security.
I also wish to draw members' attention to
document S/2012/774, which contains a letter dated
2 October 2012 from the Permanent Representative
of Guatemala to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.

I welcome the presence of the Deputy Secretary-
General and give him the floor.

