Ms. Wallstrom (Sweden): Council members may
be aware that when the formal peace talks between
the Colombian Government and the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC) opened in Havana
in November 2012, only 1 of the 20 negotiators around

the table was a woman. A year later, civil society leaders
organized the first-ever national summit on women and
peace, and from that summit came a clear demand for
an inclusive peace process. Two years later, women
comprised 20 per cent of the Government's negotiating
team and 43 per cent of the FARC representatives.

What happened? By organizing themselves, these
women contributed in crucial ways to the peacemaking
effort, including by broadening the agenda. Women
addressed some of the primary grievances of affected
communities, such as land restitution and the right to
justice and reparations for victims. Women furthermore
negotiated local ceasefires and thereby improved the
local security situations in towns and villages across
the country.

In addition, because of the demands of female
negotiators and civil society, FARC undertook several
confidence-building measures - such as an apology
process and the release of child soldiers - that
allowed the process to continue, thereby increasing
accountability. Finally, women built coalitions and
rallied public support in favour of the peace talks.
By repairing relations in communities affected by the
conflict, women and civil society laid the groundwork
for the peacebuilding efforts necessary to the long-
term success of the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. The
peace agreement in Colombia is a model when it comes
to inclusion. Women were key to the success of the
peace process and their continued involvement will be
key in its implementation, as well as for consolidating
the peace.

I thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2018/900), which made for chilling reading, in part,
but also presented us with an enormous challenge. I
also thank him for the to-do list that he presented here
of things to do for the United Nations system and for us
as Member States. I hope that we will all bring it back
home with us and start to implement it.

We welcome the focus on participation in this year's
debate and wish to thank Bolivia for putting emphasis
on political inclusion and economic recovery. We also
thank Ms. Randa Siniora Atallah, General Director of
the Women's Centre for Legal Aid and Counselling;
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director
of UN-Women; and the Secretary-General for their
valuable input.

Participation is not about counting heads, but about
having influence; about being recognized as a party
to peace; about making sure that women's and men's
situations are taken into consideration when making
plans for the economy, for the infrastructure and for the
justice system.

That is evident in the Sahel, where decreasing
livelihood opportunities are directly linked to the risk
of conflict and women play a role as agents of change.
I had the pleasure of visiting the region this summer
with colleagues from the United Nations and the
African Union. In the Lake Chad region, where people
are facing a food and nutrition crisis, we heard about
how the shrinking lake and growing insecurity have
had severe consequences for people who traditionally
have sustained themselves by fishing activities. The
fisherwomen whom we met in the village of B01 told
us that they wished for only three things: bigger boats,
better nets and not to get raped. Many of the women
and girls whom we met had suffered from violence
and inequality, and are now seeking to use their
experiences to transform societies and structures.
We were encouraged to see that women were coming
together in networks to address the challenges they
faced, including sexual and reproductive health and
rights and access to basic social services.

The roles women have played and continue to
play in Colombia and the Sahel demonstrate the very
apparent need for including women in all aspects of
decision-making and how that, in turn, leads to more
sustainable peace. That is why we, as a member of
the Council, have consistently asked: Where are the
women? We will only ever be effective if we translate
the women and peace and security agenda into concrete
action and tailor responses to the specific situations on
our agenda.

That has yielded results. All political and
peacekeeping missions now have a women, peace
and security mandate. Discussions in the Council are
better informed, mandates are more precise, decisions
are more inclusive and the number of civil society
organization briefers has increased considerably,
leading to better input. In July, for the first time - but,
we hope, not the last - there was gender parity among
briefers to the Council. However, agreements in the
Security Council or advancements in our work do not
automatically translate into changed realities on the
ground. There needs to be a shift in mentality, a shift in
analysis and a shift in action.

First of all, making tangible progress requires
ownership and accountability at the highest levels
of leadership in the United Nations system, as well
as among us Member States. In the United Nations,
Special Representatives and Special Envoys should
be measured on how they implement and deliver on
women, peace and security.

Secondly, the agenda must be taken seriously
in the field. Senior gender expertise in political and
peacekeepingmissionsshouldbestrategicallypositioned.

Thirdly, a gender dimension must always be taken
into account throughout strategic planning processes
in conflict situations and never become an add-on or
an afterthought. Such approaches must permeate all
sectors, be they military, police or civilian.

Fourthly, missions must also step up efforts to engage
with civil society, not least women's organizations.

Fifthly, we need better analysis. Conflict analysis
that informs decision-making must include gender
equality. Much work remains to do to make women's
and men's situations visible in each setting. Gender
disaggregated data in reporting from the field should
be a minimum, including in the reports to the Council.

Lastly, peacekeeping and political mission budgets
must be gender responsive. We have shared more
detailed recommendations on all of these aspects with
the Secretary-General.

We still witness too many peace processes in which
the absence of women is apparent. That should no
longer be accepted. I would like to dispel, once and for
all, four myths on gender in peace mediation.

The first myth is that there are distinct women's
issues. While conflict affects women and men
differently, that does not mean that certain topics are
only relevant to only one gender.

The second myth is that peace processes starts
at the negotiating table. Women are usually invited
when formal talks are already convened, long after
pre-negotiations, consultations and agenda-setting have
already started. In the earlier phases, a broad range of
perspectives about the drivers of conflict and peace are
urgently needed.

The third myth is that mediation is political magic
in smoky rooms - or, as somebody has said, men in
fancy hotels. Mediation is not some political game
played by charismatic, mysterious personalities. Such
a narrow view of mediation risks closing the door to
many skilful women. A group of people who challenge
that myth is in the audience today - the representatives
from five regional women mediator's networks. They
bring incredible experience as negotiators, mediators,
political decision-makers, civil society leaders and
experts, and must be recognized and drawn upon by the
United Nations and its Member States.

The fourth myth is that we need more evidence.
Women frequently need to justify their participation
by presenting evidence of the benefits of women's
participation. Male counterparts never have to do that.
Women should be able to participate simply because it
is their right to do so. I believe that the inclusion of
women mediators from all around the world will change
the dynamics of peace processes.

No woman needs to be given a voice; everyone
has a voice. What is needed is more listening. Sweden
had the pleasure of hosting the first Multi-stakeholder
Forum on Women, Peace and Security earlier this
week, at which Security Council members had the
opportunity to listen to more than 50 civil society
representatives. Among the many themes that were
raised, representatives of civil society stressed the need
for addressing root causes, investing in the protection
of human rights defenders and addressing gender
equality within economic recovery efforts. They also
called on the Security Council to act as a role model
and an influencer within the system.

Empowering women and increasing women's
political participation is one of the most effective tools
for advancing global peace and security. It is also a
prerequisite for preventing sexual and gender-based
violence, which, sadly, still affects an appalling number
of women every day. We salute the heroic efforts of
Nadia Murad and Denis Mukwege, the winners of
the 2018 Nobel Peace Prize, who treat, speak up for
and seek justice for women who fall victim to such
violence. Their work, as well as the work of thousands
of activists, peacebuilders and women human rights
defenders around the world should be an inspiration to
us all.

In conclusion, let me pose a challenge to all present
ahead of 2020. In two years' time, resolution 1325
(2000) will turn 20. By then, we need to ensure that the
commitments we have made matter. Let us collectively
pledge i politically and financially - to ensure that
the agenda becomes a priority and a reality.

