Mr. Gertze (Namibia): Namibia thanks you most
sincerely, Mr. President, for organizing this important
debate today. We are encouraged, as always, by the
overwhelming support for this open debate. We also
welcome the Security Council's unanimous adoption of
resolution 2493 (2019), the tenth resolution on women
and peace and security.

We are fast approaching the twentieth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). The
historic mindset shift towards finally recognizing
the immeasurable and constructive role that women
can play globally in the crucial pursuit of peace and
security set us on a great path of hope and progress.
While we appreciate that we have made some progress
over the past 19 years, Namibia, as an initiator of
the landmark resolution 1325 (2000), notes with a
sense of disappointment that there are still too few
women peacekeepers in the world today. Currently,
only 4.2 per cent of the military personnel in United
Nations peacekeeping missions are women. Namibia
has peacekeepers, both military and police personnel,
deployed in three missions: the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei, the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan and the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur. I am happy to report that
Namibia has female police officers deployed in all
three missions.
Another important issue that needs to be addressed
is the greater inclusion of women in conflict prevention,
peace processes and mediation. We welcome the
formation of women mediator networks, notably the
Network of African Women in Conflict Prevention and
Mediation, which act as a direct response to current
obstacles to women's meaningful participation and
influence in all aspects of peace processes.

Women continue to be underrepresented in arms
control and disarmament forums, as highlighted in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/800). In 2017,
only one-quarter of the participants in multilateral
disarmament meetings at the United Nations were
women. There is an urgent need to mainstream the
women and peace and security agenda in disarmament.
As of September, 82 countries had adopted and
were implementing national action plans on women
and peace and security. These plans provide a valuable
tool for States to implement their commitments to the
women and peace and security agenda and to detail
their actions and obligations under the Security Council
resolutions on women, peace and security, of which
there are now 10. Namibia launched its first national
action plan earlier this year. Our plan is forward-
looking and incorporates emerging issues, trends and
threats to peace and security, such as climate change,
cybersecurity and the traffic of persons, while also
looking at how those issues impact the overall women
and peace and security agenda.

Regional and subregional organizations must also
take stronger measures to ensure that the women and
peace and security agenda is implemented at those
levels. Namibia welcomes the launch of the African
Union Continental Results Framework for Monitoring
and Reporting on the Implementation of the Women,
Peace and Security Agenda in Africa. We strongly
believe that monitoring, reporting and accountability
are important tools to ensure the post-2020 meaningful
implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda.

In April, Namibia organized the third meeting of the
Women, Peace and Security Focal Points Network. The
Network enables closer coordination among Member
States and facilitates the annual sharing and exchange
of best practices and lessons learned. At the meeting,
participants discussed the importance of having a
youthful voice on this agenda and how the convergence
of the women and peace and security agenda and
disarmament can be translated into national actions
at the local, national and regional levels. The meeting
underscored that access to information, youth networks
and the use of technology, including social media,
can play a crucial role in promoting and supporting
the active engagement of women and young people in
peace and security. A total of 85 countries are currently
members of the Network and we strongly encourage all
countries to join. We look forward to handing over the
chairmanship of the Network to Canada and Uruguay
next year.

Next year, the international community will mark
the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the
twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000). That should be an opportunity for Member
States to outline and/or renew commitments made to
ensure that women are adequately represented in peace
and security matters. In that regard, I would like to
take this opportunity to reiterate Namibia's intention
to establish an international women's peace centre
in Windhoek. We are diligently consulting with our
various stakeholders and partners in establishing this
centre, as we intend to launch it in 2020 as part of our
commitment. We look forward to welcoming everyone
to the centre and to hearing the commitments of other
Member States for 2020.

