Mr. Franco (Colombia) (Spoke in Spanish): I
want to say, first of all, that I was extremely struck by
the comment made by my friend, Christian Maquieira
of Chile, on women ministers of defense. It seems that
this is a practice that is becoming fashionable in Latin
America according to news reports. There are
comments and suggestions that I would like to make in
this connection. The first comment relates to
peacekeeping operations.

I would like to commend Under-Secretary-
General Guehenno on his efforts to mainstream the
gender perspective in peacekeeping operations. It is
necessary to continue to work to ensure that this is a
systematic process that can be supported, we hope, by a
focal point. I think you have made some
announcements in this respect.

What we want to emphasize is the need to
consolidate some sort of disciplinary mechanism, or to
establish a code of conduct that can prevent and punish
abuses that might be committed by peacekeepers, or by
humanitarian workers, or by any person who is
involved in providing protection and assistance to
communities that are affected by situations of armed
conflict. It is fundamental that we support, without
reserve, the policy of zero tolerance that has been
affirmed by the Secretary-General.

The second comment that I have relates to peace-
building and reconstruction. The contribution of
women in this field is often marginalized. But
experience has shown that dealing with women as
merely a vulnerable group is not appropriate. In
practice, women can produce a turnaround in the
dynamics of negotiation. In this regard, I believe that
the examples that we have seen in response to the
comments made by Ambassador Mahbubani are of
great interest. Women managed to produce
commitments that are more community-based. I think
that in Western Africa there are very concrete examples
of this. They have contributed, moreover, to those
agreements that have been more successful in the long
term.

This is why we believe that it is important to
actively and systematically promote the involvement of
women at every stage of the peace process. Even
though a peace process may be fraught with
difficulties, it is important to maintain that
involvement. But the involvement cannot stop at that.
It must also include involvement in rebuilding the
political, economic and social structure after the
conflict. This also concerns the daily decision-making
processes of the State.

The Council must, therefore, play a central role in
this regard, not only by promoting the involvement of
women in peacekeeping processes, but also by
promoting specific measures for women within those
agreements. For the information of the presenters here
and my colleagues on the Security Council, we are
informally examining the feasibility of doing some
kind of work on the gender issue and on the question of
gender, small arms and light weapons during our own
term as President in December. There are a number of
months before that time, but we would be extremely
grateful for any comments and suggestions that you
may have in this respect.

I want to conclude with two concrete suggestions
for the report. First, something very brief on the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
processes. Here I just want to echo what was stated by
our colleague from Jamaica. In other words, it is vital
that women be empowered, bearing in mind their
multiple roles as ex-combatants, as mothers, as
providers of information, as widows, as victims, so that
we can best document what the concrete contribution
of women is in the DDR processes, and what can be
done so that there can be greater participation of
women in these processes. This is information that can
be of great usefulness to the Council, because this is
one of the greatest bottlenecks in Sierra Leone,
specifically in the framework of the recent debate that
we have on Western Africa.

The second suggestion relates to resolution 1325
(2000). This is a resolution that is rather special
because it is different from many others adopted owing
to its thematic subjects. This has generated more
activity on the part of civil society than any other
thematic resolution. This resolution has been
disseminated globally, with local implementation, and
that has been the case in many places, even places not
on the Council's agenda. Resolution 1325 (2000)
became a real tool, and it is hard for me to imagine any
other resolution with those specific characteristics. I
would like to suggest to Ms. King and Ms. Heyzer that
the reports should document the usefulness of that
resolution, so the Security Council can be reassured
that a document truly can produce change in the lives
of people. I think there are many lessons to be learned
from resolution 1325 (2002) for other thematic areas
where there has been less success.

