Ms. Beckles (Trinidad and Tobago): Trinidad and
Tobago is pleased to contribute to this open debate on
the sixteenth anniversary of the women amd peace
and security agenda and one year after the global
study on resolution 1325 (2000). It is also noteworthy
that this debate comes one year after the international
community adopted the most comprehensive universal
agenda for sustainable development, the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. This debate provides a
valuable opportunity for us to take stock of how far we
have come in our implementation efforts, particularly
as it relates to Goal 5, on women's empowerment and
gender equality, as well as Goal 16 which speaks to
peaceful and inclusive societies, which mirror the
subject of this debate. We have, after all, committed to
leaving no one behind.

My delegation wishes to thank the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive report on the topic, and
we echo his words as stated in the report:

"The women and peace and security agenda
is a critical, yet underutilized tool for preventing
conflict and shaping more effective responses to
today's complex crises." (S/2016/822, para. 4)

In that respect, we are reminded that the paramount
importance of the United Nations lies in the maintenance
of international peace and security. As the nature of
threats to international security continues to evolve in
complexity, my delegation submits that the primary
objective of our Organization would be elusive without
the full and effective integration of women into all
spheres of conflict resolution, conflict prevention and
peacebuilding processes. Trinidad and Tobago is fully
committed to the goal of gender equality. For us, the
empowerment of women is an integral part of national
development and an essential pillar in the maintenance
of sustainable peace.

Trinidad and Tobago is steadfast in its
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). In 2010, my
country introduced, and has been the main sponsor
since then, of the first General Assembly resolution
entitled "Women, disarmament, non-proliferation and
arms control" (General Assembly resolution 69/61). It
must be highlighted that the catalyst for the resolution
on women and disarmament in 2010 was the tenth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security. Since its introduction, the
resolution has received the support of a majority of
Member States and is currently being considered again
in the First Committee. The resolution transcends the
notion of women as victims of armed conflict and
armed violence and recognizes women as empowered
and indispensable actors in decision-making efforts to
address the issue of disarmament, non-proliferation and
arms control. Trinidad and Tobago is pleased that the
language contained in the current and last versions of
the resolution on women and disarmament is reflective
of the Arms Trade Treaty and its provisions on gender-
based violence and violence against women and girls.

At the national level, the equal rights of women and
men are guaranteed under the Constitution of Trinidad
and Tobago. Equal opportunities exist for women's
participation at the decision-making level in matters
regarding peace and security. That is underscored by
the recruitment and ascendency of women to senior
ranks of the security sector in Trinidad and Tobago.
At the regional level, we have also worked with the
United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs on
initiatives to strengthen the participatory role played by
Latin America and the Caribbean in combating illicit
trafficking in small arms and light weapons.

Trinidad and Tobago continues to host a number of
initiatives, in conjunction the United Nations Regional
Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development
in Latin America and the Caribbean, to provide
disarmament and arms control training to security
personnel, including women. My country pledges
its commitment to continue to work with the United
Nations in advancing and empowering women at the
global level. Consequently, Trinidad and Tobago was
elected to the Executive Board of the United Nations
Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women in April. We are eager to begin our mandate in
January 2017 and to join international efforts to promote
the advancement of women and girls everywhere.
Trinidad and Tobago takes the opportunity
to reaffirm its continued commitment to the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda at the national, subregional, regional and
international levels.

