Mr. Rogachev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Resolution 1325 (2000) remains significant
as a guideline in determining the role of women in the
prevention and settlement of conflicts, in post-conflict
reconstruction and in assessing the situation regarding
the protection of women's rights in conflicts. It is
important that the work of the Security Council for its
implementation should focus on tasks relating to the
Council's mandate, and not duplicate the activities of
other United Nations bodies, including the General
Assembly, the Peacebuilding Commission, the Human
Rights Council and the Commission on the Status of
Women.

An artificial connection between gender
questions and the whole gamut of questions under the
exclusive purview of the Security Council would lead
to imbalance in terms of system-wide coherence and
would impede the effective implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). On the other hand, the Council
cannot focus on sexual violence only when it occurs
during armed conflict. We must make efforts to find a
balanced approach to this problem within the Security
Council, bearing in mind its tasks and competence
under the Charter of the United Nations. That has to
do, also, with the fact that we see in this problem and
other topics an attempt to promote the concept of
responsibility to protect within the Security Council, an
issue which under the 2005 World Summit Outcome
Document is something that first requires discussion
within the General Assembly.

In terms of its goals under the Charter, the focus
of the Council should be primarily on the most acute
and major armed conflicts, and obviously not just in
Africa. We believe that the United Nations as a whole
should give priority to responding to massive and
systematic violence against women. That goal will be
promoted by strengthening the gender component in
reports of the Secretary-General to the Security
Council dealing with specific situations, and that could
be a new specific step in the Council's work furthering
this objective.

We also should not, we believe, reduce the scope
of this important resolution to the problem of sexual
violence while ignoring other forms of violence against
women, not even referring to other issues such as equal
participation by women in peace processes,
incorporating gender aspects in United Nations
programmes and strategies, and so on. We believe that,
as in the work on children and armed conflict, we
should pay equal attention to all serious cases of
violence against women and children, including murder
and mutilation. Such crimes - including those
resulting from acts of terrorism, indiscriminate or
excessive use of force or unlawful actions by armed
forces, including private defence contractors - require
consistent attention from the international community.

The System-wide Action Plan for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) for 2005-
2007 has facilitated the implementation of the United
Nations strategy on women and peace and security. Its
implementation has contributed to enhancing national
potential, that being a key condition for protecting the
rights of women and encouraging their equal
participation in peacebuilding. We agree with the
conclusions of the Secretary-General contained in his
report (S/2007/567) on the need to overcome the
shortcomings in the implementation of this plan.

At the same time, we cannot agree with the
recommendations on creating specialized machinery
within the Security Council to monitor the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on a national
level. We believe that that would simply exacerbate the
problem of duplication and lack of coherence.
Experience in similar plans has shown that it would not
lead to real improvements in the field. What is needed
is to enhance the effectiveness of existing machinery
and not establish new bureaucratic structures,
particularly at a time when the issue of the new gender
architecture of the United Nations has not yet been
resolved.

In this context, we are bewildered by the public
statements made on the eve of this Security Council
meeting by the Secretariat prejudging the Council's
conclusions with respect to creating a monitoring
mechanism. Generally speaking, we support the
extension of the plan for 2008-2009, in order to further
develop constructive coordination between the United
Nations and interested States.

