Mrs. Gregoire-Van-Haaren (Netherlands) (spoke in French): I thank the French presidency for organizing
this important debate today.

(spoke in English)

The Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself fully
with the statement of the European Union. We also
fully support the statements made by the Permanent
Representative of Italy and by the Permanent
Representative of Canada as Chair of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security.

We also wish to thank the Chef de Cabinet of the
Secretary-General for her briefing, and the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2017/861) and leadership on
this issue.

Nalia, Valerie, Angele, Arlette, Josephine, Alice,
Martine, Marie, Nicole and Natifa are names that deserve
to be mentioned in the Council, because they are names
that appeared in this month's report of Human Rights
Watch on widespread sexual violence by armed groups
in the Central African Republic. The report observes
how, during nearly five years of conflict, those groups
have used rape and sexual slavery as a tactic of war.
As such, it provides us with both a gruesome reminder
of how conflict affects women and a painful reminder
of the acute relevance of resolution 1325 (2000) to this
day. That reminder is painful because it reminds us
that, eight resolutions down the road, we need to have a
serious talk about the resolution's implementation.

Women are still not actively engaged in many peace
processes, including those that are United Nations-led
or assisted, and are therefore not recognized as the
powerful agents of peace they are. If we truly want
to practice what we preach, we must pressure parties
to a peace process to include women, and not leave
it as an afterthought, because those that have briefed
the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and
Security, or someone like Ms. Mina-Rojas, today are
living proof of what the meaningful participation of
women could do for peace processes. However, if they
cannot, conflicts are often prolonged and women and
girls bear the brunt. As the Secretary-General rightfly
observes in his report,

"Commitments become meaningful accomplishments,
changing lives and transforming societies, only upon
implementation" (S/2017/861, para. 6).

Today, I wish to emphasize three conditions that
need to be met in order to make resolution 1325 (2000)
become a reality.

It is good to remind ourselves, firstly, that
gender mainstreaming is not a goal in itself, but
rather an instrument - an instrument to achieve a
transformative peace agenda. The meaningful and
balanced participation of women and men has the
potential to transform conflict prevention and peace
processes. Resolution 1325 (2000) was adopted with
that transformative intent.
We do not tick the box, let alone implement
resolution 1325 (2000), by simply having women
around the table; it is not simply about the numbers.
We have to integrate a women's perspective and let
the voice of women's organizations on the ground be
heard at mediation tables through their substantive
participation. If we do, there is a 35 per cent increase
in the probability of a peace agreement lasting more
than 15 years. That figure alone speaks for itself. In
that respect, I welcome the meeting the visiting mission
to the Sahel held with women's organizations in Mali.
Ideally, in future missions, that would not be a separate
session, but rather the voice of women would be
integrated into the other meetings.

Secondly, in order to be implemented, resolution
1325 (2000) needs to be translated not just into United
Nations languages, but into plans and activities. It
needs to be operationalized and, equally important,
funded. To date, 68 Members have devised their
national action plans. While we applaud those Members
that did so, the Kingdom of the Netherlands strongly
calls on the remaining two-thirds of the United Nations
membership to follow suit. The Kingdom of the
Netherlands, moreover, is sadly one of just a handful
that actually finance their national action plans. More
funds should be made available if we are serious about
making gender equality a practical reality.

Thirdly and lastly, in all of that, as the Secretary-
General also states to conclude in his report, the United
Nations should "lead and inspire by example" (ibid., para. 111) by including sufficiently strong language on
women and peace and security in all of our mission's
mandates; by systematically applying a gender lens in
strategic reviews and analysing the power dimensions
between women, men and youth in conflict dynamics;
by consequently requesting troop-contributing
countries to train all peacekeepers on gender and
subsequently actually deploying women to the field;
by showing zero tolerance for sexual exploitation and
abuse through transparency, accountability and careful
victim care; and, as justly advocated by the NGO
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security, by
upgrading rather than downgrading the role of gender
advisers in peacekeeping missions. We welcome efforts
made by other troop-contributing countries to that
effect, and we particularly support Canada's efforts to
include gender as part of the discussions and pledges
at the Vancouver Defence Peacekeeping Ministerial
Conference next month.

In conclusion, the challenge and responsibility
are upon us to integrate resolution 1325 (2000)
into a transformative peace agenda - one that is
operationalized and funded and on which the United
Nations leads the way. Its implementation should enable
the likes of Valerie, Alice and Nicole to lead the peace
talks in their country. Let me finish by reiterating once
again the support of the Kingdom of the Netherlands
for resolution 1325 (2000), as well as our genuine
commitment to its implementation.

