Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I want to thank the Secretary-General and everyone
who, based on their experience and commitment, has
contributed to the need to make progress in realizing
the full equality for women.

In that connection, I should like to recall what
Patrick Cammaert, former Deputy Force Commander
of the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, said in 2008: it
is more dangerous to be a woman than a soldier in a
modern conflict.

Argentina would like to emhasize the need for a
gender perspective and for crimes against women to be
incorporated into the agenda of peace negotiations. To
that end, we need women in decision-making positions
and at all stages of the peace process. We know that
women are victims of widespread violence at the hands
of all parties involved in a conflict. We also know that
sexual violence in conflict is not a new phenomenon,
rather it is a powerful weapon used to destroy not
merely the life of a woman but also to destroy families,
communities, ethnic groups or entire nations.

Although we still hear that violence is as old as war
itself and that women's bodies have been a battlefield
for centuries throughout the world, the experience in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Rwanda served to scuttle
the cynical acceptance of sexual violence as a natural
phenomenon in armed conflicts, and ofrape as a weapon
of war of devastating power. The atrocities documented
at the time and the survivors' testimonies of massive
violations - rapes in camps, mutilations, sexual
slavery and forced pregnancies - moved humankind's
ethical consciousness, while sexual violence in
armed conflicts seized being an invisible crime or
an immutable tradition. The International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia and the Special Court for Sierra
Leone decisively made progress in classifying sexual
violence, in particular rape in conflict situations, as
torture, a war crime and a crime against humanity.
With complete clarity, the International Criminal
Court Statute would subsequently establish that acts
of rape, sexual slavery, prostitution, forced pregnancy
or sterilization or any other form of sexual violence of
comparable severity constitute war crimes and crimes
against humanity.

In accordance with that progressive increase in
awareness, the Security Council's trajectory shows an
awareness and increasing commitment to preventing
and eradicating sexual and gender-based discrimination
in situations of conflict and post-conflict situations,
as well as a commitment to ensuring that when sexist
crimes are committed, the perpetrators will not enjoy
impunity, that there is justice and redress for the
Victims and that societies can achieve a lasting peace
based on authentic reconciliation that is born of an
understanding of the truth and a recognition of the
fact that nobody has the right to deny another human
being of their life, their freedom or their dignity, nor
can they impede their participation by way of any type
of discrimination in any area of society.

From resolution 1208 (1998), on security for
refugees, which underscores the special security
needs of women in camps, to resolution 1314 (2000),
which underscores the importance of prevention,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration policies
including a gender perspective, it is clear we have
made progress. However, it was particularly through
resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions
focused on the situation of women in conflict and
post-conflict situations that the Council underscored,
as priorities in achieving lasting peace, the promotion
and protection of women's human rights and their equal
participation in transitional justice and reconciliation
processes, as well as a human rights perspective and a
gender perspective in all the efforts and programmes
for development, peace, security and the building and
strengthening of the rule oflaw.

It is true that much remains to be done. Despite
all the progress made - as we recently noted in our
visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Great Lakes region - weak States, authoritarian
Governments, corrupt systems and a widespread
culture of impunity serve to perpetuate inequality and
violence against women in conflict and post-conflict
situations, and that enables other types of inequality,
discrimination and violence to exist in society. We have
worked very hard to put an end to rape as a weapon of
war and to the wrongful response of impunity for its
perpetrators. While those efforts have contributed to
reducing impunity's negative effects, we are aware that
the problem has still not been eradicated.

We cannot lock ourselves inside a laboratory to
restore and recognize women's human rights or to build
a genuine rule of law. In that connection, I would like
to end with the testimony of women from various parts
of the world. In this century, in one country in Africa,
1,152 women were raped every day - that is 48 every
hour or four every five minutes. In another area of that
continent, a woman reported that, when women tried
to escape, their children were killed. She said that they
raped lots of women and girls and were happy when
they raped them. They even sang while they raped
them and told them they had the right to do whatever
they wish with women. In another country, a women's
organization told us that the criminal code there still
interprets rape as a form of adultery. If a women cannot
prove that there was no consent and if there are not at
least four witnesses who confirm her testimony, women
are punished for adultery by whipping or stoning. In
a country in Asia, we heard recently from a group of
women who were subjected to sexual torture. Their
genitals were burned, they said. They were forced
into prostitution by security forces, rebel groups and
members of peacekeeping missions. In Europe, a
women from the former Yugoslavia testified that in the
camps the soldiers raped her all day long. She would
fall asleep, but when she awoke a different soldier
would be in her bed.

In the Middle East, many women do not turn to the
justice system for the crimes they have been subjected
to because they say that they are scared - scared of
exclusion, ofbeing victimized again, or ofbeing victims
of honour crimes. In my region of Latin America and
the Caribbean, a woman in a conflict situation said that
a woman can never report a rape to her national police;
it would be like being raped all over again.

Finally, I would like to share the sentiments
expressed in 2012 by a group of women Nobel Peace
Prize laureates - Jody Williams, Shirin Ebadi, Mairead
Maguire and Leymah Gbowee - that a world without
war and violence against women is possible and that

"[o]ur collective efforts have brought gender
violence to the forefront of policy and public
discussions. Now, our united actions will stop rape
in conflict".

However, we still have much to do to achieve
women's effective equality as people with rights and
to achieve equal representation in decision-making
arenas, and for those reasons, we welcome the resolution
adopted today (resolution 2122 (2013)).

