Ms. Anderson (Ireland): The award of the 2011
Nobel Peace Prize to President Johnson Sirleaf,
Leymah Gbowee and Tawakkul Karman recognized the
importance of encouraging and empowering women to
play their full part in working for peace. In its citation,
the Nobel Committee recognized the non-violent
struggle of those three women for the safety of women
and for women's right to full participation in
peacebuilding work.

The latest Secretary-General's report
(S/2011/598*) covers the four themes of prevention,
participation, protection, and relief and recovery.
Justifiably, protection issues have received much
attention. Special Representative Wallstrom and her
team, with their unstinting efforts to help prevent
sexual violence in conflict and end immunity for the
perpetrators, deserve our full support. We expect to
announce shortly a significant Irish financial
contribution to her Office.

However, as has so often been emphasized, a
focus on the way that conflict can victimize women
should not lead us to obscure the role that women can
play as agents of conflict resolution and recovery or, in
the words of the Nobel Committee, lead us to ignore
the great potential for democracy and peace that
women can represent.

More than simply asserting the right of women to
participate in peacemaking or peacebuilding - which
is, of course, their right - the report of the Secretary-
General acknowledges what women bring to the table
and what their absence from the table implies. Efforts
at peace that accord women prominent and active roles
have a better chance of successfully addressing key
post-conflict issues. The corollary is equally clear:
"[The e]xclusion of women and lack of gender
expertise in negotiations leads to irreversible setbacks
for women's rights" (S/2011/598*, para. 18).

While the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) and
the four subsequent resolutions on the topic
represented a paradigm shift in relation to women and
conflict, there remains a striking reluctance in many
quarters to include women as full and equal partners in
peace efforts. Of the nine peace agreements signed
during the course of 2010, only two have provisions
ensuring women's rights.

There is a basic design flaw that needs to be
addressed: peace processes in general are not set up to
engage non-traditional actors like women's groups or
other civil society organizations. That has to change.
Processes need to be structured from the outset to draw
more fully on non-formal and non-traditional
influences, where women, woven into the social fabric
of societies, have so much to offer.

The mediation phase, when things remain in flux,
presents a good opportunity to empower and include
such groups. As the Secretary-General points out in his
report, it is critical that women peacebuilders and
mediators be engaged as early as possible in the
conflict prevention and resolution cycle - and not just
by the inclusion of women negotiators, but by a
broader gender perspective, so that gender is
established as a thread running through all major
peacebuilding issues, rather than being parked on its
own as a discrete topic. Gender is not a box to be
ticked, a nod to political correctness. Its place is not at
the end of a long list; it is a concern that should
condition the approach from start to finish.

The promise and potential of women
peacebuilders was evident to a delegation of women
ambassadors, including Ireland's Ambassador to the
African Union, who paid a visit to the Sudan earlier
this year and met with a cross-section of women
peacebuilders, legislators and internally displaced
persons. The delegation's report noted the
determination of women to play a full role in conflict
prevention efforts and recommended that international
organizations take on more responsibility for
implementing women and peace and security priorities.

The Arab Spring provides a crucible for
addressing the questions of the representation and
participation of women. The striking and inspirational
roles played by women in the early stages of events in
Cairo, Benghazi and elsewhere have given way to a
sense of women being side-lined. The risks for women
are obvious; revolutions begin on the streets but, at a
later stage, key decisions may be taken in smoke-filled
rooms. In that transition, women all too easily lose out;
their courage helped to make the revolution, but their
inexperience of power allows others to shape the
outcomes.
Special Representative Wallstrom has previously
referred to the risk that the Arab Spring could turn into
a cold winter for Arab women. As those societies and
interim Governments continue to adjust and settle, the
international community must use its leverage to
ensure that democratic changes under way are seen
through and that the full role promised to women is

realized.

Our watchwords must be "delivery" and
"urgency". Good intentions and solemn commitments
are of value only to the extent that they are acted upon.
All of us must step up to the plate.

Ireland's principal pledge at last year's debate on
women and peace and security was to develop, adopt
and launch a national action plan on resolution 1325
(2000) (see S/PV.6411). I am pleased to announce that
Ireland has recently adopted its national action plan
and that this plan will be officially launched in the
coming weeks. The plan was informed by a cross-
learning initiative that brought together women from
Timor-Leste, Liberia, Ireland and Northern Ireland to
discuss the most critical issues facing women and girls
in conflict and post-conflict settings. As we implement
our national action plan, Ireland will continue to listen
to the voices of women affected by conflict, strengthen
institutional capacities through comprehensive training
of personnel deployed overseas, and support
programmes that promote women's participation.

In its Peace Prize citation earlier this month, the
Nobel Committee wrote that "[w]e cannot achieve
democracy and lasting peace in the world unless
women obtain the same opportunities as men to
influence developments at all levels of society". That is
not just a worthy sentiment in a citation; it is a bald
statement of reality and one that demands our full and
urgent attention.

