Mrs. Bose (India): We are very pleased to see
you, Sir, presiding over the Council. The subject
chosen for this debate is important to me as a woman
and as a politician whose interests lie in foreign policy
and security issues. We thank you for very thoughtfully
sending around to your colleagues a folder of
background reading which contains suggestions,
presumably made by the Secretariat, for Council
action.

In addressing a subject that is vast and complex, I
will limit myself, as I hope the Council will, to those
areas which are properly within its mandate: the impact
on women when peace breaks down, and their role in
conflict and its resolution.

The first point of concern must be that women
bear a disproportionately large share of the burden of
conflict, but have a marginal say in matters of war and
peace. That is perhaps a function of the gender
imbalance in our societies, which is reflected in
positions of power and influence. On International
Women's Day this year, the President of the Council
issued a statement affirming that the equal access and
full participation of women in power structures and
their full involvement in all efforts for the prevention
and resolution of conflict were essential for the
maintenance and promotion of peace and security. I
thank the Council for those sentiments, but, looking
around this table, I should also like to say that a
Security Council dominated by men illustrates the
problem, not the solution.

The second point is, of course, where the equality
of the sexes - which we believe is a necessity - will
lead us. Women form such a large proportion of the
casualties of modern war because throughout the last
century military doctrines no longer distinguished
between combatants and civilians. From the Second
World War onwards, civilians became preferred targets
both because they were more vulnerable and because it
was believed that the national will had to be broken to
win a total war. Paradoxically, women became the
favoured victims of modern war because they were not
combatants.

Does the answer lie, therefore, in giving women
the dubious right to fight alongside their menfolk in
modern armies? Throughout history, women have taken
up arms when the need has been desperate. The Rani of
Jhansi led our first War of Independence in 1857, and
died fighting. Kaipkire of the Herero led her people in
battles against European slave traders. Those, however,
and others like them, were women who took up arms to
fight against injustice. We need to consider the impact
on our societies, and on their tendency to war, if
women become part of and glorify the military culture.
Who should women take as their model - Lysistrata,
using her femininity to force men from war, or the
Amazon, joining and beating men at their own bloody
game? A generation ago, two psychologists, Eleanor
Maccoby and Carol Jacklin, established that while
certain gender stereotypes could not be proved, one
could: men were the more aggressive sex. In every
culture, the organized violence of war and conflict has
been a male preserve. That is a steel purdah in which
we can leave our men.

There is also the question of the technology of
war. Until the two world wars, weapons were heavy
and hard to use, designed for soldiers who had to meet
minimum physical standards and be trained in their
use. In total war, weapons had to be designed for
conscripts who were not fit and had little or no
training; they became light and simple to use. As Graga
Machel pointed out in her study on children and armed
conflict, light automatic weapons were what made it
easy and tempting to use child soldiers. If women
become a significant percentage of armies, it is a
foregone conclusion that weapons will be adapted even
more to suit them, and what is light enough for a
woman to use is also very well suited for a young boy
or girl. These new weapons will make for even more
indiscriminate use and could very well increase the use
of children in conflict.

These are not academic points, because in the
Western societies whose norms tend to dominate
thinking at the United Nations, women are now
increasingly permitted by law to go into combat. At the
United Nations, including in this Council, there are
repeated calls for a gender balance in the composition
of peacekeeping forces, which, as the Brahimi report,
prepared by a Panel dominated by men, has pointed
out, increasingly go into situations where robust
military action might be needed. Is it in the interest
either of women or of peace, or of gender equality, for
women to embroil themselves in conflict, even if it is
in the cause of the United Nations? We have problems
enough with the feminization of poverty; we need not
feminize Violence. It would be much better, surely, if
women had a larger and more visible role in helping
the United Nations to resolve conflicts, for instance, as
special representatives of the Secretary-General. This
the Council can and should encourage.

I want to make one more point about
peacekeeping practices. The Council has decided that
AIDS is a threat to security, and peacekeepers must all
be issued contraceptives by the United Nations.
Unfortunately, as the United Nations knows, to its cost,
a large number of the troops it fields are poorly trained;
others, in the 1990s, trafficked in women. Blue
Helmets might very well now believe that if the United
Nations is giving them contraceptives, they are
expected to use them. AIDS has never been a problem
in any United Nations peacekeeping operation; the
exploitation of women unfortunately has. The
Council's decision could make this worse.

Feminist lawyers argue that human rights law and
international humanitarian law do not offer enough
protection to women. This is a bit extreme; women's
rights and needs have received the attention they
deserve in the codification of international law. I do
agree that there are loopholes even in the much
stronger walls of legal protection that have been raised
over the last 50 years, and these must be closed.
However, insofar as these are treaty-based protections,
action must be taken within the terms of these treaties,
and by the States parties. Otherwise, in seeking to
strengthen law, we would be undermining it. Therefore,
unless there are treaties that give the Security Council a
role in their implementation, we would urge the
Council not to assume to itself rights and
responsibilities that it does not have.

There is a further point, which we have made in
this Council before. By definition, it is States that are
parties to the treaty-based system of international law.
By and large, they respect them, and when they do not,
penalties arise, through the provisions of the treaties.
When their actions gravely threaten peace and security,
sanctions can be brought against them by action in this
Council. The most egregious crimes against women in
times of conflict, however, have been and are
committed by irregular forces, often warring against
Governments; they obey no laws and are, as experience
has shown throughout the 1990s, much more immune
to sanctions than Governments are. How, in practical
terms, will the Council tackle these forces, which are
responsible for the bulk of the crimes that continue to
be committed against women?

Situations of conflict vary. Each has its own
causes and consequences. Clearly, there cannot be off-
the-shelf remedies or panaceas. We need to take
practical and effective steps to mitigate the impact of
conflict on women and to enhance their ability to
restore and preserve peace. The Namibia Plan of
Action on Mainstreaming a Gender Perspective in
Multidimensional Peace Support Operations has many
useful elements. We support the call in the Windhoek
Declaration of 31 May 2000 urging the Secretary-
General to ensure that appropriate follow-up measures
are taken to implement this Plan of Action, in
consultation with Member States.

The World Bank estimates that by 2015 the world
will have more than 1.9 billion poor, most of them
women. Globalization has affected both men and
women, but women bear the double burden of
inequality and marginalization. Empowering them is
therefore both crucial and urgent. The Council will
remember that the theme of the special session of the
General Assembly in June this year was "Women 2000:
gender equality, development and peace for the twenty-
first century". In considering the role of women in
peace and security, the Council will, I am sure, bear in
mind this wider perspective of the empowerment of
women.

This may well be the last statement we will make
in the Security Council before Namibia completes its
current two-year term. We would therefore like to place
on record our very warm appreciation for the work of
the Namibian delegation in the Council, and for the
courageous and independent stand Namibia has taken
on difficult issues on its agenda.

