Mr. Munoz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
wishes to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this important meeting on women, peace and
security. We also thank the representatives of the
Secretariat and of civil society for their important
interventions on women in conflict and post-conflict
situations. We are grateful to delegations for their
patience in listening to interventions at this late hour.

Chile fully supports the statement made by the

delegation of Ireland on behalf of the member
countries of the Human Security Network.

This year, eight years after the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), the Council adopted resolution
1820 (2008), which reveals that atrocities against
women in armed conflicts are continuing. That
situation is unacceptable at this stage of the twenty-
first century, and we must put a stop to it immediately.

We welcome the Secretary-General's report on
the item (S/2008/622). While noting some progress
towards implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), it
also points out that the situation of women in conflict
and post-conflict situations has not improved. In that
regard, and as the Chairman of the Human Security
Network has pointed out, the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) is not the exclusive concern of
Security Council or the United Nations system but is a
concern of the international community as a whole.

In that context, the creation and implementation
of a national action plan is crucial. Chile has started
work on such a plan, which at this initial stage reflects
the priority assigned by the Government of Chile to the
cross-cutting application of the focus on gender
mainstreaming in government policies.

Last March, a working group was created,
consisting of representatives of the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, the Ministry of Defence, the National
Women's Service and civil society, and was tasked
with submitting in March 2009, on International
Women's Day, a final draft of a national action plan
that meets the requirements of resolution 1325 (2000).
On Thursday, 23 October this year, a first draft of the
plan was presented to the public sector and to civil
society to allow an open and participatory discussion
leading to a final draft that will be a faithful reflection
of the interests of our society.

As recommended by the Secretary-General in his
report, the draft action plan is a comprehensive design
for the best possible involvement of bodies concerned
with the prevention of conflict and the management
and solution of existing conflicts, with comprehensive
inclusion of the gender perspective. There are several
primary action lines in the national action plan
submitted for discussion.

First, a gender approach is to be applied in the
respect for and promotion of human rights, both in

Chile and beyond our frontiers. Secondly, the equitable
participation of women in peacekeeping operations and
in the relevant decision-making bodies must be
promoted. Thirdly, we must mainstream a gender
perspective in its broadest sense in the design,
implementation and execution of our international
cooperation policies. The fourth action line is to
enhance the technical capacity of both government
officials and civil society in relation to gender
perspective, security and conflict. Fifthly,
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) must be
promoted in the region, through the exchange of
experiences and international cooperation both on a
bilateral basis and in regional mechanisms for
peacekeeping operations in which Chile is involved,
particularly in the context of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti.

With the adoption of a national action plan in the
context of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000),
Chile will be following one of the fundamental
principles of our foreign policy, which is promotion of
the fundamental rights of the human person at the
universal level, including gender perspective in its
widest sense, which should be a central element of a
modern people-oriented foreign policy.

