Mr. Kariyawasam (Sri Lanka): Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security, adopted five years ago, is a landmark
achievement. The review of its implementation is of
immense importance to the international community
because while we deliberate on this important subject,
millions of women and children in all parts of the
world still remain mired in disease, poverty and the
adverse effects of terrorism.

Resolution 1325 (2000) was a result of the
increasing realization of the need to address grave and
systematic violations of the human rights of women
and children in situations of armed conflict, as well as
the recognition of the capacity of women and the
contribution that they can make in peacebuilding.
While the General Assembly, the Commission on
Human Rights and the Commission on the Status of
Women have addressed these issues from time to time,
the Security Council - the United Nations apex
body mandated to ensure international peace and
security - by this resolution provided an impetus to
mainstream gender perspective in promoting peace and
security.

Today, women and children account for the
majority of civilians adversely affected by armed
conflict. They are subjected to grave violations of
human rights and to violence at the hands of repressive
elements. In situations of armed conflict as well as
during war-to-peace transitions and peacebuilding
phases, women's needs are rarely addressed with the
seriousness that they deserve.

In all such situations, it has been observed that
women are more vulnerable and invariably suffer most.
That is partly a direct result of violence targeted
against them. It is often due to an uneven share of
responsibility that women have in running the
household, caring for children and even earning a
living for the family as war widows. In many
situations, a level playing field in terms of gender
parity still remains beyond the reach of women.

The effect of armed conflict on the girl-child has
been a grave concern in Sri Lanka for some time.
Recruitment of children, including girls, to the ranks of
an armed group in the conflict in Sri Lanka is a
continuing worry for our people. The armed group
LTTE, in gross violation of its commitments, continues
such recruitment. This affects women in general, who
are the primary care givers in most families. This
situation where children, in particular girls, are being
affected by armed conflict cannot and should not be
allowed to continue by the civilized world, and the
imposition of targeted actions against the perpetrators
of such crimes is a paramount necessity.

In our View, for any national or international
action plan to be more effective and result-oriented, it
should evolve through a process of consultation with
civil society and other relevant actors, and it should
contain a time-bound set of targets with monitoring and
reporting mechanisms. The Government of Sri Lanka
supports such processes worldwide and also as part of
its national approach to peace and reconciliation.

In this context, we view Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) as a groundbreaking initiative.
The resolution sets forth responsibilities that should be
borne by the international community and Member
States of the United Nations to ensure a gender
perspective and security for women in its
multidimensional aspects related to peace, security and
peacebuilding.

Against this backdrop, it has now become
incumbent upon the Security Council to review the
progress made in the implementation of its resolution,
as well as to consider further practical measures to
strengthen the safety net and security for women in
situations of armed conflict and to promote their role in
peacebuilding. In doing so, it is essential that the
Security Council consider the following important
measures.
First, the Council should establish a focal point to
ensure the integration of resolution 1325 (2000) in the
Council's work programme, as well as in mandates,
processes and mechanisms of all relevant United
Nations agencies. Secondly, it should request the
Secretary-General to update, monitor and review the
United Nations system-wide action plan on an annual
basis. Thirdly, it should determine means by which the
Council could be systematically informed of the use of
gender-biased violence by parties to armed conflict.

It is time that the United Nations redoubled its
efforts in taking immediate, coherent and coordinated
actions to translate the commitments undertaken in the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, as well as
in Security Council resolution 1325 (2000). My
delegation fully supports all such efforts in the
manifestation of Sri Lanka's commitment towards the
protection of women and children in armed conflict
and, more importantly, to further our belief in the value
of the participation of women in peacemaking and
peacebuilding processes.

May I conclude by recalling the words of Eleanor
Roosevelt:

"For it is not enough to talk about peace. One
must believe in it. And it isn't enough to believe
in it. One must work at it."

