Mr. Amayo (Kenya): I commend South Africa
for this initiative and the United Kingdom for further
continuing this important discussion to reflect on
the achievements and challenges in implementing
resolution 1325 (2000) and its subsequent related
resolutions in the lead-up to the former's twentieth
anniversary. There are still important gaps that need to
be addressed, in particular those between rhetoric and
actual political and financial investments.

Kenya aligns itself with the statements made on
behalf of the African Union and UN-Women during
29 October. We also look forward to the Peacebuilding
Commission briefing the Security Council on this
important agenda item.

Kenya also takes this opportunity to commend
the Security Council for its sustained engagement
over the past 19 years on the women and peace and
security agenda. We fully subscribe to the theme for
this meeting, which calls on all of us positively to move
from mere rhetoric to actual accomplishments towards
the successful implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda.

It was a great honour for Kenya to host the first-ever
African Women Leaders Network Intergenerational
Retreat on Leadership in Africa, held in Nairobi from
16 to 19 August, organized by the African Union,
specifically the African Women Leaders Network, and
the Office of the African Union Youth Envoy.

Through the various interventions and many
reports, including that of the Secretary-General, we
have heard of the persistent challenges that continue to
inhibit the full implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda. Despite that, it is particularly
important to recognize that, although the process has
been slow, many countries and regional organizations
are dedicated and committed on delivering on this
groundbreaking resolution.

Beyond reaffirming the significant role of women
in the peace and security agenda, we Member States
and the United Nations system need to demonstrate
support and invest in this agenda, including its linkages
to sustainable peace and sustainable development.

Kenya has just finalized the implementation of
the first national action plan on resolution 1325 (2000)
and is currently drafting the second edition based on
the experiences gained and lessons learned from 2016
to 2018. Our mantra continues to be, in Kiswahili,
"Kuhusisha Wanawake ni Kudumisha Amani", which
means "to involve women is to sustain peace". Kenya is
proud to be one of the many African countries to have
developed a national action plan on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), and among the 42 per cent of
countries around the world having such a plan.

Our own assessment of implementation phase noted

that the national action plan has resulted in more gender-
responsive language and messaging among leaders and
law enforcement personnel when it comes to matters
pertaining to women and peace and security, including
women and girl survivors of sexual and gender-based
violence. We also learned the importance ofinclusivity
in the development and implementation of the national
action plan. The women and peace and security agenda
must be a whole-of-society enterprise and not just left
to women. Partnership with the private sector and civil
society has also proved critical in moving this agenda
forward. For example, Kenya has endorsed the Safe
Schools Declaration to ensure safe education for our
women and girls.

In conclusion, we have also noted that it is important
to build trust, identify champions, localize national
action plans, including in the allocation of resources
both locally and through all relevant ministries, and
strengthen monitoring and evaluation systems.

