Ms. Heyzer: There were a number of comments
to the effect that Security Council resolution 1325
(2000) is the only resolution having a whole
constituency. I would like to say that this constituency
is our partner to make things happen on the ground.
What we have tried to do is to make sure that they have
a voice and that they can be visible in the
implementation process.

What are some of things the Council can do to
make sure that this kind of implementation makes a
difference at the level of women's lives? A number of
recommendations and findings will be coming out. One
of these ideas is that the Council may want to look at
and map out some of the responsibilities of the various
actors of the United Nations system through the
adoption of another resolution. The Council could also
respond to the gaps that have been identified by this
report. Also, new actors have emerged, such as the
financial and regional organizations. We also hope that
the Council will make sure that this topic - women,
peace and security - will become a regular item on its
agenda.

What are some of the ideas that women on the
ground have raised that could be helpful in terms of
peacekeeping operations to protect women and ensure
their participation in the peace process? One of the
ideas that have come up is to dedicate civilian policing
units. This has worked in Kosovo and in East Timor.
We can build up on good practices that have worked at
the ground level and consider how to disseminate them.

Secondly, there is the concept of operation and
mandate. We have to have a more gender-sensitive
approach. The protection needs will be identified if that
concept is incorporated. There has to be greater
dialogue with women on the ground. Is it working or
not? What are some of the good lessons that have been
learned in terms of collaboration? What are some of the
gaps that we still need to address? What about the
whole need to address women's organizations and
quick-impact projects, and to support and promote the
participation of women in peace-building?

There is much that we have been able to do in
partnership with civil society, but at the same time
there is much to be done and a long way to go. We
hope that the findings of the two studies will be a step
towards making sure that we reach our journey.

