Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): I thank the
presidency of Spain and previous speakers for focusing
attention on ways to strengthen the landmark resolution
1325 (2000), following its 15-year review and as
we work towards the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. While many noteworthy strides have
been achieved since 2000, it is necessary to bridge the
gap between intent and implementation. My delegation
would therefore like to propose some key measures.

First, the women and peace and security agenda
requires still closer coordination among the appropriate
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General who
deal with violence and the United Nations system and
agencies, notably the Department of Political Affairs,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
its operations on the ground, and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, with UN-Women
serving as the lead agency. Member States and troop-
contributing countries should provide predeployment
gender-sensitivity training, and regional organizations,
civil society and other stakeholders should also be
integral to the collective effort.

Secondly, all comprehensive, multidimensional
and hybrid peacekeeping operations should have a
strong women and peace and security mandate, with
gender specialists to provide capacity-building in the
military, police and civilian sectors, as well as in units
that focus on the rule of law, transitional justice and
human rights. Peacekeeping operations must strive
for gender mainstreaming, just as at Headquarters.
My delegation fully endorses the Secretary-General's
zero-tolerance policy, which must be strictly enforced
without any impunity. Member States should support
that initiative with expertise and funding, so that the
impact of resolution 1325 (2000) can be durable and
wide-reaching, especially in fragile and insecure
societies.

In that regard, Kazakh peacekeepers receive
intensive training on the issue of women and peace and
security. My country currently chairs the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Gender
Unit and is in the process of developing a national action
plan based on resolution 1325 (2000). As Chair of the
Conference on Interaction and Confidence-building
Measures in Asia and of the OSCE, and as former Chair
ofthe Organization ofIslamic Cooperation from 2011 to
2012 and of the Collective Security Treaty Organization
from 2010 to 2012, we supported Governments in the
region and beyond in the areas of conflict prevention
and resolution, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, recovery processes, and humanitarian
assistance, in which women were fully engaged as
equal partners, not victims.

Resolution 1325 (2000) can serve as a compass for
Member States in peacetime, too. My country sees a
close nexus between peace and development. As the
President of Kazakhstan, Mr. Nursultan Nazarbayev,
emphasized in his address in the general debate at
the General Assembly at its seventieth session (see A/70/PV.13):

"Humankind needs to move from a focus
on routine conflict prevention and post-conflict
rehabilitation to a new development strategy that
would make such conflicts senseless." (A/70/PV13)

He proposed that the United Nations formulate a
global development strategy 2045 as a vision for the
United Nations centenary. He also proposed that the
global focus on international law and on joint counter-
terrorism activities be strengthened to ensure better
protection for civilians, including women and girls.
Another initiative would involve the earmarking of
1 per cent of the military or defence budgets of Member
States for the purposes of achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals, including the very theme that we
are discussing this morning.

Our national Kazakhstan 2050 Strategy, announced
in December 2012, provides for the full participation of
women in every aspect of national life. In our national
legislation, key instruments support women and peace
and security with the aim of maintaining gender equality
and ensuring freedom from gender-based violence.

Kazakhstan believes it is vitally important for
the Security Council to remain committed to making
the protection of women and girls a high priority. My
country pledges to be a strong voice on their behalf.

