Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I wish to thank
you, Mr. Minister, for being here at this late hour. It is
great to see you back in New York, and we commend
and admire the work of Uruguay on the Council, which
is a great inspiration to future elected members. We
warmly thank you for all the work that your team here
is doing.

We thank Uruguay for having organized this
debate, and we welcome the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2017/249). Let me take this opportunity
to thank Ms. Bangura for her excellent work in past
years and to say that we look forward to working with
Ms. Patten in the coming period.

We align ourselves with the statement made by the
observer of the European Union and with that made by
the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security.

Let me also underline the points made by my Italian
colleague, in the light of the split term on the Security
Council between our two countries, Italy this year and
the Netherlands in 2018.

I will focus on three issues: first, identifying the
problem; secondly, ending impunity; and, thirdly,
taking action.

As concerns identifying the problem, the report
of the Secretary-General rightly draws our attention
to the disturbing trend of sexual violence as a tactic
of war and terrorism. Violent extremism is on the rise.
Perpetrators often do not react to political pressure or
abide by agreements, treaties or international law. The
use of rape as an instrument of war and terror constitutes
one of the most horrendous human rights violations in
the world. The problem is clear, so we need to do more.

That brings me to my second point: ending impunity.
Reporting of cases is complicated and can carry high
social costs. Shame, stigma and strong cultural norms
can dissuade women and men from reporting crimes.
The Council therefore needs to act. The listing of
the individuals and groups that commit such acts of
violence is one ofthe means to address these violations,
and the Council has a responsibility there.

But we also need to ensure that perpetrators are
prosecuted. We have to close the impunity gap, and this
applies also to sexual exploitation and abuse by United
Nations personnel. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
therefore strongly supports the Secretary-General's
zero-tolerance approach to this issue.

When it comes to ending impunity, we feel very
strongly that the International Criminal Court (ICC)
has a role to play as a court of last resort. Its mandate
allows for prosecuting individuals suspected of sexual
violence. We believe that the ICC must continue to
strengthen the policies that ensure accountability under
international criminal law.

This brings me to my third point. We need to
take action. Let me share some Dutch examples here.
All Dutch police and military personnel receive
pre-deployment training, and, together with our valued
partner Spain, whose representative spoke earlier
today, we provide training to other professionals from
other States. Additionally, we financed a specialized
training programme for female military officers with
UN-Women, and we also made possible a global study
on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
But we also need to shift our conceptual paradigm.
We must empower women and involve them as leaders
in conflict resolution and in peace negotiations. We
should not only see them as victims but see and treat
them as leaders, and empower them accordingly.

In conclusion, identifying the problem, ending
impunity and strengthening action to deal with sexual
violence in conflict is important, and it is the clear task
of the Council to support such efforts. Together we must
put an end to conflict-related sexual violence. Together
we must end sexual violence as a tactic of war and
terrorism, and, working together, the Council should
act accordingly. The Kingdom of the Netherlands will
continue to be a partner in that endeavour this year and
certainly also in 2018.

