Mr. Zehnder (Liechtenstein): It is my honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of Austria, Slovenia,
Switzerland and my own country, Liechtenstein.

We welcome the opportunity to discuss the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and its
follow-up resolutions, notably resolution 2242 (2015),
adopted last year in the wake of the high-level review.

We would like to use this opportunity to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his unwavering
support of the women and peace and security agenda
during his time in office. We look forward to working
with his successor, Mr. Antonio Guterres, to strengthen
the women and peace and security agenda. We
would like to commend the Security Council for the
establishment of the Informal Expert Group on Women
and Peace and Security, thereby implementing one
important aspect of resolution 2242 (2015). We hope
that the Council will keep the broader membership
informed of the work of the Expert Group and that its
work will lead to a stronger presence by women and
further peace and security debates and draft resolutions
on conflict situations before the Council.

As we can see from the name, peace is at the
centre of the women and peace and security agenda.
It is not just about making conflict safer for women or
including women in post-conflict reconstruction; most
important, it is about empowering women in order to
prevent conflict.

The need for the United Nations to become more
effective in conflict prevention was one of the main
outcomes of the three high-level reviews last year and
is one of the most important aspects of the global study
on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We
therefore call on the Security Council, the United Nations
and its States Members to place greater emphasis on
gender-sensitive conflict prevention and early warning.
We see the Secretary-General's Human Rights Up
Front Initiative as an important tool for doing so. We
also see a strong need for the United Nations to become
more effective in the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) with regard to peacekeeping missions.
Therefore, we support the call for proper resources
for the Department of Peacekeeping Operations/
Department of Field Support gender advisers.

When we look at positive examples of the inclusion
of women in peace processes - for instance, in
Colombia - we clearly see that it is indispensable
to empower women as agents of peace. We have data
that show that women's participation increases the
probability of a peace agreement lasting at least two
years by 20 per cent, and at least 15 years by 35 per cent.
In order to make that possible, we need to eliminate
barriers to their participation in peace-related activities.
We also need to ensure that women are fully included
during the formulation and implementation of early-
warning systems and peacekeeping and peacebuilding
efforts at all levels.

The massive displacement of people in different
conflict areas in the past year has once more shown
that, when conflicts arise, women and children are
among the first victims to suffer, not only in the
conflict zone but also when fleeing it. Hence we also
need to further strengthen the fight against human
trafficking. For that reason, we will jointly organize
a side event, together with the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, on countering human trafficking
and achieving the universal ratification of the Palermo
Protocol, supplementing the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime, on Thursday,
27 October at 11.15 am. in Conference Room 9. We
call on all States that have not yet done so to ratify and
effectively implement the Palermo Protocol.

Let me conclude by emphasizing once more our
full commitment to the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) and all follow-up resolutions. We continue
to be committed to the pledges that we issued last
year during the fifteenth anniversary of the women
and peace and security agenda, and we hope that the
impressive amount of pledges issued by other States
will also be implemented in due time.

