Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French): Allow
me at the outset, Mr. President, to thank you for
organizing this debate and for having made us give up
our lunch for this good cause.

In the interests oftime, I shall deliver an abbreviated
version of my written statement, with a focus on
four points to which my country attaches particular
importance.
First, Switzerland puts particular stress on a
gender-sensitive implementation of the transitional
justice mechanisms. As Ms. Balipou pointed out earlier,
women's perspectives and needs should be included
in all four principles against impunity: the right to be
informed, the right to justice, the right to reparations
and the guarantee of non-recurrence. As we know
from experience, violent conflict affects women and
men differently, not only with respect to the types of
Violence suffered, especially sexually-based violence,
but also based on their different biological and social
roles and identities. Prosecutions for gender-based
and sexist violence at the national and international
levels are thus key to achieving reconciliation and
reintegration in post-conflict societies. For example,
when truth commissions investigate violations from
a gender viewpoint, they identify the impact of
those violations on women and men alike and can
make recommendations that lead to specific gender-
sensitive initiatives in terms of justice, reparation and
institutional reform.

Secondly, archives are key to the fight against
impunity, especially to the full realization of the right
to be informed. Switzerland welcomes the work of
the experts convoked at the initiative of the British
Government on the prevention of gender-based violence,
which makes good use of archives in order to expose
sexual Violence committed in conflict situations and to
investigate crimes. Switzerland has seconded an expert
to the working group and stands ready to contribute
further expertise.

Thirdly, Switzerland welcomes the fact that the
Secretary-General's report (S/2013/525) mentions
the importance of access to safe abortion for women
and girls who are Victims of rape. Switzerland firmly
believes that all women and girls have the right to
control their own bodies and to be free from coercion
and sexual violence. Given the increased exposure to
sexual Violence in conflict and post-conflict settings,
those rights must be strictly guaranteed.

While Switzerland supports the Secretary-
General's proposal to draft an independent study on
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), the
implementation of commitments made almost 15 years
ago is one of our chief concerns, which leads to my
final remark.

It is well known that Switzerland is one of the
22 States members of the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency Group, a transregional initiative that
seeks to improve the working methods of the Security
Council. My country notes that when resolutions on
specific crises are adopted by the Security Council, they
do not always take into account all the commitments
made with regard to women, peace and security.
Furthermore, their implementation differs greatly from
one context to another.

Our country therefore urges the Security Council,
among other matters, to ensure that gender advisers
are deployed in all peace missions and that effective
mechanisms are introduced so that information
concerning the situation of women and girls can
be presented in a systematic manner in reports and
transmitted in Security Council debates. In that regard,
Switzerland welcomes resolution 2122 (2013), adopted
earlier today, which broadly accommodates the concrete
recommendations in that sense. Nonetheless, it would
have been better yet to have adopted the resolution after
this debate in order to more fully take into account the
views expressed by the participants.

