Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, I would
like to reiterate our expressions of solidarity and
condolences to the Government and the people of the
Russian Federation folowing the brutal assassination of
their Ambassador, Andrey Karlov ,yesterday in Turkey.
We call for an end to hate speech against the Russian
Federation regarding the situation in the Middle East.

We are honoured by your presence, Sir, Mr. Mariano
Rajoy Brey, as President of the Government of Spain, at
this important open debate. This is the final debate in
which we will participate as a non-permanent member
of the Security Council. We also wish to express
our warmest congratulations for the work of your
Ambassador, Sir, Mr. Roman Oyarzun Marchesi, who,
along with the Spanish team, has done excellent work
during your membership of the Security Council.

We also appreciate the briefings given by
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, Mr. Yury Fedotov
and Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura. We especially wish
to thank Ms. Ameena Saeed Hasan and Ms. Nadia
Murad Basee Taha for their courage and for reminding
us once again today of the consequences and trauma
experienced by victims of war and terrorism, in this
case in one of its most perverse forms: trafficking in
persons and sexual violence.

Venezuela furthermore wishes to align itself with
the statement to be delivered by the delegation of the
Kingdom of Bahrain on behalf of the Group of Friends
against Trafficking in Persons.

The information provided by today's briefers
and Nadia Murad Basee Taha's wrenching testimony
in particular could not have been more eloquent or
revealing. Her sad experience regarding the murder of
her family and the situation in her village demonstrate
the brutal nature of the war taking place in the
Middle East.

It is unacceptable to us that human beings are used
by criminal and terrorist groups as spoils of war. We
are witnessing a tragedy that is being experienced by
thousands of people, especially women and children.
In addition to the horrors of armed conflict, they are
victims of trafficking and sexual violence: crimes
that attack human dignity in the most perverse of
ways and, depending on the circumstances, constitute
flagrant violations of international humanitarian law
and international conventions on human rights and on
transnational organized crime.

Trafficking in persons is a transnational crime
from which no country is exempt. Nevertheless, it is
necessary to highlight that the reasons for and causes
that promote this type of crime - and the fact that
extremist and terrorist groups use trafficking in
persons and sexual violence as part of their strategic
goals and to finance their criminal activities - have
been exacerbated in recent years due to situations of
armed conflict in various regions of the world, such as
the Middle East and North Africa, and in particular in
Iraq, Syria, Libya and the Sahel. In the case of the latter,
due to the destruction of the social fabric of the Sahel
region of Africa, terrorism has been spread throughout
the Lake Chad basin by groups such as Boko Haram,
which operate in various countries.

In the Global Report on Trafi'icking in Persons,
published by the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime in 2014, it was acknowledged that, prior to
the year 2011, when the Syrian conflict began, it was
very rare to identify victims of trafficking of Syrian
nationality. In the briefing given by Mr. Fedotov a year
ago he stated that since the so-called Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant began its uprising in the north of
the country, victims of trafficking from Iraq and Syria
have been more frequently identified in various parts
of the world.

The report of the Secretary-General on sexual
violence in armed conflicts (S/2016/361) highlighted the
fact that in the past two years sexual violence has been
increasingly linked to the strategic, ideological and
financial objectives of extremist and terrorist groups.
Venezuela recognizes that trafficking in persons and
sexual violence are being used by some extremist and
terrorist groups as a terror tactic and also to finance
this scourge. Moreover, the enslavement and trafficking
of women and children demonstrates their absolute
disregard towards women and their intolerance and
hatred of other races, cultures and religions. It is the
clearest sign of the brutal and despicable nature of
those extremist groups, which will have to be brought
to justice.

All the information we have available to us clearly
points to the fact that the training, equipping and
promotion of non-State actors, whose actions are based
on violent extremism, are aimed at promoting the break-
up of States for political reasons and the creation of
such groups as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham,
the Al-Nusra Front and the Army of Conquerors. They
also facilitate the commission of various atrocities,
war crimes and crimes against humanity against the
population, in particular against the most vulnerable
groups, such as women and children.

In that regard, we once again demand that all
actors in the international community prevent those
kinds of crimes. The best way to do that is to fully
respect the standards and provisions of international
law and the relevant resolutions of the Council and
the General Assembly relating to the prohibition on
providing weapons and financial and logistical support
to such non-State violent groups, who often become
terrorist groups. That way we can effectively decrease
their operational capacity and, consequently, reduce
the number of various crimes related to trafficking
in persons and sexual violence. Ending trafficking in
persons and sexual violence in armed conflicts means
being fully committed to resolving armed conflicts
wherever such crimes occur.

While we need to confront the criminal mafias
that engage in human trafficking and take advantage
of the tragedy of millions of human beings, we must
also act in a coherent political and moral way, without
encouraging armed conflicts that are based on economic
and geopolitical interests. In that way, we can avoid the
tragic consequences that we want to eradicate today,
but which were not given due consideration when some
countries irresponsibly supported military aggression
in Iraq, Libya and now in Syria. In the Security Council
we need to expend a huge effort to put a stop and to
rectify the irreparable suffering of millions of people
and the destruction of entire societies.

We believe that accountability is one of the most
important aspects related to the prevention ofthis kind of
crime. We cannot accept impunity for this kind ofcrime.
Venezuela is in favour of effective accountability for all
forms of sexual violence. Exemplary sanctions should
be applied to all instigators and perpetrators of those
crimes, including the adoption of targeted sanctions,
in accordance with the mechanisms established by the
Security Council. Just as important is the establishment
and the scaling-up of national institutional capacities
related to justice, health care and social welfare systems
in countries in situations of armed conflict and post-
conflict, so that, while fully respecting the sovereignty
of the States concerned, we can develop and build their
capacities with the goal of providing due attention to
the victims.

We believe that we have sound legal instruments
at hand that could make it possible for us to combat
the crime of trafficking in human beings and also to
cover situations of armed conflict. An example is the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its Protocol to prevent, Suppress
and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children. That is an instrument that has almost
reached universal membership. We also have the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in
Persons, including provisions pertaining to examining
this problem in situations of conflict. In 2017, there will
be a full review of that Plan of Action. It will be an ideal
opportunity to strengthen the Plan and to address the
challenges that we are currently dealing with.

Resolution 2332 (2016), adopted today by
consensus in the Security Council, is an extraordinary
and concrete contribution by the Security Council on
this topic for those situations of armed conflict that we
were discussing. Also, it clearly points to the need to
have better strategic coordination of efforts in order to
prevent trafficking in persons and sexual violence and
also to confront it, in line with efforts to combat violent
extremism, which could lead to terrorism.

In addition, I would like to add that the nature of
both crimes and the measures aimed at their effective
prevention and eradication in the context of armed
conflict also requires forms of broadened democratic
discussion that ensures the full participation of Member
States, with the goal of coordinating and establishing
synergies together with the various entities of the
United Nations that have a remit in that area and with
different regional and subregional mechanisms.

To conclude, Venezuela would like to reiterate
its commitment to contribute to strengthening the
institutional, administrative and judicial instruments
that are key in the fight to eradicate those horrendous
and barbaric crimes against humanity, which are an
affront to civilization and to the modern world. They
are a pressing responsibility for the Organization if we
want to see its noble purposes and principles become
a reality.

