Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia would like to thank
the Uruguayan presidency for taking the initiative to
hold today's important open debate. We also welcome
your presence here today, Mr. President, and that of the
Minister of Defence of Sweden, and we are grateful
for the briefings by the Deputy Secretary-General,
Mr. Adama Dieng, Acting Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and
Ms. Mina Jaf, representing civil society.

Today we have heard devastating stories of the
experiences of women and girls living in situations of
armed conflict. They are victims of sexual violence,
rape, sexual slavery, forced prostitution and sterilization
and other forms of sexual abuse. Sexual violence
against women represents a denial of their most basic
rights, which continue to be abused and violated despite
the existence of a framework of international law that
should protect them. It is sustained even more by a
patriarchal system that takes away women's control
of their own sexuality and reproductive rights. Sexual
violence against women is a dreadful expression of a
patriarchal system intensified by conflict situations and
that, as has been said, tightens its grip when women and
children are targeted physically or mentally, deprived
of their dignity and used as shields in war or armed
conflict, making it impossible to effectively consolidate
international peace and security.

Given the nature of crimes such as these that have
consequences for security, as well as the fear or shame
that can prevent them from being reported or condemned,
it is difficult to estimate the numbers of victims of
sexual violence in conflict. However, in many cases
the figures are alarming. For example, according to the
Outreach Programme on the Rwanda Genocide and the
United Nations, between 100,000 and 150,000 women
were raped during the Rwanda genocide. According to
the Secretary-General's most recent report (S/2017/249)
on conflict-related sexual violence, such acts were
reported in 19 countries. We also have data from the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, published in 2016, showing that more
than 15 million refugees and 36 million internally
displaced persons were recorded, and from the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs showing
that women and children make up 80 per cent of the
displaced population of countries in conflict.

The current situation has certainly not improved.
Given its complexity, we feel it is important to focus on
five fundamental areas, the first of which is prevention,
followed by the right to truth, the right to justice, the
right to reparation and to the knowledge that such
abuses will not be repeated. With regard to prevention,
I would like to cite the Secretary-General's report,
which states that

"the prevention of sexual violence is an integral part
of wider conflict prevention and is not merely a
priority, but the priority." (S/2017/249, para. 4)

Where security is concerned, I would like to echo
the words of Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, outgoing
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, who said in the 2014
annual report (S/2014/181) that in South Sudan women
had to choose between feeding their families or being
attacked by armed men when they were out harvesting
in the fields.

Such cases arise in other conflict-affected areas as
well, which is why we must work to strengthen existing
mechanisms that can help provide women and girls with
effective security, whatever their circumstances and
wherever and whenever they occur. In that regard, the
relationship between sexual violence and trafficking
in persons and the reference to that in resolution
1325 (2000) are very important, demonstrating the
link between them and also between terrorism and
transnational organized crime. According to the Global
Report on Trafficking in Persons 2016 of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, 79 per cent of the
victims of human trafficking are women and children.
Terrorist groups such as the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham, Al-Qaida and Boko Haram, among others,
use sexual violence not only as a weapon of war but
also as a method for financing their activities. In that
regard, we must combat the flows of illicit funds from
sexual exploitation and forced prostitution.

With regard to the implementation of international
standards, we urge all countries to ratify the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court, which is
the most appropriate mechanism for combating crimes
related to sexual violence, because it recognizes that
they constitute war crimes, crimes against humanity
and, in some cases, acts of genocide. It is also important
to implement the relevant Security Council resolutions,
including resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1960
(2010). Their implementation would enable the Office
of the Special Representative to have a reliable system
for monitoring, analysing and providing information
on sexual violence in conflict, tools that can help to
facilitate dialogue between parties to conflicts in
order to help them protect civilians and develop a
comprehensive strategy for combating sexual violence.

Lastly, if we are to see sustainable and lasting
peace prevail, the perpetrators of sexual violence must
not go unpunished at any time or at any level. Such acts
must not be considered an inevitable consequence of
war. While we cannot necessarily stop people going
to war, we must work to adhere to international law
and to condemn unilateral action, interventionism and
policies of regime change, which are some of the factors
that provoke conflict and must be halted if we are to
avoid the tragic consequences that can arise not just for
women and girls but for the whole of humankind.

