Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): I commend
the presidency of Chile for convening this open debate
on an issue that needs special attention and requires
immediate measures on the part of the international
community. I would also like to take this opportunity
to congratulate Chile for its very active and successful
presidency of the Security Council. We also thank the
briefers for sharing their insights on the issue before us,
in particular the representative of the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security.

The need to uphold the rights of women and
girls should be clearly specified in the mandates and
operations of United Nations peacekeepers and country
teams, host Governments, regional organizations and
all other stakeholders, with the rules and responsibilities
explicitly demarcated and effectively coordinated,
including in cases requiring the use of force.

The make-up of peacekeeping operations, with
political, military, human rights and humanitarian
components and a gender focal point within a single
United Nations mission, has recently demonstrated
significant results. Given the widespread gender
inequality in post-conflict countries, gender units
in peacekeeping missions will require additional
personnel, more funds and technical assistance to
accomplish their tasks. In addition, the gender unit
must lobby for a gender-sensitive outlook and public
awareness among country leaders at all levels and at all
phases of a conflict, and facilitate greater contacts for
women with Government officials.

We envisage the following steps, among others:
the recruitment of more women from civilian, military
and police ranks in peacekeeping operations, including
through increased engagement on the part oftroop- and
police-contributing countries; the further training of
Department of Peacekeeping Operations gender teams;
regular reviews of the policies that serve to guide and
assist field missions aimed at better implementing
resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions;
the broader representation of women from the outset
and throughout all stages of the peace process; the
conclusion of peace agreements that are be compatible
with international standards and instruments with
regard to women's rights; support to women, including
victims, and the training of women aimed at promoting
their participation in political and social life in their
countries, including in electoral processes, both as
candidates and voters; and special attention to women
in conflict zones affected by climate change.
My country, Kazakhstan, accords the utmost
importance to the security of women and girls during
conflicts and in post-conflict phases, as is evident in
its engagement in the United Nations peacekeeping
operations in Western Sahara and Cote d'Ivoire.
Likewise, civilian protection has been a priority for my
country. We have supported Governments in the region
and beyond with humanitarian assistance, and we have
and contributed significantly to regional peace and
security.

My country is among the 27 member States of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
to have developed a national action plan on women and
peace and security, which focuses on early warning and
actions, dialogue, facilitation, mediation support and
post-conflict resolution. Key international instruments
related to women and peace and security are also
reflected in our national legislation relating to gender
equality and freedom from gender-based violence.

Kazakhstan, which is bidding for a non-permanent
seat on the Security Council for the 2017-2018 term, has
assigned high priority to its commitment to protecting
women and girls, and pledges to be a strong voice on
their behalf.

