Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): First of all, let me thank
Uruguay for organizing today's very important open
debate. We would also like to thank Ms. Zainab Bangura
for her outstanding work as the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in
Conflict, and we welcome Ms. Pramila Patten in that
important role.

Hungary aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union. I would also
like to make some remarks in my national capacity.

Hungary is deeply concerned by the widespread
and growing threat and use of sexual violence in
armed conflict as a tactic of war and terrorism. The
international community must not tolerate sexual
violence in any form or context. We are appalled to
see that sexual violence is not only an integral part of
the ideology of violent extremist and terrorist groups,
but also a cold-blooded strategy for financing and
recruitment through sex trafficking, sexual slavery, the
extortion of ransoms and forced displacement.

The impact of sexual violence in armed conflict is
dramatic for survivors and detrimental to communities.
Individuals do not only suffer serious and long-
term physical and psychological harm, they also face
stigma, double victimization, trauma, the risk of
discrimination and social exclusion. For communities,
sexual violence means a form of collective persecution
of ethnic and religious minorities; the loss of their
identity through forced conversion and indoctrination
and the destruction of their social fabric through forced
marriage and stigmatization.

That complex and more serious issue must be
tackled in a comprehensive way. There must be
justice and accountability for such horrendous crimes,
underpinned by efficient investigation, documentation
and reporting mechanisms to prevent impunity and
future violence and to break the conflict cycle. In that
regard, we highly appreciate the work of the United
Nations Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict. Moreover, Hungary is proud to
financially support and contribute to the invaluable
work of the gender advisers deployed by UN-Women
and Justice Rapid Response, and to the work of
UN-Women to prevent violent extremism.

Survivors need immediate, comprehensive victim-
and witness-protection and -support. Women and men,
girls and boys alike should be given context-specific
assistance for their socioeconomic reintegration into
their communities. For that we need not only top-
down policies, but also bottom-up, community-driven
responses against stigma, in cooperation with traditional
and community leaders, faith-based organizations and
families alike.

To tackle conflict-related sexual violence in the long
run, we should build a robust preventive architecture
that includes early warning, strengthened national legal
and policy frameworks and justice systems and gender-
sensitivity training of security-sector and peacekeeping
personnel, and that ensures the presence of women's
protection advisers in all peacekeeping operations.

Hungary is an active contributor to initiatives to
combat sexual violence in conflict. The Hungarian
Ministry for Foreign Affairs and Trade will organize
an awareness-raising workshop this summer on
women and peace and security for experts of the
relevant ministries, the army, the police, peacekeeping
personnel. interested civil society organizations and
academics. Only together can we tackle sexual violence
in armed conflict. That will be one of the topics under
discussion at that conference. We have to do our
utmost, including through concerted action, to tackle
the scourge of sexual violence in conflict.

