Mr. Roet (Israel): I wish to thank today's
briefers - Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed, Under-Secretary-General Dieng and
Ms. Mina Jaf- for their remarks. I would also like to
give a special thanks to former Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Zainab Bangura, for her outstanding work over the
past five years, and to congratulate Ms. Pramila Patten
on her appointment as the new Special Representative
of the Secretary-General. She can always count on
Israel's full support.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
congratulate the Uruguayan delegation on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
May, and to acknowledge you, Mr. President, for your
presence and commitment throughout the day, which
shows exactly how committed Uruguay is to this issue.
For that I offer my thanks.

Israel aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security and would like
to add the following in its national capacity.

It is unimaginable - it makes one's blood boil - to
realize that in 2017 it is still necessary to gather to debate
the issue of conflict-related sexual violence. Sexual
violence is an atrocious crime of humanity against
humanity and a plague that must be eradicated. If a
nation refuses to prosecute domestic violence, marital
rape or honour killings in times of peace, then there is
little hope forjustice in times of war and conflict

I look around the world today and see an epidemic
of sexual violence. The number of victims is so
overwhelming that we often lose sight of the individuals
whose lives have been destroyed. Tragically, as we all
have learned over the past couple of years, this trend
is actually intensifying in some parts of the world.
This despicable ancient tool of war has resurfaced as
a tactic of terrorism. It has become an integral part
of recruitment, resourcing and radicalization, and
above all, it is intended to instil fear in the hearts of
local communities.

According to the Secretary General's report
(S/2017/249), this terror tactic is being used not
only by non-State actors, but also by national armed
forces of States Memberes of the Organization. That
is a dreadful thought. The report also offers practical
recommendations for the Security Council, Member
States and regional organizations on the important steps
that must be taken by the international community.
Those recommendations can no longer be ignored.
Israel fully supports the recommendations and strongly
encourages others to do the same.

The term "conflict-related sexual violence" is far
too weak to actually describe the hell that women, men
and children are forced to go through. It is our duty
to speak against these horrors. It is what the people of
the world demand of us. Silence is not an option in the
face of rape, sexual slavery, forced prostitution, forced
pregnancy, forced abortion, enforced sterilization and
forced marriages. These are the horrible realities of far
too many around the world.

In territories controlled by Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (Da'esh), women are being herded into pens,
only to be later sold in open air markets in city centres.
Young girls are given as trophies to fighters after they
come back from the battlefield.

But we should make no mistake: in Syria Da'esh is

not alone. The Syrian regime is also directly involved in
the atrocities. According to the Secretary General's list
of parties credibly suspected of committing or being
responsible for patterns of rape or other forms of sexual
violence in conflict, the Syrian armed forces, the Syrian
intelligence services and Syrian pro-Government forces
have been using these savage tactics as well. In that
context, I would also like to mention the fact that Iran,
a notorious human rights violator and a promoter of
global terror, is supporting the Syrian regime, thereby
enabling it to avoid accountability for its crimes.

These barbaric acts have a devastating impact,
not only on the victims themselves but also on entire
communities and future generations. We need to think
about the daughters and sons of women who have been
sold as sex slaves; their mothers' trauma lingers with
them. We must address this issue as well and make sure
that all who have been affected receive the support they
so desperately need.

One of the most disturbing aspects of this
phenomenon is the fact that many cases go unreported.
The reasons for that are clear f the fear of stigma,
the fear of reprisals and a lack of avenues for redress
prevent many from reporting what has been done to
them or to their loved ones. We must help the victims
break the wall of silence and make sure that they have
legal recourse.

The international community has a collective
responsibility to the victims of sexual violence in
conflict. All of us - Governments, civil society and
United Nations agencies - must work together to pass
stronger laws, strengthen enforcement and introduce
tougher penalties for offenders. People around the world
demand concrete action. Victims of sexual violence in
conflict cry out for help. We must act, and we must
act now. The victims and survivors of sexual violence
deserve nothing less.

