Mr. Abdelaziz (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, we
thank the Security Council presidencies of South Africa
and the United Kingdom for providing the opportunity
to assess the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

The League of Arab States welcomes the new
policy adopted by the United Nations Department of
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs on promoting the
political analysis of conflicts, taking into account
gender perspectives and encouraging the participation
of women in all stages of peace operations, including
field operations. The League of Arab States also
commends the tireless and relentless efforts of the
Secretary-General and his Special Envoys to promote
the presence and participation of women in mediation
work and peace operations. The results of that work have
been seen in various regions throughout the Arab world,
including the establishment of the Yemeni Women's
Technical Advisory Group, whose advice can be used
to support peace operations, and the establishment of
the Syrian Women's Advisory Board and the Syrian
Civil Society Support Room for reaching a permanent
political settlement in Syria, which contributed to
reaching an agreement on the participation of women in
the Constitutional Committee's membership at nearly
30 per cent. We also note the effective participation
of women parliamentarians, representatives and
ministers in the Libyan delegations that attended the
Palermo conference in November 2018, along with
the establishment of the Women's Advisory Group
on reconciliation and political affairs in Iraq, among
other activities.

Significant gaps remain with respect to gender-
equality, however, as explained in the Secretary-
General's report (S/2019/800), despite the Organization's
progress in terms of implementing the resolution. There
are still significant challenges within the Arab world
that undermine the effective participation of women in
peace and security activities. In order to address such
challenges, it is important to ensure the integrated and
simultaneous implementation of the recommendations
of the 2015 review and to strengthen cooperation
between the United Nations, in particular the Security
Council, and regional organizations and Member States.

At the regional level, the Ministerial Council of
the League of Arab States adopted the Strategy for
the Protection of Arab Women in 2015 as a regional
strategy and an implementation action plan for the
protection of Arab women, and as a significant step
towards raising the awareness of officials and actors in
connection with regional and international resolutions
with a view to implementing them through the provision
of protection for women and girls in the Arab region.
The strategy includes four pillars for supporting the
effective participation of women and girls: promoting
their roles in leadership, ensuring conflict prevention,
protecting against conflict and all forms of violence
against women and guaranteeing that all women and
girls in the Arab region have their relief needs met.
The League of Arab States has also maintained
constructive cooperation with the United Nations, as
epitomized by the outcome of the first Arab Ministerial
Council on Women, Peace and Security in the Arab
region, which was held by the League of Arab States
in late 2018. In March 2019, the conference adopted
important recommendations at the ministerial level on
implementing the agenda, including the establishment
of an emergency committee for protecting women in
armed conflict in the Arab region and the creation
of the Arab Women Mediators Network as one of the
mechanisms of the aforementioned committee. Within
that intensive campaign, Iraq, Palestine, Jordan,
Tunisia and Lebanon reiterated their commitments to
implementing resolution 1325 (2000) by declaring and
carrying out their national action plans. Other Arab
States will follow suit in coordination with the League
of Arab States.

In conclusion, and in the context of commemorating
the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), the League of Arab States reiterates the
need to optimize the use of presidential statement
S/PRST/2019/5 of 13 June, on the promotion of
cooperation between the Security Council and the
League of Arab States. That included areas such as
early warning, preventive diplomacy, peacekeeping

operations and the sustainability of peace, We can
be successful in none of those areas without the
participation of Arab women in the maintenance of
peace and security. The League of Arab States looks
forward to the consultations that will take place with
the United Nations towards reaching a consultative
framework in that regard.

The meeting ruse at 6pm.
