Ms. Marinaki: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union and its member States.
The candidate countries Turkey, the Republic of North
Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia,
align themselves with this statement.

We would like to thank the presidency of South
Africa for choosing this topic for this year's debate
and for so successfully initiating an early start to the
stocktaking of implementation efforts ahead of next
year's twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the
landmark Security Council resolution 1325 (2000)
on women and peace and security. We already have a
robust framework of policies in place. More than words,
what is needed now is decisive action.

The European Union (EU) has already adopted
a new strategic approach on women and peace and
security, as well as a revised action plan reaffirming
our determination to pursue implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda in a holistic
fashion. Our strategic approach supports actions
by Governments and civil society alike to engage,
empower, protect and support women and girls through
concrete commitments, with particular emphasis on
our aim to achieve sustainable and lasting peace and
security through the promotion of gender equality and
women's empowerment.

In the European Union, we endeavour to lead by
example. The key objectives of our action plan on
women, peace and security are to increase women's
leadership, to reinforce their full, equal and meaningful
participation and to firmly emphasize the centrality
of gender analysis and the mainstreaming of gender
perspectives, the prevention of conflicts and conflict-
related human rights violations, the promotion of full
accountability policies and institutional reforms, the
protection of women's and girls' rights, better access to
justice and the promotion of institutional mechanisms
to help prevent all forms of sexual and gender-based
violence and support effective relief and recovery.
We insist on the urgency of ensuring full access to
comprehensive, coordinated and quality services,
including sexual and reproductive-health care,
psychological support and legal counselling.

Our commitment to promoting regional and global
leadership and practice in the implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda cannot be
fulfilled without close cooperation with multilateral and
regional organizations, civil society, academia, think
tanks and the private sector. Tomorrow, we will take
a step forward in terms of scaling up our international
cooperation on women, peace and security at a regional
level. Together with the United Nations, the African
Union and NATO, and with the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe as an observer, we
will launch a joint initiative on regional acceleration of
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We believe
that this unique initiative will, among other benefits,
prove the advantages of multilateralism in moving the
women and peace and security agenda forward faster.

The European Union is founded on the universal
values of respect for human dignity, freedom,
democracy, equality, the rule of law and respect for
human rights. We note with concern the renewed efforts
in many parts of the world to curtail the space for civil
society. We appreciate the emphasis that the Secretary-
General places in his report (S/2019/800) on women's
organizations, peacebuilders and women human rights
defenders as key political constituents who play pivotal
roles in efforts relating to conflict prevention and
resolution and peace maintenance.

We share the Secretary-General's grave concern
at the increase in attacks and threats inflicted on
those actors. This is unacceptable, and we will take
further specific steps to protect them, including through
sustainable funding and by paying particular attention
to those who experience multiple and intersecting
forms of discrimination and therefore are particularly
at risk, namely, for example, persons with disabilities.

We continue to engage proactively in the promotion
of women's leadership through bilateral and multilateral
diplomacy, as well as through regular consultations
in EU-led and EU-supported processes with women's
organizations and women human rights defenders
working in conflict-related settings, conflict prevention,
preventing violent extremism and radicalization,
peace negotiations, mediation and peacebuilding,
humanitarian action and development programmes.
In our civilian and military missions and operations,
we reiterate our commitment to a zero-tolerance
policy towards misconduct and abuse, and we aim to
improve our response to sexual exploitation, abuse and
harassment through a new European Union policy.

The instruments, strategies and political
commitments are already in place. Our focus now
should be on implementation, with more and better
targeted action in order for us all to demonstrate the
significant progress that is long overdue ahead of
next year's important anniversaries. However, time is
against us, and we must step up our game collectively.
This mission is not for women and girls alone, but also
for men and boys, who need to be fully engaged as
positive agents for change.

Finally, in view of the upcoming twentieth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) in 2020, the
European Union reiterates its commitment to helping
the United Nations in efforts aimed at achieving a faster
and more ambitious implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda. In this regard, we look
forward to tightening our European Union-United
Nations cooperation in all areas. Together we must
work on better gender analysis, more sex-disaggregated
data, improved gender expertise, greater leadership
accountability and enhanced resources. The United
Nations can always rely on the European Union's
unwavering support, not only in New York but around
the world.

