Mr. Ibrahim (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank the
Secretary-General, the Foreign Secretary of the United
Kingdom, Ms. Zainab Bangura, Ms. Angelina Jolie
and Ms. Jane Adong Anywar. I would also like to
thank you, Mr. President, for holding this open debate
on sexual violence against women, an issue of great
interest to Member States in general, and one that has
recently acquired a special dimension in view of the
levels of violence being perpetrated against women
in my country, particularly since the documented
number of cases of rape committed by armed terrorist
groups is about 37,000 in Damascus and its environs
alone, according to the estimates of Syria's national
reconciliation committee, and the number of women
who have been kidnapped has reached about 1,000 to
date.

My country has sent several official letters to
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Bangura detailing documented information on the
responsibility of armed terrorist groups for acts of rape,
sexual violence and murder against women in Syria.
Armed groups continue to kidnap women and girls and
use them as spoils of war and sex slaves for the pleasure
of terrorists, while the sponsors of such groups, thugs
of war and sexual perverts, some of whom reside in
Gulf sheikhdoms, continue to issue edicts blessing
such crimes under the so-called sexual or fornication
jihad. All this deviant moral and social behaviour has
been met with an unjustified and objectionable silence
on the part of many of the specialized United Nations
agencies. That continued suspicious silence is no longer
acceptable.

I would also like to address some of the statements
that have been made in this meeting, particularly the
total and deliberate omission of any mention of the
crimes committed by those terrorist groups - some of
which are affiliated with Al-Qaida - to the extent that
some Member States look as if they are supporting and
protecting this kind of terrorism and justifying the acts
committed by the terrorists, such as cannibalism in the
wake of their slaughter of their victims. In a meeting
such as this, we believe that it would be proper to say
that such an attitude cannot put an end to such horrible
practices and appalling forms of Violence against
women.
It is truly shameful for the apartheid Israeli regime
to speak of women's rights and combating Violence
against women while its soldiers and settlers continue
their daily aggression against Palestinian women, men
and children, in addition to the violence practiced in its
detention centres and prisons, tantamount to the worst
forms of human rights violations. Before 1948, Israeli
gangs were guilty of several massacres; they later
formed the so-called Israeli Defense Forces, which
has perpetuated the approach of those terrorist gangs,
committing murder, destruction, rape, displacement
and other crimes that are an affront to humankind.
None of those crimes have been curbed; they continue
to this day.

Palmach, Haganah, Irgun - these were all Jewish
terrorist organizations active before 1948, and they
formed the nucleus for the so-called Israeli Defense
Forces. Those were terrorist gangs that committed
collective massacres, displaced Arabs - Muslims and
Christians alike - desecrated Muslim and Christian
holy places and committed hundreds ofmassacres, such
as in Deir Yassin, Balad Al-Shaykh, Al-Dawayima,
Al-Tantura, Sa'Sa', Arab Al-Mawasi, Saf Saf, Haifa,
Jaffa, Al-Husayniyya and scores more. All those
violations continue to this day at the hands ofthe Israeli
army and its settlers.

As for the statement made by the representative
of Turkey, I would say that before he calls on the
Syrian Arab Republic to grant access to the United
Nations - whose agencies are active in Syria to this
day - his regime should allow the United Nations
and other international organizations to enter and
visit the many training camps on Turkish territory
where hundreds of terrorists reside and train in order
to eventually go to Syria and commit their murderous
crimes.

I would also like to address the crimes that have
been perpetrated against Syrian women and girls
displaced to neighbouring countries. Their rights have
been violated, and those who support terrorist groups
like Al-Nusra - a group affiliated with Al-Qaida that
commits the most heinous crimes against civilians,
including women - answer to the Qatari regime, which
continues to arm and finance terrorists and provide
them with a propaganda smokescreen to cover up their
crimes against women and girls. They appear daily on
satellite television channels, issuing fundamentalist and
destructive fatwas blessing the commission of horrible
crimes that violate human rights and international
humanitarian law.

The Syrian Arab Republic continues to believe in
the peaceful settlement of the conflict on the basis of a
comprehensive national dialogue, an end to the terrorist
campaign against Syria and the restoration ofpeace and
security in my country, which is a land of tolerance and
brotherly love.

