Mr. Zehnder (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland wishes to thank the French presidency for
having organized this debate and welcomes the latest
report of the Secretary-General on conflict-related
sexual violence (S/2016/36l) and its recommendations.

Switzerland would like to emphasize three
elements: first, protection challenges in the face of
large movements of migrants and forcefully displaced
persons; secondly, trafficking in persons, in particular
women and children, as a means to fuel armed conflict,
terrorism and violent extremism; and thirdly, the
importance of ending impunity for sexual and gender-
based violence.

Switzerland is deeply concerned by the accounts
of exploitation and trafficking in the context of
large-scale movements of refugees and migrants. For
this reason, we welcome the presence of Maria Grazia
Giammarinaro, Special Rapporteur on trafficking in
persons, especially in women and children, among
us today.

Unregistered individuals on the move and displaced
persons are particularly vulnerable to trafficking,
especially women and girls. They are easy victims
for criminal networks, including organized crime.
We need to adopt a broad perspective and include all
relevant actors: peacekeeping forces, border police,
immigration officials and humanitarian actors. Indeed,
they all have a role to play in preventing and fighting
trafficking. These actors should work on the basis of
a gender-sensitive approach that includes the use of
female officers and personnel.

Restrictive migration policies that limit
opportunities for women and girls fleeing conflict
zones increase the latter's vulnerability to exploitation
and trafficking. Through increased dialogue and
cooperation, we should find ways to adjust these
policies and to ensure that women and girls coming from
conflict-affected areas are not subject to trafficking.

As underscored in the most recent report of the
Secretary-General, the trafficking of women and girls
has become a full-fledged element of the economy of
war and terrorism, as well as violent extremism. We
know that armed groups, including terrorist groups
such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, are
financing their activities through trafficking, and that
women and girls are used as incentives and rewards
for fighters.

On the one hand, it is important to understand that
trafficking in persons, in particular ofwomen, girls and
children, fuels armed conflict, terrorism and violent
extremism. On the other, it is fundamental to ensure
the participation of women and girls in the development
of anti-trafficking and counter-terrorism strategies and
strategies aimed at the prevention of violent extremism.

The Secretary-General's report and his Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism highlight the
importance of empowering women as a force for
sustainable peace. We believe that the fifth review of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
is an opportunity to address this issue.

The list of non-State armed groups engaged in
conflict-related sexual violence contained in the current
report of the Secretary-General remains long. This
underlines the importance of strengthening dialogue
with armed groups so as to improve their compliance
with international humanitarian law and human rights
law. To this end, Switzerland supports, for example,
the non-governmental organization Geneva Call,
which engages with armed groups so as to enhance
the prevention and reduction of sexual violence by
having them sign voluntary commitments to abide by
international norms.

Switzerland is concerned by the climate of
impunity in terms of conflict-related sexual violence. It
supports the efforts made by the International Criminal
Court and its Prosecutor to fight against impunity for
sexual and gender-based crimes. It also advocates for
a holistic approach to the treatment of survivors of
sexual violence.

Finally, I wish to highlight the importance of broad-
based action against trafficking in persons and sexual
exploitation and abuse by United Nations personnel. We
call on the Secretary-General to continue unswervingly
to pursue his efforts in this respect. We would recall
that it is the responsibility of States to investigate and to
prosecute all alleged violations and to bring perpetrators
to justice. The Justice Rapid Response roster could
be used to ensure that adequate human resources are
present to enforce the zero-tolerance policy.

