Mr. Braun (Germany): At the outset, allow me to
express my thanks to His Excellency the President of
the Government of Spain, in his capacity ofPresident of
the Security Council, for his expression of condolences
following yesterday's terrorist attack in the German
capital, Berlin. I would also like to thank the members
of the Council for their statements today of solidarity
with my country. I wish to take this opportunity to
thank all other Member States and colleagues who have
sent messages of sympathy and solidarity, which are
much appreciated.
On the topic of this meeting, while aligning myself
with the statement to be made by the observer of
the European Union, I would like to thank Spain for
initiating this debate, and the briefers for their input
and their substantive reports.

Germany co-sponsored resolution 2331 (2016), just
adopted. I would like to underscore three aspects in
particular

First, armed conflict often enables or aggravates
the crime of human trafficking through the breakdown
of law and order, weakened or non-existing Government
structures and incresing levels of violence, for example.
Human trafficking can constitute a war crime and
is often connected to sexual violence as a method
of warfare against civilians. Displaced persons are
particularly vulnerable and prone to becoming the
prey of criminals specializing in human trafficking for
labour or sexual exploitation. It is a shame that civilian
populations are viewed by some armed groups, such as
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, as a resource
or commodity to be trafficked, thereby lining their
pockets and ultimately prolonging conflicts. Going
after the proceeds of human trafficking will lead us
to those commissioning these crimes. We therefore
welcome that the Monitoring Team is mandated to
investigate the cross-cutting issue of human trafficking
in its threat assessments.

Secondly, I would like to underscore the importance
of one of the questions that you, Mr. President, have
raised in the concept note (S/2016/1031, annex) for this
debate, namely, the risk of procurement and supply
chains contributing to trafficking in persons. Much of
what we all consume every day has come a long way
and has gone through many hands. All of us have a
responsibility to make sure that what we enjoy is not the
end product of the abuse of slave labour and victims of
human trafficking. Germany has placed this issue at the
top of the agenda of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) during its chairmanship
in 2016, hosting a conference in Berlin on the issue in
September. In close collaboration with the OSCE's
coordinator, we strengthen the role of the OSCE as
mediator and pioneer for an internationally coordinated
approach against human trafficking.

Thirdly, people falling prey to human trafficking
in conflict are already among the most vulnerable in
their societies. Those who reach a safe destination often
have lost all their belongings. Their bodies and souls
have endured unspeakable horrors. Minors lose their
parents and are in particular need of responsible care.
The risks of vulnerable persons becoming victims of
traffickers can be reduced by establishing legal and safe
routes. Resettlement and relocation programmes are a
good means to achieve that. Germany's programme for
Yazidi refugees from Iraq, for example, has reached
a 1,000 victims of the terrorism of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant. The victims and their families
have found a safe refuge in Germany.

The group's most recognized face and their
loudest voice is Ms. Nadia Murad Basee Taha, the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime Goodwill
Ambassador for the Dignity of Survivors of Human
Trafficking and winner of the Sakharov Prize of the
European Parliament. I am glad to see that Ms. Taha
is present in the Chamber. She speaks out against
the horrors the people who endured and calls for the
dignified treatment to which every victim of human
trafficking is entitled. Let us not forget: every bit of
help for the victims is also one step ahead in the long
struggle against human trafficking.

Let us spare no national or international effort to
drain the swamp of human trafficking, both in conflict
situations and beyond. Let us step up efforts to address
conflict and instability as key push factors for human
trafficking and migration. Human trafficking is an
abuse of the human rights of the victims. Let us be
mindful of the victims' human rights at every stage of
their horrific journeys.

