Ms. Smythe: I am grateful for the invitation to
bring to Council members a field perspective on the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000). This invitation is not only an honour for
MONUC, but indeed for all Gender Advisers, mission-
wide.

Before briefing you on the work of
mainstreaming gender in the field, allow me to briefly
summarize some of the key gender challenges in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The International Rescue Committee estimates
that up to 3.5 million people, mostly civilians, have
perished in the past four and-a-half years of war. The
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
estimates that there are currently 3.4 million internally
displaced persons in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and around 17 million people are food insecure.
Forty-one per cent of all children are undernourished.
At least 1.3 million people are infected with the HIV
virus, whose prevalence among soldiers and irregular
combatants is around 60 per cent.

The consequences for women throughout the
Democratic Republic of the Congo have been
devastating, as they have suffered the most. Some key
features affecting women are internal displacement; the
breakdown of almost every institution, beginning with
the family; the inability to take care of crops or
cultivate farms; rape and sexual violence on a massive
scale, and complete impunity for the perpetrators of
these heinous crimes. In essence, the law of the gun has
devastated the condition of women.
It was in this context of one of the world's
greatest living tragedies that the Gender Unit was set
up in March 2002. A small but very important office,
staffed with a Senior Gender Adviser and her Deputy,
two United Nations Volunteers, an administrative
officer and two local officers, the Unit had to adopt a
two-pronged strategy. The first was to integrate a
gender perspective within MONUC itself. The second
was to work with the Congolese population and society
to bring the realities of the conflict, as they especially
affect women, to the attention of decision makers in the
peace process and the transitional government.

The Unit, together with other components of
MONUC, has facilitated the implementation of
MONUC's mandate through activities such as training
and research, communication and dissemination of
gender sensitive information, outreach to the
Congolese population, capacity-building for women
leaders and advocacy and monitoring and evaluation of
women's participation in the peace and transition
processes.

I will now comment on activities within
MONUC. Allow me to begin with the activities of
disseminating information within MONUC, soon after
the Gender Unit was set up. The first task was to
sensitize chiefs of sections and divisions to the
provisions of resolution 1325 (2000), beginning with
the Office of the Special Representative of the United
Nations Secretary-General, with the objective of
seeking their personal commitment to the gender
message and to take action. Once this was
accomplished with both military and civilian heads, the
message was shared with colleagues in the agencies
and the international community. The sensitization
included the distribution of information on the mandate
and scope of work of the Gender Unit and the
encouragement of managers to initiate a two-way
exchange of relevant information with the Unit.

The second task that was critical to the
implementation of our mandate was the gender
sensitization training of Military Observers, the United
Nations Civilian Police (CIVPOL) and civilian
personnel upon their arrival at the mission, as well as
with contingents when possible. The need to
systematically train the contingents continues to be
crucial because the military and CIVPOL live and work
nearest to the communities in the conflict areas. Their
behaviour is therefore not only used to judge MONUC
in many instances but becomes the yardstick emulated
by the population and Government. The staff of the
Gender Unit also provides gender training to the
Congolese National Police.

There have been sessions in Kisangani and Bunia
which have resulted in improved awareness by the
police of the rights of women, as well as men, in
society. Trainees deployed in Kindu are working
closely with women's group on cases of violence
against women.

I turn now to the issue of recruiting more women
peacekeepers. Women have had an enhancing role,
especially in the work with victims of sexual violence,
and as community bridge-builders. Victims, usually
female, have repeatedly intimated that the sight of a
male officer in uniform makes them relive the
experience of the violation all over again. Thus, there
is a serious need for women military and CIVPOL
officers.

The pattern of recruitment of CIVPOL officers in
MONUC is a major concern. Regrettably, the
proportion of women, instead of increasing to address
the problems of violence against women, is steadily
decreasing. Statistics show that, before June 2003, out
of 15 CIVPOL officers there was one woman. As of 9
June, however, out of 69 officers there were three
women. At present, out of 90 CIVPOL officers there
are still only three women. I would strongly urge
police-contributing countries to take prompt action in
this area. The expectation of the gender Office is that,
of the 182 CIVPOL officers that are to be recruited this
year, at least 20 should be women.

The low percentage of women in CIVPOL is
equally reflected in the training of the Congolese
National Police that has been carried out by the gender
Office. Out of a total of 623 police officers trained so
far, only 15 are women.

In the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and repatriation or resettlement (DDRRR) programme,
our major challenge was to gain the understanding of
DDRRR personnel that women's concerns were an
integral part of all activities, especially demobilization.
There are women commanders and combatants in the
various militia. A package was also developed on
gender and vulnerable groups with the message that
behind every combatant, there was usually a woman. A
policy paper on gender and DDRRR was circulated to
the DDRRR office with recommendations on the need
to take women's concerns into consideration in policy
conceptualization, as well as in implementation and
monitoring.
During the setting up of the temporary Reception
Centre in Lubero, as well as with the Kamina exercise,
the Senior Gender Advisor and staff, together with
other female colleagues from child protection, human
rights and humanitarian affairs, served in technical
committees and worked with DDRRR colleagues. This
strategic outreach was a breakthrough because
combatants as well as dependants presented themselves
for the DDRRR programme, demonstrating the link
between gender and DDRRR.

I turn now to activities outside the Mission. The
first major political activity on the inception of the
gender Office was to support women in the inter-
Congolese dialogue in Sun City. This was done by
sensitizing them to resolution 1325 (2000), which was
translated into the four major languages of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The strategy
resulted in the formulation of a plan of action, the
Nairobi Declaration, that was going to be used by
Congolese women as their bargaining tool to allow
them access to participate in the negotiations.

Following this, the gender Office, in very close
collaboration with the United Nations Development
Fund for Women, held several training sessions with
women in readiness for their participation in the Sun
City negotiations, to which only a few women had
originally been invited as delegates. Because of this
poor representation of women as delegates to the
negotiations, it was decided that an alternative way of
increasing the number would be to invite other women
to participate as experts. Thus, a total of 74,
comprising 37 women delegates and 37 women
experts, were able to work alongside the majority 516
men to bring the women's perspective to the
negotiation process. It is widely accepted by both men
and women that the participation of women in the
inter-Congolese dialogue in the corridors, at
commissions, as well as in plenary helped resolve and
unravel difficult impasses during negotiations.

The outcome of the Sun City resolutions,
especially the recommendations of the Humanitarian,
Social and Cultural Commission, reflects the voices of
the women in the negotiations. In addition, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo Transitional
Constitution took into account some of the women's
concerns and the need to have them play a role in
decision-making, as is evident in article 51 of the
Transitional Constitution. Unfortunately, however, the
constitutional provision was very vague and did not go
far enough in reflecting international instruments, such
as the Beijing Platform for Action, that are very
specific concerning women's representation in
decision-making. The reality is that, in the transitional
period, so far only 7 per cent of the representatives in
Government, Parliament, the Senate and the
institutions supporting democracy are women, whilst
93 per cent are men.

We have also developed a network of partners,
including La Dynamique des femmes politiques au
Congo democratique (DYNAFEP), which represents
women from all factions and political parties. They
have been articulating the political views of women on
the evolution of the transition process and working to
increase women's involvement and participation in the
elections through press conferences and other media
activities.

Recently, an assessment was made of the first 100
days of the Transitional Government. The key issues of
concern were identified as follows: security, immediate
and long-term; national unity and the establishment of
democratic governance throughout the Democratic
Republic of the Congo; sexual violence against women
and impunity; women's representation in the transition
and elections; and post-conflict issues, including the
return of displaced persons and refugees, with special
reference to women and girls.

An important tool for monitoring women's
involvement in the peace process and transition has
been a fortnightly forum of experience-sharing,
facilitated by the gender unit, with partners in civil
society, including the media, MONUC personnel and
employees of the Government. Several key issues that
have been discussed, reflect similar concerns raised by
DYNAFEP.

Sexual violence is one of the major tragedies of
the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The police will have to play an important role in this
area. In the eastern DRC, data being collected by
MONUC, colleagues in the agencies and the local
communities reveal that tens, if not hundreds of
thousands of girls and women are being raped as a
result of the conflict. It is believed - on the basis of
local sources - that in the town of Uvira alone, in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
about 20 per cent of all women and girls have been
raped. A constitutional provision setting up legal
mechanisms to document women's experiences and
address impunity is now in place. However, expediting
the processes will enhance healing for the victims. It
will also assure victims that, despite the lack of the rule
of law for the time being in a place like Bunia, justice
will eventually prevail.
The success of the Gender Unit will be judged by
the heritage we leave behind for the Government and
the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
emulate. After 18 months, it is too early to make any
claims. However, we can draw some key conclusions.

First, the foundation has been laid to ensure that
the concerns of both men and women are reflected in
the resolution of the conflict.

Secondly, networking within and outside the
Mission and the use of creative means are leading to
attitudinal changes about women's role in establishing
peace. They are also leading to a greater understanding
of gender mainstreaming. More of that will need to be
seen in the post-conflict and reconstruction era.

Thirdly, although comprised of a small team of
officers, the Office of Gender Affairs has since March
2002 creatively used the limited human and material
resources at its disposal to implement its mandate and
that of the Mission.

In conclusion, I should like to set out, by way of
recommendation, the following priority action points
that have emerged from our experience over the last 18
months.

I begin with Security Council visits. The positive
impact of field visits, both psychologically and
otherwise, is tremendous. Missions to the field from
Headquarters should see women as much as they do
men, listen to them and report back on their concerns,
so that decisions and policies will reflect the realities
and interests of both men and women in conflict and
post-conflict situations.

The second point concerns appropriate staffing of
gender units. If gender mainstreaming is to succeed in
peacekeeping operations, it should start from the
Headquarters level and proceed to the field. In that
regard, the recent establishment of the position of
gender adviser in the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations is welcome. It is hoped that that person will
receive adequate support to influence policy decisions
at the highest level and to support field missions. At
the same time, recruiting and adequately supporting
gender advisers at a sufficiently high level in field
missions will enable them to influence decision-making
at all levels, so that effective use can be made of a
mission's resources, to the satisfaction of the
population as well as other stakeholders.

Thirdly, with regard to female military observers
and civilian police, troop- and police-contributing
countries should ensure that there is a substantial
proportion of women among personnel recruited for
peacekeeping operations, including civilian police and
military observers. We have come to realize that it may
be necessary to review the recruitment criteria in order
to enable women to be identified for field missions.

The Security Council should hold national
Governments accountable for implementing gender-
related provisions in peace accords, to guarantee
women's participation in all decision-making
arrangements. Above all, the all-pervasive cultures of
impunity, including impunity for violence of all kinds
against women, must come to an end.

