Mr. Verdier (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security. We would like
to share with the Council the following considerations
in our national capacity.

First of all, I would like to thank the Government of
Peru for taking the initiative of organizing this debate
and for presiding over it throughout the day. We also
thank the Deputy Secretary-General and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict for their briefings, and Ms. Razia
Sultana for her courageous testimony on behalf of the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security.

Argentina continues to strongly support the efforts
of the Secretary-General and the Office of the Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict. We also
thank the Secretary-General for his most recent report
(S/2018/250), and we fully endorse its recommendations
aimed at preventing, combating and eliminating all
forms of sexual violence in armed conflicts, with a
special focus on addressing issues related to prevention,
early warning, contributing factors and rapid responses
in the face of the occurrence of such crimes.

Sexual violence in conflict is one of the most
horrific and abhorrent violations of human dignity,
and poses a singular and undeniable threat to
international peace and security. We must therefore
redouble our commitment to prevention, eradication
and accountability with regard to such crimes. We
must put the victims of such crimes at the heart of our
actions and pool our efforts to address the structural
and underlying conditions that increase the victims'
vulnerability and risk.

The growing use and threat of sexual violence
perpetrated by various State and non-State armed actors
and groups against specific groups - women, children,
minorities, people who have or are perceived as having
a sexual orientation or gender identity other than that
of the norm, among others - constitute the most
serious international crimes and must be prevented and
punished in strict compliance with the law by making
use of available tools and mechanisms, including the
sanctions regimes of the Council.

Preventing and combating sexual violence in
conflict should be at the forefront of all prevention,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts undertaken by
the United Nations and by the international community,
as a whole. One of the key ways to prevent the scourge
is to address the risks and underlying factors that make
women and certain groups particularly vulnerable
to sexual violence. Such factors include, inter alia,
structural discrimination, gender-based violence and
a climate of insecurity and impunity. Efforts and
initiatives aimed at promoting gender equality and the
empowerment of women and girls, in all their diversity,
are also important.

With regard to access to justice and accountability
for crimes of sexual violence, it is crucial to build
documentation and investigation capacity and foster
greater cooperation, information-sharing and good
practices in the areas of investigation, documentation,
location, assistance for the victims, extradition and
legal aid in order to end the climate of impunity that
contributes to the proliferation of such crimes.

With regard to crimes of sexual violence, we
reiterate that victims must be at the core of our
prevention, eradication and accountability efforts. It
is therefore essential to protect, assist and reintegrate
all victims of such violations by working with women's
organizations and other civil society organizations to
provide services, aid and gender-inclusive multisectoral
and multidisciplinary support and compensation, meet
needs and protect the dignity and human rights of
the victims.

Those elements must be taken into consideration
when designing the mandates of peacekeeping
operations, special political and peacebuilding missions,
pursuant to resolution 1325 (2000). The goal is to ensure
the inclusion of women in equal conditions and their
access to significant decision-making positions so as
to secure their seats at the negotiating table. We must
ensure that experts on gender, gender-based violence
and sexual violence are included in the various United
Nations missions and mediation teams. We must also
include specific provisions and commitments when
brokering peace agreements and ceasefires and ensure
that more women participate in peacekeeping forces.

We believe that the development of national plans
to implement resolution 1325 (2000) must be viewed as
a tool for building peace and preventing sexual violence
in all areas. That spirit encouraged our country to join
the Women, Peace and Security Focal Points Network
and the Group of Friends on Women, Peace and
Security in Geneva. It also joined the Elsie Initiative
on Women in Peace Operations, spearheaded by
Canada, which aims to increase the number of women
in peacekeeping operations.

Preventing sexual violence in conflict must begin
by building more peaceful societies. That can be
achieved only through equality. In keeping with the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, we can leave
no one behind. There is no peace without inclusion or
justice. Societies with a climate of impunity perpetuate
Violence. Argentina takes a comprehensive view of
peace in which gender equity and equality permeate all
public policy. It works to achieve social transformation
geared towards gender equality, which is a sine qua non
for strengthening democracy. Our priority for gender
policy is the elimination of violence against women. In
that regard, gender reforms have been implemented in
the defence and security sector.

Argentina reiterates its commitment to the
Organization's zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse, as well as its support for the
measures adopted by the Secretary-General on the
issue. Argentina, together with 80 countries, signed the
voluntary compact on preventing and addressing sexual
exploitation and abuse.

In conclusion, I would like to recall that General
Assembly resolution 69/293 designates 19 June as the
International Day for the Elimination of Sexual Violence
in Conflict. We encourage all Member States, entities
of the United Nations system and other international
and regional organizations, as well as civil society and
other relevant actors, to participate in the activities to
mark the Day.

The meeting rose at 6.15 pm.
