Ms. Darisuren: I am glad to be here today to talk to
the Council about the preparations of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OCSE) for the
approaching twentieth anniversary of the women and
peace and security agenda.

As the world's largest regional security
organization, with a long track record on conflict
prevention and management, we in the OSCE see the
women and peace and security agenda as a fundamental
element in our conflict toolbox. The OSCE study on
the progress made in the implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda in the OSCE region will
be published early next year. I would like to highlight
some of its findings.

Let me start with the creation of national action
plans in our region. Following a global trend, the
number of national action plans in the OSCE region
has continued to grow steadily during the past five
years. Over 60 per cent of OSCE participating States
now have a national action plan. These plans continue
to identify women's participation in peace and security
as a main priority. We see a trend whereby recently
developed national action plans are responding to
the recommendations made in Preventing Conflict,
Transforming Justice and Securing the Peace: A
Global Study on the Implementation of United Nations
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), which called
for more attention to be paid to conflict prevention. It is
essential that the women and peace and security action
plans recognize that addressing deeper, underlying
root causes of conflict, such as prevailing structural
inequality, which particularly affects women and girls,
is crucial to any conflict prevention effort.

The lack of budgeted funding continues to pose
a major challenge to the implementation of national
action plans. Our assessment shows that over 80 per
cent of the current national action plans make no or
only minimal reference as to how the implementation
of action plans will be funded.

In 2020, the OSCE will offer a series of
events to provide platforms to Government and
civil society representatives and our international
partner organizations to discuss the findings and
recommendations of our study and develop ways
forward to implement the women and peace and
security agenda. Regional organizations are well suited
to supporting the national-level implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda in coordinating,
setting agendas and carrying out initiatives that support
the work at the national level.

I would like to say a few brief words on OSCE
initiatives that provide data, tools and capacity-building
in this field. The OSCE-led survey on the well-being
and safety of women in South-East and Eastern Europe
illustrates how regional organizations can assist in
promoting the women and peace and security agenda.
By making available data on the prevalence and patters
of Violence against women, the survey helps to highlight
the need to respond to and prevent violence. That in
turn can help States to strengthen measures to combat
violence against women.

In December, the OCSE will launch a toolkit on
the inclusion of women in effective peace processes
that will complement the efforts of the United Nations
and other organizations to address the unacceptably
low level of women's participation in decision-making
at peace tables. The OSCE also offers concrete
tailored capacity-building for security service actors
in our participating States. The OSCE Office for
Democratic Institutions and Human Rights has
supported the armed forces of Ukraine in developing
a set of recommendations to military commanders.
These are aimed at assisting them in efforts to foster
a gender-sensitive institutional culture that addresses
discrimination, harassment and abuse. Furthermore,
we have provided recommendations on measures that
could be used to help prevent gender-based Violence in
the families of armed force personnel.

In Central Asia, the OSCE has provided long-
term support to border management and services in
Turkmenistan and Tajikistan, including on building
skills and knowledge on how to gender mainstream the
work of border services. A training workshop on gender
aspects of border management was conducted jointly
for Turkmen and Afghan law enforcement officers. We
look forward to continuing to work with our Government
and civil society partners to develop ways to address
the remaining challenges in the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda.

