Mr. Fifield (Australia): I am pleased to address
the Security Council for the first time, as the new
Permanent Representative of Australia, on a topic
of such Vital importance as the women and peace
and security agenda. We thank South Africa for its
strong leadership on this agenda, and we welcome the
Secretary-General's renewed commitment and call to
action. We also welcome the report of the Secretary-
General on the subject (S/2019/800) and commend the
work of the experts who contributed to it.

Australia has a proud history of contributing to
international peace and security. Since 1947, Australia
has deployed troops to more than 60 operations overseas,
including long-standing contributions to some of the
oldest United Nations peacekeeping efforts. Today, all
Australian Defence Force personnel deployed to fragile
and conflict-affected contexts are trained in women
and peace and security. We also have 166 Australian
Defence Force gender advisers who can be deployed on
military, humanitarian, relief and recovery operations.

The women and peace and security agenda reflects
the fact that conflict continues to disproportionately
affect women. Women's needs, contributions and
agency in conflict and peacebuilding situations are too
often an afterthought. The rights of women and girls
underpin the fundamental components of the women
and peace and security agenda. The convergence of
the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Platform
for Action and the twentieth anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000) provides an opportunity to highlight the
intersections of these two important agendas.

Women and girls are central to the success of
efforts to prevent, respond to and resolve conflict
and to build peace. However, women are too often
excluded from conflict resolution, peacebuilding and
security operations. This situation puts peace and
stability at risk and compounds negative outcomes for
women and girls. To deliver on this agenda, we must
address the root causes of gender inequality, including
harmful norms and inequitable structures. We must
promote and protect women's rights, including sexual
and reproductive-health rights. We must commit to
improving gender composition in our peacekeeping
missions and our national security services. We must
commit to the Secretary-General's sustaining peace
agenda and its important actions on women and peace
and security.

In Australia, the women and peace and security
agenda is indivisible from our work on humanitarian
response and disaster relief, on development assistance
and on peacekeeping and peacebuilding missions. We
have seen the difference that gender advisers have
made in reconstruction efforts. It is life-changing. It is
transformative to the way in which we do business.

Australia's second women and peace and security
national action plan, to be released this year, is
underpinned by a commitment to human rights, inclusion
and women's meaningful participation in all aspects of
peacebuilding, crisis response and prevention.

We look forward to continuing to work with the
United Nations, its Member States and civil society to
accelerate implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda in 2020 and beyond.

