Mr. Kalpokas (Vanuatu): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Pacific small island developing
States (Pacific SIDS) represented at the United
Nations: Fiji, the Marshall Islands, Micronesia, Nauru,
Palau, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands,
Tonga, Tuvalu and my own country, Vanuatu.

I wish to thank Nigeria for having convened this
important debate. The Pacific SIDS are committed to
the full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). In
advancing our efforts, we are pleased to announce that
in December 2010, as part of the tenth anniversary
commemoration of the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), we established the Pacific Regional Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security. The Group is an
inclusive endeavour among diverse stakeholders in our
region.

In order to further advance the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) in the Pacific region, it is
important that we focus our work on approaches that
reflect the reality of the situation on the ground in our
islands. We believe that the development of a Pacific
regional action plan would assist in this regard, and
would build on our efforts to integrate resolution 1325
(2000) into the wider regional peace and security
agenda. A Pacific regional action plan also has the
potential to channel a series of high-level regional
commitments into viable national action plans, which
is essential for enhancing security-sector governance
policies and programmes in our region.

The Pacific is also committed to international
efforts, and in this regard we welcome support for the
Pacific SIDS candidate from the Solomon Islands for
the Executive Board of UN-Women. We ask that the
United Nations and donor partners continue to provide
resources and support for our efforts to implement
resolution 1325 (2000), particularly those aimed at
enhancing women's participation in prevention and
broader peacebuilding. We asking the United Nations
to support pre- and post-deployment training of
peacekeepers in our region, both as police and military,
particularly to ensure the incorporation of training in
human rights compliance.

The Pacific SIDS wish to highlight the
importance of conflict prevention as an essential
element of resolution 1325 (2000). Unabated climate
change raises the risk of increasing violent conflict in
many parts of the world and its consequent impact on
women and girls, which is potentially beyond the
capacity of the international community to respond to
adequately. The adverse impacts of climate change
alter the distribution and quality of natural resources
such as fresh water, arable land, coastal territory and
marine resources. Such changes can increase the
competition for available resources, weaken
Government institutions and lead to internal and
international migration. Furthermore, such adverse
impacts can create obstacles that substantially interfere
with the ability of nations to maintain their territorial
integrity, sovereignty and independence. All these
effects of climate change can create a severe risk of
increased violent conflict in many parts of the world,
along with the ensuing impacts on women and girls
during and after conflict.

We welcome the recent statement by the
President of the Security Council on climate change
and the maintenance of international peace and security
(S/PRST/2011/15*). This was a landmark event, as it
was the first time that the Security Council, which has
primary responsibility under the Charter of the United
Nations for the maintenance of international peace and
Security, explicitly acknowledged the link between
climate change and international peace and security. It
provides a solid foundation and, indeed, an imperative
for the Council to undertake further work on this
critical issue. As a first step, the Pacific SIDS seek the
appointment of a special representative on climate
security to identify and assess threats to international
peace and security resulting from the current and
projected adverse impacts of climate change.

