Ms. Mammadova (Azerbaijan): I wish to thank you,
Madam President, for having convened this important
debate to discuss ways to advance the women and peace
and security agenda, with a focus on displaced women.

I also thank the Secretary-General for his insightful
report (S/2014/693), which updates us on the progress
and challenges pertaining to the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). Our appreciation also goes to all
briefers for their informative statements earlier today.

Conflicts, with their security, socioeconomic and
humanitarian implications, continue to expose affected
countries on the whole, and women in particular, to
the full range of human rights violations. Regrettably,
abuse, gender-based violence and discrimination have
become recognizable patterns in the conflict and
post-conflict settings. It is a matter of great concern,
as highlighted in the report, that these trends are
deliberate campaigns against women's rights. Based on
our own tragic experiences of the aggression to which
Azerbaijan was exposed in the early 1990s, acts of
violence and the trauma they cause to victims are not
easy to heal physically and psychologically, and have
long-term impacts on societies that also have a bearing
on the prospects of lasting peace and reconciliation.

In situations of mass displacement, ensuring the
physical security, well-being and protection ofthe rights
of women should be seen not as an add-on element,
but rather as an essential component of the protection
agenda. Greater and timely support for efforts promote
gender equality and facilitate women's economic and
political empowerment can be an important practical
step towards mitigating the vulnerability of displaced
women in conflict and post-conflict settings. Special
attention should be paid to the situation of women and
girls in protracted displacement. By the same token,
more needs to be done to strengthen the capacities of
Governments and to complement efforts of hosting
societies to ensure the sustainable social reintegration
and rehabilitation of displaced persons, in particular
women and girls.

The unresolved conflicts in many parts of the
world - involving continued incidents of violence
against women and girls, mass displacement flows
and related humanitarian crisis - require renewed
attention to the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda and leadership to deliver on the
commitments set out in the landmark resolution 1325
(2000). We welcome the efforts that the United Nations
system has put in place to mainstream the priorities and
commitments under the women and peace and security
agenda into policy and operational tools. These certainly
have contributed to strengthening normative and
institutional safeguards and accountability frameworks
in support of implementation. Beyond doubt, much
more needs to be done by States, the United Nations
system, and human rights and humanitarian actors.

Prevention should be our common goal, and
we share the view that it is important to explore the
broader prevention aspects of resolution 1325 (2000).
In this regard, we welcome the establishment of the
designation criteria relating to human rights and
sexual violence within the current sanctions regime
as an important step towards the operationalization
of prevention and enforcement tools. Strengthening
mechanisms for the control of small arms and lights
weapons and enforcement can also serve as effective
means of prevention. In the meantime, we should
remained focused on strengthening the capacity and
capability of peacekeeping missions to identify early
risks and effectively respond to them, including
through regular training for gender advisers and the
promotion of the role of women protection advisers in
peacekeeping missions.

On the next steps, while appreciating that gains
have been made in strengthening the political will
and international legal framework to secure justice
for conflict-related sexual violence crimes, we believe
that more attention should be paid to addressing
the full range of violations and crimes experienced
by women, including gendered impacts of enforced
disappearances, foreign occupation, mass forced
diplacement, restrictions on humanitarian aid, conflict-
related trafficking and the destruction of civilian
infrastructure. Combating impunity and strengthening
both international and national justice responses to
these crimes is equally crucial.

It is critical to ensure respect for the rule of law,
and that the rule of law in conflict and post-conflict
situations comprehensively promotes justice and
accountability in ways that further the equal rights
of women and their right to equal participation in
decision-making. Reparation programmes, a key
justice priority for women, deserve greater attention
and support as a tool for delivering justice and recovery
for victims and long-term peace dividends within
communities. The need to rebuild the justice and
security sectors is critical, not only for the protection of
women and combating impunity, but also for enabling
women to participate in all aspects of post-conflict
reconstruction and rehabilitation, which are key pillars
of the women and peace and security agenda.

Azerbaijan remains committed to implementation
and is pleased to have made a contribution to the work
of the Council during its presidency in October 2013,
including the adoption ofresolution 2122 (2013). We look
forward to the high-level review of the implementation
and cooperation with interested States, UN-Women and
other relevant entities in the process of preparations of
the global study.

