Ms. Lopidia: I am speaking today in my capacity
as Executive Director and co-Founder of the EVE
Organization for Women Development in South Sudan
and on behalf of the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security.

In my country, conflict is spreading, tribal and
community tensions are mounting and more than
1.6 million South Sudanese are internally displaced.
For the majority of women in South Sudan, peace and
security remain a far-fetched and almost unattainable
notion. Women lack protection, live in fear, are at risk
of being raped daily, have almost no recourse to justice,
are economically disadvantaged and live in limited
freedom. Yet we stand united in our search for peace.
In my role as an activist for women's rights and peace, I
meet many South Sudanese women, and the stories they
share with me are heartbreaking. A woman in Bentiu,
Unity state, told me recently, "I have been raped several
times, but I still have to go out. What option do I have? I
still have to find food for my children. On a lucky day, I
go out and nothing happens. On a bad day, I go out and
I am raped."

I want to focus today on the critical involvement
of women during all phases of peace agreements; the
actions peacekeepers must take to include women in
protection strategies and, overall, be more responsive
to the needs of women and girls; our right to justice and
accountability; and strengthening inclusive institutions
and national frameworks.

I was part of the civil society delegation in Addis
Ababa advocating for women's issues to be included in
the agreement and for women to participate in all parts
of the peace process. It took significant advocacy for
women of civil society to sit at the negotiating table.
The inclusion of women's issues and the signing of the
peace agreement in August 2015 gave South Sudanese
women hope. However, its implementation is not
guaranteed, as is evident from the violence that erupted
in July. Peace and stability will not come to South
Sudan if the agreement is not fully implemented.

I have just come from Nairobi where, along with
South Sudanese and global partners, I convened a
peace dialogue with representatives of the Transitional
Government, local and global women's groups, faith-
based organizations and academia. It is important that
such initiatives fostering people-to-people dialogue
be supported. We came together to call for an end to
the violence and for all South Sudanese leaders to rise
above tribal affiliations to build a peaceful national
identity based on respect, diversity, personal integrity
and women's inclusion. The different parties to the
agreement must honour their commitments; denounce
violence, including widespread sexual violence; and
respect both the letter and spirit of the August 2015
agreement. The Security Council and the international
community must apply all necessary pressure to ensure
that the entire agreement is upheld by every side and
that South Sudanese women from national and grass-
roots organizations are included in its implementation
and monitoring.

Women peacebuilders and civil society colleagues
from Colombia have also asked me today to urge
the international community to ensure that the
comprehensive agreement reached in Havana is
salvaged. Ijoin them in calling for women, including
Afro-Colombian and indigenous women, to continue to
be part of all discussions on the future ofthe agreement.

Across all conflicts and crisis situations, the
Security Council must also prioritize women and
girls' protection. Peacekeeping missions mandated to
protect civilians, including the United Nations Mission
in the Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS), as well as
humanitarian agencies, must do a better job of seeking
out and listening to the needs of women and prioritizing
their protection. A crucial aspect ofensuring that women
are protected must involve increasing the number
of women peacekeepers to enable more responsive
channels for women to communicate their immediate
protection concerns and overall perspectives on the
security situation.

Recognizing the urgent situation in my country,
the Security Council adopted resolution 2304 (2016)
in August. The Security Council should not allow
2017 to arrive without the Government and opposition
leaders of South Sudan meeting all the requirements
set out in the new resolution, including the deployment
of a regional protection force, the improvement of
UNMISS peacekeeping operations and the realignment
of transitional security arrangements for Juba and other
major cities and deadly flash points. South Sudan is
increasingly becoming a living hell for a lot of women
and, in my opinion, this should not be happening on the
Council's watch.

If the Government and opposition leaders of South
Sudan do not meet the requirements set out in the latest
Security Council resolution, then the Security Council
must impose more targeted sanctions on individuals
and a total arms embargo. South Sudan has one of
the highest rates of arms per capita of any country
worldwide, which is exacerbating the Violence in my
country. The Security Council's reluctance to address
the ongoing impunity in South Sudan is prolonging this
conflict and its devastating impact on women.

Additionally transitional justice, accountability
and reconciliation are important parts of healing for
South Sudanese women and for women elsewhere.
The Security Council, the African Union and Member
States need to support the rule of law, including the
establishment of the Hybrid Court for South Sudan and
the appointment of women in senior roles throughout
the Court. The Council must also not allow impunity to
fuel further violence and atrocities. Accountability must
also extend to sexual exploitation and abuse committed
by all United Nations and international staff.

The situation in my country today has reached a
dangerous tipping point. There is an urgent need for
good governance, respect for civil society, institutional
reforms and respect for women's quotas in power-
sharing. South Sudan recently launched its national
action plan on resolution 1325 (2000), however there
seems to be little or no political will to translate it to
realities on the ground and so women continue to be
systematically excluded from decision-making.

Women's voices not only in South Sudan, but also
from Syria, Iraq, Yemen, Mali, the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
other conflict-affected areas around the world, must
be elevated. The Security Council, the Member States
and the United Nations must significantly improve their
engagement with women civil society during times of
crisis at Headquarters in New York and in missions,
including those undertaken by Security Council
members. Despite a commitment made this time last
year, the Security Council has yet to invite civil society
representatives to country-specific consultations.
Many other commitments were made last year
during the high-level review of resolution 1325 (2000),
on promoting women's participation and gender
equality, emphasizing conflict prevention and financing
the women and peace and security agenda. Unmet
commitments are just words and do nothing to bring
about peace. I look forward to hearing the concrete
actions that have been taken in the past 12 months to
improve the lives of South Sudanese women and of
other women around the world affected by conflict and
to promote their inclusion in all decision-making.

