Mr. Govender (South Africa): My delegation
expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2013/525). We thank the Under-Secretary-
General and Executive Director of UN Women,
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka; the High Commissioner
for Human Rights, Ms. Navanethem Pillay; and the
representative of the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security, Ms. Brigitte Balipou, respectively,
for their statements. My delegation also wishes to thank
you, Sir, for convening this meeting today.

The report of the Secretary-General reflects the
measurable advances that have been made across all
areas ofthe women, peace and security agenda since the
adoption of landmark resolution 1325 (2000) 13 years
ago, and its implementation. It has provided for the
establishment of an enabling framework placing women
at the centre of processes impacting on their safety,
security and development, in equal partnership with
men. The report highlights the remaining significant
protection, prevention and participation deficits in the
areas ofpeacekeeping, peacebuilding and post-conflict
economic recovery, impeding the full and effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

However, we must recognize the limitation
that comes with that approach and the underlying
expectations of the mechanisms to deliver on these
areas in a sustainable manner. Such an approach, we
must appreciate, brings with it short-term relief and
impact and therefore cannot be considered a panacea
for the full and effective implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). The host State has to eventually play its
rightful role in addressing the specific challenges in the
long term.

My delegation welcomes the recommendations
elaborated in the report of the Secretary-General on
how to close these implementation gaps. A renewed
commitment is also required of Member States and the
United Nations system to effectively implement the
seven-point action plan.

We welcome the Security Council's adoption of
resolution 2122 (2013), especially as it seeks to place
women at the table for negotiations and peace talks.
Women generally represent a majority constituency
in societies, and as such should not be excluded from
the negotiation table in conflict-affected States. South
Africa is supportive of such an approach, especially as
our own history has taught us about the powerful role
that women play in bringing about peace and stability.
We also believe that women should play a role beyond
that, one that includes securing a larger stake in political
leadership and policy- and decision-making positions,
both in the public and private sectors.

The report of the Secretary-General correctly
points out the need for increased participation by
women in United Nations peacekeeping missions. South
Africa has played its role in that regard by contributing
through its police deployment, a contingent made up of
16 per cent women, which, according to the Secretary-
General's report, is the highest percentage of female
deployment by a troop-contributing country.

While the host State needs to demonstrate the
political will to fully implement resolution 1325
(2000), greater commitment and support by the United
Nations and the international community is needed
to capacitate countries in conflict and post-conflict
situations. In the South African context, where women
have been historically disadvantaged by apartheid and
the patriarchal nature of South African society, men
traditionally dominated the political and economic
space. During the past 18 years of democratic rule, the
Government instituted specific measures that included
electoral and candidature quotas for women at the
national, provincial and local levels of Government,
including at the executive and legislature branches of
Government.

Our history has not only demonstrated, but has
taught us, about the powerful role that women play in
a post-conflict setting. South African women represent
a powerful constituency and have been at the forefront
of driving reform and developing and advancing
responsive policies and legislation across all sectors
of Government and the public and private sectors.
At the level of women's participation in political
decision-making, today South Africa has 44 per
cent women representation in Parliament and 43 per
cent women at the level of Cabinet ministers. At the
provincial level, five of the nine provincial premiers are
women.

We recognize the importance of women having
unfettered access to justice in conflict and post-
conflict settings, including through gender-responsive
legal, judicial and security-sector reform and other
mechanisms. Access to justice for women in conflict
and post-conflict settings through conscious policies
of inclusion is essential to building fair, equitable and
just societies. Women suffer disproportionately from
poverty, and the risks they face are heightened in armed
conflict and post-conflict settings.

Women's legal status and rights must be ensured
in post-conflict situations. Strengthening the legal
framework to address issues of discrimination against
women with respect to land ownership, access to
economic opportunity and employment, education
and health care is an essential component of gender-
responsive peacebuilding architecture.

Justice for victims of serious violations of
international law is an essential requirement for
sustainable peace, security and the development for
States emerging from armed conflict, where the rule of
law must enjoy primacy and be unscrupulously upheld.
My delegation therefore supports efforts by the Council
to continue fighting impunity for the most serious
crimes committed against women and girls, through
the work of the International Criminal Court, ad hoc
and mixed tribunals, as well as specialized chambers in
national tribunals.

My delegation appreciates the commendable work
undertaken by the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law
and Sexual Violence in Conflict. However, we remain
of the View that significantly more needs to be done
by Member States, the United Nations system and the
relevant entities in supporting national efforts by States
to increase women's participation, leadership and
expertise in the rule of law and transitional justice, as
well as in advancing accountability measures for serious
offences committed against women and children.

In conclusion, my delegation welcomes resolution
2122 (2013) and its reinforcement of preceding
resolutions. We also welcome the announcement by
the Secretary-General of a high-level review in 2015
to assess progress at the global, regional and national
levels on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

