Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): Let me join others
in thanking you Sir, for holding this open debate on a
very important issue. I would like to express my
thanks, alongside my colleagues, for all the
presentations that we have heard today, including from
nongovernmental organizations, the United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) and the
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General.

I would also like to say at the outset that we align
ourselves with the statement delivered by the
representative of France on behalf of the European
Union.

The role of women in helping to break the
conflict cycle is multifaceted. Legitimate conflict
resolution and peacebuilding need a fully inclusive
process. More importantly, however, women's full
participation is a question of effectiveness and of
success. Women bring important skills and
perspectives to the substance of negotiations and to
practical peacebuilding efforts on the ground. Peace
processes in which women are fully engaged are more
likely to generate lasting solutions. And yet, often the
constituency of women is neither represented among
the assembled parties during a peace process nor
employed as mediators.

Despite this Council's recognition of the vital
role that women can play in the areas of conflict
prevention and resolution, the record of women's
participation in peace processes since the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) is poor. We heard some
welcome news from the Under-Secretary-General
today about certain appointments of women to senior
positions. But it remains the case that, remarkably,
there are currently no women engaged as Special
Envoys of the Secretary-General. The Council has very
recently reiterated its concern about this, in its debate
last month on mediation (see S/PV.5979). We hope that
the report that was requested during that debate will
address the reasons for this shortfall.

Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf has talked of the challenge
to peacebuilding in Liberia in the following terms:

"My biggest fear is that a small group might
succeed in trying to return us to conflict. It will
always remain a fear until we have done enough
in responding to the needs of the population."

It is clear that mobilizing and enabling all available
human resources within a country emerging from
conflict is key. That means giving women within civil
society and government the room to manoeuvre, giving
them a platform from which to engage and the means
to make their perspectives heard, and ensuring that
they know that they are being listened to. The full
engagement of women on the ground, with the direct
contribution that they make to the stability of a society,
underpins the peacebuilding process. That has been
demonstrated time and again in the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

The international community also needs to better
mobilize its resources, human and financial, in support
of post-conflict States. At the open debate on post-
conflict peacebuilding in May (see S/PV.5895), my
Foreign Secretary identified this urgent challenge.
First, he stressed the need to strengthen the
international community's ability to offer coordinated
and well-managed support to national authorities, in
order to ensure a common strategy to drive integrated
political, security and development activities.
Secondly, he saw a requirement for increased national
and international civilian capacities to plan and
implement stabilization and recovery efforts.

There is a pressing need for capable and talented
personnel to fill those staffing and leadership positions.
Against that backdrop, women appear to be a largely
untapped resource. We hope that this issue will be
addressed in the Secretary-General's report on post-
conflict peacebuilding that was requested at the May
debate, and we look forward to the appearance of that
report.

In sixty years of United Nations peacekeeping,
only seven women have held the post of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. As colleagues
have noted today, in terms of boots on the ground, a
measurement from April this year put the percentage of
women military personnel in United Nations operations
at only 1.9. Yet many militaries, including that of the
United Kingdom and other troop- and police-
contributing countries, from the South as well as from
the North, have a much higher percentage of women
serving and very many more women in senior
command positions. So why not the United Nations?
This is not just a question of resources but also one of
effectiveness. There is a rich seam of evidence to show
that the presence of deployed women peacekeepers
helps to make peacekeeping forces more approachable
to a local population, and that in turn facilitates their
work.

So we believe that we have to think creatively.
Member States have a role to play in ensuring women's
full and effective contribution during peace processes,
in supporting local civil society efforts, in deploying
more women in support of peace support operations
and in identifying and proposing talented women for
senior peacekeeping and peacebuilding positions. In
turn, the United Nations needs to attract the
appropriately qualified women from across the globe
that we know are out there. This must be done for the
credibility of conflict resolution and peacebuilding
processes and to improve the likelihood of their
success.

