Mr. Duque Estrada Meyer (Brazil): Allow me to
congratulate the German presidency on convening this
meeting. I would also like to thank the briefers for their
valuable insights.

Resolution 1325 (2000) was a milestone in the
debate of women and peace and security. On the one
hand, it aims at empowering women and amplifying
their presence both in decision-making processes and in
the field. On the other hand, it seeks to prevent and fight
sexual violence in conflict situations. Brazil therefore
commends the latest report of the Secretary-General
on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2019/280) for
its sober assessment of the latest developments and
measured recommendations. We reiterate our position
that the use of sexual violence as an instrument of
power in the context of an armed conflict is a scourge
that must be completely banned.

It is imperative that the causes and effects of such
violence be dealt with accordingly by the Security
Council. The Security Council should do everything in
its power in every particular situation it is called upon
to examine. In that sense, fighting impunity is almost as
important as preventing direct acts of sexual violence.
Setting an example by investigating, prosecuting and
eventually carrying out the appropriate sentences for
those who are accused of having committed such crimes
in the context of armed conflicts is a powerful deterrent
in preventing another case against another victim from
arising. It also helps to empower women, men, girls and
boys who are affected by sexual violence in conflict
to have confidence that all possible measures will be
taken to repair the situation.

The establishment of the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict 10 years ago provided the
Organization with an important tool kit to promote
advocacy and raise public awareness of the grave
question ofsexual violence in conflict. Brazil commends
Ambassador Pramila Patten on her efforts to keep the
issue high on the international agenda and reiterates its
support for the United Nations Action against Sexual
Violence in Conflict.

Peacekeepers have an important role to play in
the prevention of and focusing attention on situations
of conflict-related sexual violence, as they are in
direct contact with local populations and constitute
perhaps the most visible face of the Organization.
The presence of women peacekeepers on the ground,
including women protection advisors, has proven to be
an effective instrument to combat and prevent conflict-
oriented sexual violence and to encourage survivors to
report allegations of crimes committed.

In that context, the importance of increasing the
presence of women in peace negotiations and on the
ground becomes strikingly clear. As several studies
have shown, the presence of women not only increases
the likelihood ofpeace agreements being enforced for a
longer period of time but also facilitates the treatment
of issues such as conflict-related sexual violence. We
therefore support initiatives that promote a greater
presence of experts on conflict-related sexual violence
in mediation efforts, as well as in the formulation and
implementation of peacekeeping mandates.

We are proud to be able to recall an example of
excellence in the field from our own armed forces.
We would once again like to congratulate Brazilian
Commander Marcia Andrade Braga on receiving,
from the hands of the Secretary-General, the United
Nations Military Gender Advocate of the Year Award
for her work as a gender adviser in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic. In the Commander's
own words, the Award acknowledges how the presence
of women peacekeepers in United Nations missions
allows local women to discuss the issues that affect
their own lives. Commander Braga's actions show us
that preventing conflict-related sexual violence can
benefit from simple actions such as ensuring that the
voices of local women be heard.

There are many reasons to celebrate the work done
over the past two decades, but we must also recognize
the challenges to completely eliminate conflict-related
sexual violence. In that regard, we acknowledge
Germany's new resolution 2467 (2019) on sexual
violence in conflict and welcome the effort to update
and strengthen the international norms on this issue.

