The President: I would now like to offer a
statement in my national capacity.

The United States vigorously supported the
adoption of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000)
and we continue to pursue its goals, particularly
through the Group of Friends of resolution 1325
(2000), so ably energized by the Canadian delegation.
We therefore scheduled today's meeting to take stock
of progress made to see what can be done to continue
to advance implementation and to provide an
operational perspective on implementation. The two
presentations that started off today's discussion
provided us with valuable information, followed by a
useful and thought-provoking debate. I thank
Mr. Guehenno and Ms. Smythe for joining us today.
We heartily commend the efforts of the
Secretariat, the Gender Advisers, Member States, civil
society and others on their insight and
accomplishments. But we clearly have work to do
before we can say that Security Council resolution
1325 (2000) has been fully implemented. I address this
point to everyone - the members of the Security
Council, other Member States, parties to conflict and,
of course, every department and office in the
Secretariat.

Although we called upon the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations to provide today's report, we
have not forgotten about the responsibilities and
contributions of other United Nations departments,
including the Department of Political Affairs, the
Department for Disarmament Affairs, the Office of the
Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on Gender
Issues and Advancement of Women, and the United
Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM),
among others. For our part, we in the Security Council,
where appropriate, include references to gender and
resolution 1325 (2000) in our resolutions, mission
mandates and reports - although there have been
comments throughout the day that perhaps we do not
do that sufficiently.

My Government's support for resolution 1325
(2000) and the principles it embodies are part of a
larger United States commitment to advancing the
rights of women more broadly at home and around the
world. We envision a world in which participation in
all aspects of civic life by both men and women is free
and whole.

With respect to the focus of resolution 1325
(2000), it is literally impossible to understand conflicts
and then frame and implement policy responses to
those conflicts without overcoming the inertia that too
often sidelines, sidetracks and silences half of the
world's population. No approach to peace can succeed
if it does not view men and women as equally
important components of the solution.

The United States, therefore, is placing great
emphasis on the role of women in resolving conflicts
and building peace in countries that desperately need
their vision and full participation. That is why we are
investing heavily in bringing women into the equation
in post-conflict areas where their voices have been
muted. For example, the Office of the Senior
Coordinator for International Women's Issues in the
United States Department of State lists nearly 175
projects dedicated to women's political, economic and
social development in Afghanistan. These include a
$2.5 million grant to build women's resource centres in
14 provinces, as well as an additional $1 million for
educational and training programmes on topics ranging
from employment to human rights education and
political participation skills; grants to support women's
political participation and potential female candidates
in various Afghan provinces, and an advocacy training
programme held in the United States for Afghan
women political activists in preparation for the Loya
Jirga. We look forward to the Council's upcoming trip
to Afghanistan as an opportunity to see first-hand what
kind of progress women in Afghanistan have made and
to continue to urge their involvement in the post-
conflict reconstruction of their country. I am pleased to
have heard Minister of State Muller confirm
Germany's commitment to that aspect of the Council's
visit.

In Iraq, we are promoting women's inclusion in
the building of civil society. The Coalition Provisional
Authority governance team has in fact held dozens of
meetings with Iraqi women on a range of issues,
including constitutional and legal reform, security,
human rights and education and health, among others.
In May, the Authority Administrator, Ambassador
Bremer, personally met with Iraqi women representing
a range of backgrounds to discuss the future of Iraq. He
encouraged them to form a steering committee, and as
a result, on 9 July more than 70 women - experts in
law, education, health, human rights and economics -
participated in a day of workshops entitled "The voice
of women in Iraq". United States Undersecretary of
State for Global Affairs Paula Dobriansky gave the
keynote address and delivered a personal message from
President Bush, who commended the women attending
the conference for "their strong commitment to
creating an Iraq where the benefits of freedom are
available to all citizens". Representatives from the
United Nations and United Nations agencies -
including the United Nations Development Programme,
the United Nations Children's Fund and UNIFEM,
which do such important work on these issues - also
participated and contributed.

There is remarkable work being done at the
United-States-supported Fatima al-Zahra Centre for
Women's Rights in Hillah, where another important
meeting, entitled "The heartland of Iraq's women's
conference", took place just this month. More than 150
women attended from the five south-central provinces,
including women involved in the establishment of
women's centres and organizations in their
communities.
In addition, we are working to strengthen
community-based groups in Iraq to foster citizen
participation in the local policy-making process. In that
regard, our funding for women's organizations has
helped them build their capacity to promote women's
issues at interim advisory councils across Iraq and to
organize workshops for Iraqi women to discuss reforms
in such areas as matrimonial law, the prevention of
violence, abuse against women and equal opportunities
in education and employment. Reinforcing those
efforts, the Coalition Provisional Authority and the
United States Agency for International Development
(USAID) are cooperating with the Baghdad District
Advisory Council women's committee, the Baghdad
Women's Non-Governmental Organization
Coordinating Council and Women for Women
International to conduct on-site assessments for the
establishment of nine women's training and education
centres across the city.

As Ms. Smythe noted, women are among the
most disadvantaged members of the population of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, another strife-torn
nation. To help women in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, we have funded programmes through the
International Human Rights Law Group to support
local organizations attempting to end sexual violence
against women. USAID has also granted $500,000 to
the International Rescue Committee for a programme
to counsel women and help them deal with the
consequences of rape in North and South Kivu.

Those are but a few examples of our
programmatic emphasis on implementing resolution
1325 (2000) in letter and spirit. As a further
manifestation of our resolve, shared by many of the
countries present here today, the United States has
sponsored a draft resolution on women and political
participation during the current session of the General
Assembly. Our draft resolution outlines a series of
practical steps that States and other actors can and
should take to increase women's participation in
politics and decision-making. It also specifically
mentions resolution 1325 (2000) and urges States and
the United Nations to increase women's participation in
conflict resolution and peace processes.

I would also like to draw attention to another
issue that has a significant impact on women,
particularly in conflict situations. We know that each
year hundreds of thousands of women and children fall
victim to the sex trade. As President Bush said to the
General Assembly last month,
"Nearly two centuries after the abolition of the
transatlantic slave trade and more than a century
after slavery was officially ended in its last
strongholds, the trade in human beings for any
purpose must not be allowed to thrive in our
time." (A/58/PV.7, p. 12)

The United States Government has therefore
committed $50 million to support organizations that are
rescuing women and children from exploitation and
giving them the hope of a new life. In this regard, I
would especially like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Guehenno for his update on the current
response of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations to trafficking in women as it affects
peacekeeping operations, and note that we look
forward to the lessons-learned study that he has under
way. We join others in expressing our pleasure at
hearing that the Department intends soon to fill the
Gender Adviser position at Headquarters.

I conclude by saying that, while we have made
progress, there is indeed much more work to be done. I
echo many of the questions that my colleagues have
raised. My Government and my Mission will continue
to support and push for the implementation of the
landmark resolution.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

Because of the press of other business, Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno was unable to be with us
this afternoon. I therefore propose that the presidency
of the Council undertake to comb through some of the
questions that were addressed to him during the course
of this afternoon's discussion, ensure that they reach
his Office and ask for those replies that he can provide
at this particular time. In any event, I am sure that such
questions will serve as a guide to his Office and to
others with regard to the concerns expressed here this
afternoon by Member States.

Since Ms. Smythe has been with us this
afternoon, listening patiently throughout the debate, I
would now like to ask her if she has any additional
comments to make or if she would like to undertake to
reply to any of the questions that have been asked this
afternoon.

