Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to thank you, Sir, for your presence at
this important meeting and to extend to the permanent
mission of Ghana to the United Nations my sincere
thanks for its thorough preparations for this open
debate.

I would also like to extend my thanks to
Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations; Ms. Rachel Mayanja,
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Gender
Issues and Advancement of Women; Ms. Joanne
Sandler, Ad Interim Executive Director of the United
Nations Development Fund for Women; and Ms. Gina
Torry, Coordinator of the NGO Working Group on
Women, Peace and Security, for their briefings today.

The State of Qatar firmly believes that women are
key partners in all efforts towards and stages in the
maintenance and strengthening of international peace
and security. It also believes in the priority of the
ongoing work to integrate women into all peacekeeping
and peacebuilding operations and in the development
of national policies for the consolidation of peace in
areas of armed conflict. The State of Qatar strongly
condemns all sexual and physical abuse of women and
girls in areas of armed conflict. The State of Qatar
stresses the need to provide them with comprehensive
protection and to take firm action against those who
sexually abuse women and girls in areas of armed
conflict, be they parties to the conflict or United
Nations peacekeeping operations personnel, in order to
put an end to impunity.

We have reviewed the report of the Secretary-
General on the implementation of the United Nations
System-wide Action Plan for the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) for the years
2005-2007. In that regard, we commend the efforts and
activities carried out by all the entities of the United
Nations, which have made significant progress in many
areas of the Plan. It is reassuring to note that the
review process indicates an increase in the political
commitment to gender equality, the empowerment of
women in peace processes, and the strengthening of
capacity-building, especially in the area of women's
full participation in all stages of peace processes,
including in negotiating and implementing peace
agreements and in the development of new
mechanisms for monitoring and reporting on the status
of women and their contributions to peace processes.

With regard to addressing all forms of violence
against women and children in armed conflict,
including sexual violence, and to addressing the issue
of impunity from prosecution for such crimes, we
commend the efforts of United Nations entities in
carrying out the United Nations zero-tolerance policy
on sexual exploitation and abuse committed by their
personnel; in providing support to Member States in
their efforts to align their national legal systems with
the relevant international standards; and in cooperating
in the area of national capacity-building in the fight
against those crimes and against impunity. We also
commend the Governments concerned for their
cooperation, which is essential for the success of any
plan intended to put an end to this phenomenon.

Despite the progress that has been made, many
institutional and organizational challenges must still be
addressed to achieve universal implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). The Governments of post-
conflict countries and countries affected by conflict
bear the primary responsibility for the implementation
of that resolution. While such countries have
established national mechanisms for the advancement
of women, they need financial and technical support to
ensure active participation by women in the
formulation of policies and programmes relating to the
establishment and consolidation of peace and security.
In that respect, the Secretary-General has pointed out
in his report the inadequate funding of gender-related
projects in peace processes and post-conflict
peacebuilding.
Overcoming these challenges does not require the
creation of new mechanisms and bodies or the
submission of new reports. That would entail a waste
of money and effort that could be better spent to
improve and strengthen existing mechanisms. With
regard to monitoring and follow-up, the Secretary-
General should include in his periodic reports to the
Security Council on various of armed conflicts an
assessment of progress made in mainstreaming the
gender perspective in all peacekeeping and
peacebuilding missions and data on all forms of
violence against women and children, including killing
and maiming and sexual violence committed by the
parties to the conflict and by peacekeeping personnel.
Those reports must also include best practices and
lessons learned in the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000).

Turning to national implementation, the
successful implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
requires enhancing the capacity of the United Nations
peace support, humanitarian and post-conflict
reconstruction operations to backstop the efforts of
Member States in strengthening their national
capacities, in line with national objectives and the
relevant international standards, to achieve gender
equality, the empowerment of women in the area of
peace and security, success in the fight against all
forms of violence, especially violence against women
and children, and the eradication of the culture of
impunity. Success also requires paying special
attention to countries emerging from conflict, which
need financial and technical support in the preparation
of national plans of action to implement resolution
1325 (2000). We commend the effort to take that
objective into account in the formulation of the United
Nations System-wide Plan of Action for
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) for the
period 2008-2009. We also stress the importance of
continued financial and technical support, the lack of
which could make the objective of achieving the global
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) elusive. We
will support the draft presidential statement that is
before the Security Council, which enjoys consensus.

