The Secretary-General: I thank you, Sir, for this
opportunity to brief the Council on the important steps
being taken and the measures being put in place to end
the exploitation and abuse of vulnerable people by the
United Nations personnel sent to protect them.

For many people caught up in poverty and conflict
around the world, the United Nations represents their
final hope for a better future. When sexual exploitation
and abuse are perpetrated against these individuals
by the United Nations personnel authorized to protect
them, it further victimizes and violates them and
inflicts untold harm on already fragile communities. It
undermines the trust between the United Nations and its
beneficiaries, betrays the values and principles that the
United Nations purports to advance, and tarnishes the
credibility of United Nations peacekeeping operations
and the United Nations as a whole. The impact is
not limited to the location of the abuse, but reflects
on the efforts of tens of thousands of peacekeepers
and civilian staff working tirelessly to save lives and
protect people around the world in difficult and often
dangerous conditions.

In June 2015, I, like the Council, was deeply
dismayed by allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse
of children by foreign military forces in the Central
African Republic and the United Nations response to
those allegations. In that context, I appointed a high-
level external independent review panel on sexual
exploitation and abuse by international peacekeeping
forces in the Central African Republic. The panel was
led by Justice Marie Deschamps, with two other eminent
persons. In mid-December 2015, the Panel submitted its
report, which depicted a United Nations that uncovered
the abuses but failed to respond meaningfully and with
the speed, care or sensitivity required.

A number of the panel's recommendations are
already being implemented, while those that have
far-reaching implications or that require action by
legislative bodies, Member States and partners are
being considered. Given the importance of addressing
the systemic weaknesses that the panel's report exposes,
I have appointed a Special Coordinator, Ms. Jane
Holl Lute. Ms. Lute will support me in reviewing
and advancing the implementation of the panel's
recommendations and in strengthening our response to
such abuse.

Let me turn to my latest annual report to the General
Assembly on special measures on protection from sexual
exploitation and abuse (A/70/729). The report shows an
increase in the number of new allegations in 2015, with
a total of 99 for the United Nations system. Sixty-nine
of those allegations were lodged against United Nations
personnel serving in peace operations. That reflects
an increase in allegations within United Nations
peacekeeping operations, with multiple allegations
against the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) and increases in allegations from the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali. Further allegations have continued to
come to light this year.

In the face of that disturbing trend across a number
of our peacekeeping operations, it is imperative that
our collective response be more effective. My report
proposes strong new initiatives in three key areas: first,
ending impunity; secondly, helping and supporting
victims; and thirdly, strengthening accountability,
including through action by Member States.

First and foremost, to end impunity, greater
transparency is critical. This year for the first time,
my report names the countries of alleged perpetrators.
Country-specific information is publicly available on
the website of the Conduct and Discipline Unit of the
Department of Field Support. I intend to expand that
information to cover all outstanding allegations of
sexual exploitation and abuse, including the status of
referrals for criminal accountability. That will hold
accountable and enable the United Nations and Member
States to address every allegation of sexual exploitation
or abuse in a thorough and timely manner through
proper investigation and just punishment.

Secondly, the victims, many of whom are
children, need our protection and support. We are
finalizing the establishment of a trust fund that will
provide them with the medical, psychosocial and legal
services that they need. I have asked Member States
to approve the transfer to the trust fund of payments
that will be withheld in substantiated cases of sexual
exploitation and abuse. I encourage Member States to
make voluntary contributions to the fund. I have also
urged all troop- and police-contributing countries to
designate paternity focal points. We will follow up
vigorously to ensure that children who are born as a
result of these terrible abuses receive the support they
need. Member States must also consider how they will
respond to claims from victims who pursue legal action
to seek redress.

Thirdly, accountability demands the conduct
of solid investigations that can withstand judicial
scrutiny in disciplinary and criminal proceedings.
That will require developing uniformly high standards
of investigation. It will entail building the capacities
of immediate response teams to gather and preserve
evidence. All investigations should be concluded
within six months at most, with the most urgent cases
concluded within three months. I urge Member States
to adopt this standard.

I also urge Member States to cooperate with the
Office of Internal Oversight Services in the conduct of
investigations. I am strongly committed to monitoring
accountability for violations. Where appropriate, that
will include taking action up to and including the
repatriation of commanders or of whole contingents.
We have already put that into practice in repatriating
troops serving in the Central African Republic, owing
to alleged sexual exploitation and abuse. When I
requested the resignation of my Special Representative
for MINUSCA in August 2015, I further signalled that
the Organization would hold itself accountable for such
violations. I will also consider ending the deployment
of uniformed personnel from specific Member States if
there is prima facie evidence of widespread or systemic
exploitation and abuse.
Accountability demands that Member States live
up to their responsibility to bring to justice those
who have committed crimes while serving with the
United Nations. We expect them to impose sanctions
commensurate with the seriousness of the offence. I
have asked Member States to establish on-site court
martial proceedings and to ensure that domestic
legislation applies to sex crimes committed by their
nationals while they are serving within United Nations
peace operations. I have also called for the collection of
samples of the DNA of alleged offenders.

We also continue to emphasize prevention.
Significantly, this year for the first time, we will be
able to vet all uniformed personnel for previous
allegations of misconduct while in the service of the
United Nations. We are increasing our support for
predeployment training by Member States. We will
also consider imposing new rules to curtail the social
activities of peacekeeping contingents, including
by designating certain geographical areas as out-of-
bounds.

(spoke in French)

Those efforts constitute an important step forward
towards ending such crimes and the terrible suffering
they inflict on their victims. We can ensure the
implementation of the principle of accountability, and
in particular criminal accountability, only if the troop-
and police-contributing countries quickly and carefully
investigate such allegations and if the responsible
parties are duly punished. The United Nations is firmly
determined to work with Member States to ensure
that national judiciary proceedings make it possible to
implement the principle of accountability and to fight
impunity.

(spoke in English)

This is a global issue. It is not confined to any
one region, mission or nation. I am determined that
the United Nations must lead by example. Sexual
exploitation and abuse by United Nations personnel
demand nothing less than decisive and bold action.
I am committed to working with Member States to
confront that criminal conduct and to justify the trust
of the people we serve to ensure that this Organization
remains a beacon of hope for the most vulnerable.

