Mr. Mansour (Palestine): We thank France for
organizing this important meeting, and extend our
appreciation to the Chef de Cabinet of the Secretary-
General, the Executive Director of UN-Women, the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security,
and the Secretary-General of the International
Organization of la Francophonie for their efforts and
important briefings.

The issue before us is of relevance not only to
half of the planet but to everyone, given the role and
contribution of women in the area of peace and security,
and the untapped potential that could be unleashed by
mainstreaming their participation. Much has happened
since the adoption by consensus of resolution 1325
(2000), and yet we remain far from the goal of full
and equal participation, including in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts and in peacebuilding, and
from ensuring the protection and empowerment of
women. Gender equality and non-discrimination
remain prerequisites for the fulfilment of the purposes
and principles of the Organization, and all of our lofty,
collective commitments, including the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.

The State of Palestine welcomes the Secretary-
General's report (S/2017/861) and his commitment
to implementing the women and peace and security
agenda, including by placing gender at the centre of
his prevention platform and surge in diplomacy. We
appreciate all efforts of the United Nations in that
regard, including by UN-Women, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and the United Nations Development Programme,
notably in the area of human rights, capacity-building,
employment and the rule of law. We urge United Nations
bodies, notably those operating in Palestine, including
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
to intensify their engagement and collaboration with
women's organizations.

I wish to highlight some of Palestine's own

important efforts in that regard. The Palestinian women's
movement is one of the oldest and strongest in and
beyond the region, with institutional and representative
structures established as early as the nineteenth century.
Within the Palestinian Liberation Organization (PLO),
the General Union ofPalestinian Women was among the
first unions to be established. A coordination structure
linking various women's groups within PLO political
parties and other organizations was also established as
the Women's Affairs Technical Committee, following
the 1991 Madrid Peace Conference. Since then, there
have been many other achievements, including the
2012 inauguration by Palestine of a high-level national
committee for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), which was led by the Ministry of Women's
Affairs in partnership with relevant Ministries and
non-governmental organizations.

In 2016, the State of Palestine was among the
68 countries and entities that adopted a national
action plan on women and peace and security. The
2017-2019 action plan, adopted by the Government and
civil society organizations, identifies three primary
objectives: first, ensuring the protection of women
and girls both domestically and in the face of the
Israeli occupation; secondly, ensuring accountability
through national and international mechanisms, with
a particular focus on crimes and violations committed
by the occupation; and, thirdly, furthering women's
political participation in decision-making at the
national and international levels. The State of Palestine
also joined core international humanitarian law and
human rights instruments, including the Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women, without reservations. Women's participation
and empowerment are also important and cross-cutting
objectives in the context of the national policy agenda
for the period from 2017 to 2022.

We are, however, conscious that, despite all those
efforts, much more work remains to be done. Only in
2009 was a women elected to the highest executive
body of the PLO. Quotas are still decisive in allowing
women's election to Parliament and local councils.
Although women's organizations were among the
strongest advocates of national reconciliation, they
have been unfairly absent from reconciliation talks.
The relevant, applicable legislative framework in
Palestine is also outdated and must be revised to
ensure consistency with Palestine's international
commitments and obligations so as to provide women
the protection and rights to which they are entitled and
the opportunities they deserve.

The Palestinian women's movement, since its
establishment over a century ago, has pursued the
struggle on two fronts: the struggle for the independence
of Palestine and the struggle for women's rights and
empowerment. It is a dual struggle that the movement
continues to pursue to this day. The Israeli occupation
remains the main source of violations of our women's
rights, their vulnerability and violence against their
persons. We have repeatedly called for the protection of
the Palestinian people, especially women and children.
We have also called for accountability - a key element
of resolution 1325 (2000), which was the first of its
kind to address the disproportionate and unique impact
of armed conflict on women, as the only way to end
violations and crimes.

While Palestine stands ready to do its part to
advance women's rights and the role of women in the
area of peace and security, it is clear that the enjoyment
of those rights in our country requires ending the
Israeli occupation. We will therefore continue to work
towards an end to the occupation and true progress on
the path to independence, justice and peace with the
equal and full involvement of women leading to an
independent State of Palestine, ensuring human rights
for all its citizens without discrimination.

