Mr. Perovic' (Montenegro): Montenegro is pleased
to contribute to this important open debate and warmly
thanks Spain for this initiative and for providing a
platform for our deliberations. I also warmly thank
today's briefers for their valuable contributions.

Montenegro aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union.

This year marks the fifteenth anniversary of
landmark resolution 1325 (2000). Some progress has
been achieved over the past 15 years in the global
efforts to protect women from violence and to promote
the role of women in the prevention and resolution
of conflict, and in the construction of stable and just
societies. Today we need to consider which practical
steps should be taken in order to translate into reality
our commitments on this vital agenda.

Montenegro welcomes the Secretary-General's
report (S/2015/716), which demonstrates that attention to
the issue ofwomen and peace and security is increasing
across the board. We also welcome today's resolution
2242 (2015), which confirms the determination of
States to make further efforts in the implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda.

The issue of women and peace and security poses a
challenging task. Armed conflicts often affect women
and children more negatively than they do men. They
lose access to basic services and to education and
economic opportunities, and, increasingly, they are
subjected to sexual violence. The harsh reality is that,
in many conflict areas today, it is more dangerous to be
a woman than a soldier.

Women's voices are distinctively underrepresented
on issues that concern them, including armed conflicts
as one of the most critical challenges that they are facing
today. Because women do not get a chance to make their
views known, the needs, interests and views of half of
the world's population are not taken into account.

The potential of women to facilitate the process
of conflict resolution and peacebuilding is often
unrealized, thus undermining the effectiveness and
sustainability of peace initiatives. Experience shows
that female experts can provide additional lines of
communication to local communities that are not
open to male soldiers. They help in building trust and
confidence, and they can draw attention to the specific
needs of women and girls, including for basic services
and health and education.

We should regard women as assets, not victims. It is
crucial to involve women in peacebuilding processes as
stakeholders and decision-makers. Women must be part
of the process; that will allow them to gain ownership
of the policies that affect them and all of us.

Changing deeply rooted cultural beliefs is a
difficult task. It takes constant advocacy, education
and awareness-raising, and should be coupled with the
application of monitoring systems that force people
and institutions to be aware of their own biases against
women in leadership. We should renew our efforts to
ensure that in every country and every community,
girls and women are valued equally with boys and men.
They should be given the same opportunities to grow
and learn, participate and be protected from violence.

Montenegro strongly believes that women
must be leaders and key participants in political
decision-making and in the prevention and resolution of
and recovery from conflict. Promoting gender equality
and tackling violence against women, both at home
and internationally, is a priority of the Montenegrin
Government. We believe that where women live free
of violence, have equal access to education, health care
and political and economic opportunities, societies are
healthier, more prosperous and more peaceful. This is
our goal.

We must translate our collective commitments
into action, which can result in safer environments for
women and girls everywhere. Montenegro welcomes
the sustained positive trend shown in the report of the
Secretary-General, and we are committed to working
with the United Nations system, partners and other
countries to implement a reformed women and peace
and security agenda and to further improve this trend.

