Mr. Makharoblishvili (Georgia): First of all,
Georgia fully associates itself with the statement made
by the observer of European Union. Nevertheless,
I would like to add some comments in my national
capacity and contribute to these fruitful discussions by
sharing our country's experience in assisting women to
promote their fundamental rights and freedoms.

The Government of Georgia is strongly committed
to the protection of human rights, democracy and the
rule of law. Therefore, ensuring women's liberties
represents one of our priorities. The Government seeks
to strengthen United Nations coordination mechanisms
to ensure our fruitful engagement in overcoming
existing challenges.
At the international level, the Government of
Georgia fully supports the ongoing efforts of the
international community to promote the role of women
in different spheres. Georgia has become a sponsor of
the relevant resolutions presented within the General
Assembly and the Human Rights Council.

As the Council is aware, in 1994 Georgia joined
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women, without any
reservations. Apart from that, Georgia has acceded to
multilateral treaties, among them the 1951 Convention
concerning Equal Remuneration for Men and Women
Workers for Work of Equal Value and the Convention
on the Political Rights of Women.

To address the rights of women, Georgia has
dynamically carried out complex measures in various
areas, including legislation and relevant actions as
well as implementing all initiatives with the active
participation of civil society.

On 27 December 2011, the Parliament of Georgia
approved the 2012-2015 Georgia national action plan
on the implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions on women and peace and security - with
important technical assistance from UN Women. The
national action plan is built on four pillars: increasing
the participation of women in peace processes and
the security sector; preventing all forms of violence
against women; protecting women against all kinds
of threats and safeguarding their physical, mental
and economic security; and addressing the specific
needs of women during and after conflict periods. The
national action plan is the first such initiative in the
South Caucasus region to ensure the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). In total, numerous consultative
meetings were held, involving approximately 102
organizations - representing internally displaced
persons and conflict-affected women - in the
preparation process of the national action plan. That
dialogue is continuing to date in the context of the
plan's implementation phase.

While discussing the successful developments
in advancing women's rights and freedoms, I
would like to emphasize the fruitful cooperation
that the Government enjoys with UN Women. We
appreciate its support in facilitating consultations and
information-sharing meetings among representatives
of Georgian women's non-governmental organizations
and women participants of the Geneva international
discussions. The purpose of the meetings was to inform
civil society actors, especially women's organizations,
on frameworks of peace processes aimed at increasing
knowledge and capacity towards advocating for the
inclusion ofgender-specific concerns related to conflict
in the relevant forums.

Women's role in Georgia, including the political
and military fields, has significantly grown. Women
represent 5.4 per cent of the armed forces and 50 per
cent ofthe civilian personnel ofthe Ministry ofDefense,
among whom 20 per cent hold decision-making
positions. Women take part in the Georgian contingent
of the International Security Assistance Force in
Afghanistan. This is the first year that female students
have attended the main education programme of
Georgia's national defence academy.

Regular training programmes are conducted to
enhance the skills and capacities of women police
officers. After the adoption of the national action
plan, female police officers from various regions
of Georgia participated in training programmes to
enhance the skills and role of female officers, with the
aim of becoming leaders and mentors in Georgian law
enforcement. In addition, again in close collaboration
with UN Women, the Ministry of Internal Affairs is
a piloting specialized police unit to deal with gender-
based violence in several municipalities of the country.

In June 2013, the Georgia Parliament adopted
amendments to the labour code to introduce regulations
that are more liberal with respect to women's
employment. Currently, Georgia's Ministry of Justice
has also initiated the drafting of a non-discrimination
law that will foresee the establishment of mechanisms
to ensure the protection of citizens from all forms
of discrimination, including those based on gender
identity and sexual orientation.

While the Government of Georgia spares no effort
in ensuring women's liberties in the country and to
strengthen women's role in areas related to security and
peacebuilding, we face major challenges in the occupied
regions of Georgia. Concomitant to the installation of
barbed wire fences along the occupation line of the
Abkhazia and Tskhinvali regions, heavy restrictions on
freedom of movement have been imposed, extending
even to the most vulnerable populations, namely, those
in need of urgent medical assistance, and expectant
mothers. Unfortunately, such restrictions have even
led to casualties, when three women died en route to
hospital after having been refused passage through the
occupation line.

Despite numerous calls by the international
community, up to a half million internally displaced
persons and refugees, among them several hundred
thousand women, continue to be deprived of their
fundamental right to a safe and dignified return. We
remain hopeful that the international community will
adequately react to the illegal activities in the occupied
regions of Georgia and the ongoing violations of human
rights.

In conclusion, I would like to, once again,
reiterate the firm commitment of my Government to
strengthening cooperation with the relevant United
Nations agencies in order to defend the interests of
women who are suffering from gender bias, Violence
and other inhuman or degrading treatment.

