Mr. Kickert (Austria): We thank South Africa for
convening this open debate on the full and effective
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda, which we also View as the starting point for
the run-up to the twentieth anniversary of the landmark
resolution 1325 (2000) next October.

Austria aligns itself with the statements delivered
by the observer of the European Union and by the
representative of Canada, on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women and Peace and Security.

Austria has been a vocal supporter of the women
and peace and security agenda ever since the adoption
ofresolution 1325 (2000). We are constantly working for
the promotion and realization of the full and effective
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda. We are doing so at the national level, through
international cooperation with partner countries and
civil society, as well as through our support for the
United Nations, notably UN-Women.

We welcome the Secretary-General's report
(S/2019/800) and its recommendations. We note
with concern that agreed commitments have not
been matched by action. Let me refer to just a few
examples: the meaningful participation of women in
peace negotiation processes is still a distant reality in
many conflict regions; violence against women, and
in particular women human rights defenders, is on the
rise; and sexual and gender-based violence continues to
be used by conflict parties as a weapon of war.

We thank Ms. Lina Ekomo and Ms. Alaa Salah
for their truly moving and impressive testimonies this
morning. We applaud their courage and that of all
women fighting for peace every day. We hear their call
and that of the Secretary-General telling us to focus on
the full implementation of all aspects of the women and
peace and security agenda.

Let me briefly underline three components
of Austria's engagement in the full and effective
implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda.

First, as financial resources often fall short of
political commitments and funds often fail to reach
the most vulnerable, including women's organizations
working to prevent Violent conflict and build peace,
we are a proud donor and supporter of the Women's
Peace and Humanitarian Fund to support local
women's networks and engage in conflict prevention
and peacebuilding, inter alia in Iraq and, more recently,
in Uganda.

Secondly, Austria deems the role of civil society to
be paramount to the full implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda, both as actors on the
ground and as monitors of the overall implementation
of the agenda in the Security Council. In that regard,
as part of a series of events leading up to the twentieth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), Austria is proud
to be hosting a global civil society forum on women and
peace and security in Vienna in early 2020.

Lastly, Austria is endeavouring to increase the
number of Austrian uniformed women in peace
operations, and we will also foster a gender perspective
among all deployed personnel. We have been deploying
gender advisers to the peace operations of regional
organizations, including the European Union, NATO
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, as well as other United
Nations peacekeeping operations. Austria will continue
to deploy qualified experts in this important domain in
the future.

More than ever, it is our conviction that women are
agents of change for peace and security. As we look
forward to the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000), let us actively follow up on our pledges in order
to further advance the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda through a collective effort.

