Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I thank the French
presidency for convening this open debate. I also
thank the briefers for their critical contributions
and testimonies.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the European Union.

Primitive yet effective, the use of rape as a tool of
war is raging in the twenty-first century. Women and
girls sold as cattle in slave markets are beaten, killed
or burned to death simply for resisting their abusers.
Children born of rape, hated and shunned by their
own peers, are living reminders to their mothers of the
horrific ordeal they have been through. Men and boys
are sexually abused to break them down and to humiliate
their communities. As crises rage, human traffickers
are expanding their hunting grounds, preying upon the
displaced, the refugees and the most vulnerable.

Yet, according to all statistics, sexual crimes are
rarely reported, be it for fear of stigmatization or
rejection, insecurity, especially if the rapists hold
positions of power, or simply because there is no one
around to report to. Even in the Council, addressing
rape as a tool of war can be difficult. Suffice it to
remember the case of Tabith in the Sudan, where some
delegations, instead of putting women's safety and
dignity first, chose to doubt that abuse took place at all.

We cannot allow indifference to set in, because
indifference is the mother of impunity. Even the best of
tools at our disposal will not work if women continue
to be bystanders of peace negotiations, peacebuilding
and post-conflict reconstruction. Making a difference
requires the full integration and mainstreaming of the
gender perspective into the work of the Council and the
United Nations, with coherent, consistent and credible
actions at all levels. Inter alia, a gender perspective is
also key to all efforts to counter terrorism and violent
extremist. We are on the right track, but the road ahead
remains much longer than the one we have covered.

With regard to human trafficking, it does not
take place in isolation. The same routes, the same
criminal networks and the same ploys are used by the
traffickers, be it for arms, drugs or human beings. To
curb human trafficking, comprehensive efforts are
required to tackle cross-border crime and terrorist
networks, including through enhanced regional and
subregional cooperation.

Presidential statement S/PRST/2015/25 spells out
a whole range of measures aimed at tackling human
trafficking, but as our Irish colleague has said, norms
are useless without actions. Therefore, I believe that
the Council, instead of iterating what needs to be done,
should look more deeply into what is being done, how
it is being done, whether it works, whether it does not
work on the ground and how to make it work. Such an
implementation-focused, impact-oriented debate would
have specific added value.

Victims cannot wait a lifetime to obtainjustice. As
noted in the Secretary-General's report (S/2015/361),
individual countries are taking steps to pursue
accountability - small ones compared to the scope of
the problem, yet important steps and a good start. We
appreciate the work done by the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and the Team of Experts on the
Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, which
continues to assist countries in strengthening their
capacity to address conflict-related sexual violence and
to ensure the protection of victims and witnesses.

However, most conflict-affected countries, as
many have said, lack the adequate national capacity
and expertise to prevent, investigate and prosecute
sexual violence and human trafficking. Where actions
at the national level are not yet possible, international
justice mechanisms, including the International
Criminal Court, should step in. The historic trial of
Bosco Ntaganda and the Court's judgment issued in
the case of Jean-Pierre Bemba are encouraging signs
for accountability.

We call on the Council to make better use of its
sanctions tools to seek accountability as well. Even
though rape is included in the listing criteria of many
sanctions regimes, the actual listings on that basis
are few and far between. The lengthy procedure of
sanctioning the Lord's Resistance Army, for example,
which is on Secretary-General's list, is just one of
the many reminders that a more vigorous approach is
needed. Listing criteria should also be further refined
to include human trafficking for sexual enslavement.

Because ofthe very nature ofsexual abuse, speaking
out is especially difficult, even in societies where
women are fully empowered. It is hard to imagine doing
so in situations of conflict and serial discrimination of
women and girls. But some do, such as Nadia Murad,
a Yazidi survivor of sexual enslavement. Her courage
and fortitude should be an example for many victims
seeking to break out of the stigma and shame. To help
them do so, there is a dire need for public, religious and
community leaders to personally engage to help shift
the stigma from the victims to the perpetrators of those
heinous crimes. The good practices that exist in the field,
such as the work of Organization of Women's Freedom
in Iraq and many others providing shelter to trafficking
victims and promoting their destigmatization, need to
be supported and shared.

United Nations country teams and peace operations
on the ground can be instrumental in helping to
overcome the damaging stereotypes through specific
education and advocacy programmes, and they can
assist in creating the necessary victim support, care
and reparations mechanisms to offer sexual violence
and trafficking victims a new chance at life.

