Ms. Ziade (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I wish at
the outset to thank you, Sir, for having convened this
meeting. We take this opportunity to welcome
Ms. Margot Wallstrom, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and
to thank her for her comprehensive briefing on the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
for having indicated the priority areas for action. We
look forward to continued cooperation with her.

We also welcome Ms. Rachel Mayanja, Special
Adviser of the Secretary-General on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women, and commend her for her
briefing. Moreover, we commend the General
Assembly for its efforts towards the establishment of
the Secretariat's composite entity on gender issues.

There is no doubt that resolution 1325 (2000) and
subsequent resolutions on women, including
resolutions 1888 (2009) and 1889 (2009), provide a
robust framework for protecting women in conflict
situations and for ensuring that women's voices are
heard during the peaceful settlement of disputes and in
peacebuilding. But words are being translated into
action at a slow pace. We agree with Ms. Wallstrom
that there remains a wide gap between the legal
framework, which has reached an advanced stage, and
the practical impact of those laws on women in conflict
situations. We support her efforts to close that gap.

In that regard, we should view resolutions 1888
(2009) and 1889 (2009) in a comprehensive, integrated
manner. Women cannot be empowered when they are
under the threat of physical or psychological violence.
Hence, combating sexual violence must be part of
efforts to involve women in all stages of peacemaking
and peacebuilding. Today, the changing nature of
conflict and the increased number of civil wars make
women and girls more frequent targets. Here, I recall
what Ms. Wallstrom said about sexual violence being a
feature of the conflict in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo; that is true of most modern-day conflicts.
10-33085
When women are victims of sexual violence, they
suffer physical and psychological trauma, as well as
social isolation. Sexual violence leads to the collapse
of families and communities, and it erodes women's
ability to contribute to peace and security. In most
cases, the perpetrators of these crimes enjoy impunity,
thus encouraging the commission of more such crimes.
Countries in conflict situations and those emerging
from conflict should be supported in their efforts to
strengthen their legal and security institutions to enable
them to prosecute the perpetrators of these crimes and
provide justice for victims. Here, I note that resolution
1888 (2009) calls for the establishment of a team of
experts to, with the consent of the host Governments
concerned, assist national authorities to strengthen the
rule of law. We welcome the constructive role that such
a team can play in building the capacity of countries in
conflict situations and of those emerging from conflict,
enabling them to bring to justice the perpetrators of
crimes of sexual violence.

We look forward to the proposals to be submitted
by the Secretary-General in a forthcoming report with
respect to monitoring acts of sexual violence. I stress
the importance of States providing assistance
programmes for victims of sexual violence.

We commend the Secretary-General for his
efforts to develop a set of indicators, as outlined in his
recent report (S/2010/173), pursuant to resolution 1889
(2009). We look forward to agreement on a set of
indicators on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), with emphasis on both quantitative and
qualitative dimensions. The indicators must take
account of the specific characteristics of each
community and the nature and root causes of each
conflict. In that way, we can monitor the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), guide
reform efforts and implement programmes to protect
women and enhance their role in the maintenance of
peace and security.

Despite the international community's increased
awareness that the maintenance of peace and security
requires measures to ensure women's needs and
participation in peace negotiations, the level of such
participation remains low. This leads to the
marginalization of half of society from the process of
designing a peacebuilding framework in post-conflict
States. That is the half that pays the true price of war,
in pain and silence. We must guarantee the
participation of women at all stages of the peace
process to ensure that peace agreements and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes include elements focusing specifically on
women and girls.

In parallel, we must improve the social and
economic status of women, either through the
provisions of peace agreements or through practical
measures on the ground. These would include
promoting women's education as a basis for
empowering women; providing health care services
and professional and vocational training; creating
income-generating activities; and ensuring the right to
land and property ownership. In addition to national
efforts, there should be intensified action by United
Nations entities and all other international and regional
organizations, with a view to ensuring the participation
of women in peacebuilding and the maintenance of
peace.

In conclusion, we thank the Secretary-General for
acting to implement the relevant resolutions and we
hail the efforts of his Special Representative. We
support the draft presidential statement that the
Council will endorse today.

