Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, we would like to thank the Permanent
Representative and delegation of India for having held
today's debate, which was originally organized by the
Guatemalan presidency of the Council in October. We
also wish to thank the speakers who took the floor today.
Special appreciation goes to Ms. Michelle Bachelet,
Executive Director of UN-Women, for her sterling work
for equality for women.

Each anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) gives us an opportunity to reaffirm our
commitment to its objectives and at the same time to
focus on some of the many dimensions it covers. Today
we have the opportunity to reflect on the central role
of civil society, especially women's organizations, in
the drafting and subsequent implementation of the
normative framework launched by the Council in the
year 2000. We wish to recognize the work undertaken
by the civil society Working Group on Women, Peace
and Security, which at the start of this year began
specifically to push Council action in the matter. The
encouragement and guidance of the Working Group
were decisive for the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), and that continues to be the case for its effective
implementation.

Allow me, as Ambassador of my country, to recall
that Argentina has been one of the countries promoting
resolution 1325 (2000). In my case, as an activist for
human rights and the equality of women, I wish to recall
that the resolution was a new "enough!" in women's fight
for international peace and security, the prevention and
eradication of all forms of violence against women, the
elimination of impunity, and progress towards a real
and legal equality between men and women.

It was this Organization that took on the calls by and
the initiative of millions of women around the world in
order to say "enough!" to a double situation of injustice
and discrimination against women that consisted of, on
the one hand, silencing the voices of the victims and,
on the other hand, hiding the faces of women and girls
as rights holders and protagonists of social, economic
and cultural changes that could promote, protect and
ensure international peace and security and contribute
to mediation processes and capacity-building for a real
and lasting peace.

Twelve years after the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), the decisive contributions from women's
movements and organizations in conflict prevention,
and the commitment of organizations focusing on the
human rights of women and girls to make a reality of the
responsibility to protect - those are no longer matters
of opinion. The international community today shares
the certainty that the inclusion and incorporation of
women and their organizations before, during and after
conflicts is not merely ethically necessary, but is also
socially just and politically efficacious.

The best way that we have found to respond
to the theme of this debate is to refer briefly to the
National Action Plan of the Argentine Republic for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), which is
in its final phase of adoption. It will be adopted by a
presidential decree once the final review phase, is under
way right now, has been completed. The Plan is the
result of efforts by an interministerial working group in
which nine ministries participated. From the beginning,
women's organizations, feminist organizations and
human rights organizations in our country have
provided momentum and participated actively. Just to
note some examples, objective 2 of the Plan - on an
increase in political participation of women in peace
negotiation processes, in conflict management and
in decision-making - provides for holding periodic
public debates with women's organizations, feminist
organizations, human rights organizations and other
civil society organizations that incorporate gender
perspectives, in order to broaden the participation of
women and the sharing of experiences.

In addition, the actions taken to comply with
objective 3 - on the inclusion of the gender
perspective in all peacebuilding and humanitarian
assistance missions - include the promotion of joint
work by national institutions with expertise in the area
of women's equality and civil society, with particular
emphasis on the situation of women in armed conflict,
post-conflict situations and socio-natural disasters.

Finally, in the section of the National Plan that
focuses on monitoring and follow-up, it is expressly
indicated that the Plan is the result of a participatory
process launched by the Ministry for Foreign Affairs,
with the support of the Defence Ministry and with
the participation of civil society organizations. To
succeed, it requires coordination among different areas
of the Argentine State and the cooperation of other
countries in the region, civil society organizations and
international organizations.

During its 1999-2000 term as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council, Argentina maintained
an active participation in the negotiations and
consultations undertaken with women's organizations
and civil society organizations focusing on gender
issues that culminated in the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000). The same spirit and the same criteria will
guide the implementation of our Action Plan and the
participation of Argentina in the Security Council in
2013 and 2014. That is a responsibility with which we
were honoured by the General Assembly on 18 October.

We wish to offer the Council our full willingness
to contribute to the universalization of resolution 1325
(2000) and its effective implementation.

