Mr. Sow (Guinea) (spoke in French): On behalf
of my delegation, I would like to warmly congratulate
you, Mr. President, for the vigour, effectiveness and
dedication that you have shown at the head of the
Security Council.

The Republic of Guinea is pleased once again to
contribute to the collective and multilateral thinking on
the implementation of the System-wide Action Plan for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
Identifying and assessing progress made in that area in
terms of follow-up and empowerment, both nationally
and internationally, are at the heart of our concerns.

I must begin by emphasizing that it is at the
initiative of the First Lady, the president of the
foundation bearing her name, Maman Henriette Conte,
that for the first time a national educational campaign
was launched on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) in Guinea. In fact, on 26 October 2006, the First
Lady of the Republic, supported by the Office of the
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Gender
Issues and Advancement of Women, whom I welcome
here, decided to jointly organize, with the Minister for
Social Affairs and the Promotion of Women and
Children of Guinea, a commemorative day to celebrate,
in Conakry, the sixth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) by the Council.

The ceremony had many participants, including
members of Government, representatives of national
institutions, the Chief of Staff of the army, members of
the diplomatic consular corps, representatives of
international institutions, non-governmental
organizations and civil society. The themes presented
and conveyed by public and private media were
focused on the content of resolution 1325 (2000) and
on the impact of armed conflict on women and girls -
women, as Victims of conflict and parties who prevent
and manage conflict, and in their capacity as
protagonists for peacebuilding in Guinea and in the
region.

The same day, meetings to sensitize and
familiarize political, administrative and religious
authorities, the public and concerned partners on issues
surrounding the resolution were organized in the five
communities of the capital and in the national
languages. That political commitment for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) stems from
the high degree of responsibility that has always been
shown by Guinean women.

Their responsibility was illustrated once again
during the tragic events that took place in Guinea in
January and February 2007, after the general strike
called to put an end to bad governance and poverty.
Guinea and all of Africa did not fail, at that time, to
welcome the efforts made by women, in particular by
the First Lady, to promote dialogue and cooperation
among social stakeholders and to take up the serious
challenges of peace, security and stability in the
country.

Guinea is pleased to have once again found
peace, the restoration of the rule of law and improved
national cohesion, thanks primarily to the
determination of, and sacrifices made by, women.

In that context, we were pleased to receive the
second report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the System-wide Plan of Action for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We
support its major recommendations, in particular those
concerning the 2008-2009 Action Plan, conceived as a
results-based instrument for programming, follow-up
and information. The concentration of future action in
the five thematic areas identified in the report cannot
fail to ensure the successful establishment of an
integrated, coherent strategy for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) by all parties involved at the
national, regional and international levels.

In conclusion, I wish to renew the commitment of
the Government and the women of Guinea to play a
leading role in the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000). I appeal to the international
community to provide effective and sustained support
to the actions and initiatives undertaken by all
concerned in order to increase the mobilization of
women and attain their full participation in processes
of conflict prevention, peacebuilding and the building
of stability in our country and in our subregion.

