Mr. Henningstad (Norway): Let me start by
expressing my thanks to the Namibian presidency for
the initiative to hold this open meeting on women and
peace and security. Norway appreciates that these
topics are being discussed in the Security Council. We
are also grateful for the excellent introductions that we
heard yesterday and for the many thoughtful and in-
depth interventions that we have had on this very
import topic. In view of that, I take the liberty of
shortening by a little my intervention, the text of which
has been distributed.

A sustainable political process and the
enhancement of democracy require full participation of
women. Peace and the avoidance of armed conflict are
inextricably linked to equality between women and
men and to development.

Women do not yet have the opportunity to
participate on an equal basis with men in all areas and
at all levels of public life, especially in decision-
making and policy-making. This is true also with
regard to peace-building, peacemaking and conflict
resolution activities. At the twenty-third special session
of the General Assembly, in June this year, "Women
2000: gender equality, development and peace for the
twenty-first century", the topic of women and peace
and security was among the areas in which it was
agreed that a strengthening of the implementation of
the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action was
needed. In this respect, I take the liberty of referring to
Ambassador Wensley of Australia's excellent
intervention yesterday on the problem of gender
balance and equality in the United Nations system.
Definitely much can be done there, and she had some
bright ideas in that respect.

There is now wider recognition that armed
conflict has different destructive impacts on women
and men and that a gender-sensitive approach to the
application of international human rights law and
international humanitarian law is important. Women's
contributions in the areas of peace-building,
peacemaking and conflict resolution have been
increasingly recognized. Education and training in non-
violent conflict resolution have been introduced. There
is also greater recognition of the need to integrate a
gender perspective in the planning, design and
implementation of humanitarian assistance and to
provide adequate resources to make this possible.
Humanitarian relief agencies and civil society continue
to play an increasingly important role in the provision
of humanitarian assistance, including programmes to
address the needs of women and girls.
I would like to take this opportunity to announce
that Norway will host an expert seminar on the
situation of women in refugee camps early next year.

In the Brahimi report (S/2000/809), the gender
issues are in our view not sufficiently covered. There is
a need for a clearer focus on the role of women as a
resource in the planning and implementation of peace
processes. Also, the report does not say enough about
the potential positive role of women and the impact of
conflict on women and girls. It is therefore of utmost
importance that the gender perspective should be
strengthened in the follow-up to the report. We have
for too long seen women as victims only. Women
represent a resource that we cannot afford to ignore.
The report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the Brahimi report seems to be a
step in the right direction in this respect.

In June this year, a Plan of Action on
Mainstreaming a Gender Perspective in
Multidimensional Peace Support Operations was
adopted in Windhoek, Namibia. We view this plan as a
good start for putting commitments already made by
the United Nations into practice. Ms. Graca Machel's
review document dealing with the impact of armed
conflict on children and women is also seen as an
important contribution.

Norway has commissioned a study on women
soldiers in post-conflict situations. We know that a
number of women participate actively in armed
conflict, both as combatants and support staff. We need
to know more about their role after the conflict, the
problems they encounter and how their competence can
be used in a constructive manner in a post-conflict
situation.

In conclusion, Norway will continue to be
committed to the issue of women and peace and
security. We must strive for full implementation of
gender mainstreaming in all activities. Political will is
the key, and it is our responsibility to see that we
achieve these goals.

