Mr. Negroponte (United States): We welcome
this discussion on conflict, peacekeeping and gender.
We thank Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for his
presentation, and we thank Angela King, the Special
Advisor on Gender Issues and the Advancement of
Women, and Noeleen Heyzer, the Executive Director of
the United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM), for their efforts to increase women's
participation in conflict prevention, conflict resolution,
peacekeeping and peace-building.

As the Security Council stated in resolution 1325
(2000), "Civilians, particularly women and children,
account for the vast majority of those adversely
affected by armed conflict." But they also play an
essential role in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts.

The United States Government is fully committed
both to working to respond to the needs of women in
times of conflict and to supporting the role that women
play as planners, implementers and beneficiaries of
peace processes. Indeed, President Bush has stated that
fostering respect for women is an imperative of United
States foreign policy, among goals that are "grounded
in the non-negotiable demands of human dignity and
reflect universal human values."

On the specific question of women and conflict,
Secretary of State, Colin Powell, in a speech delivered
on 8 March of this year, International Women's Day,
called women the most vulnerable group when conflict
erupts and social structures break down. He then said,

"In societies torn by violence, maternal and
infant mortality rates skyrocket. When the men
and boys go off to fight, the women struggle to
care for family members left behind and to find
ways to provide for their basic necessities. For all
these reasons, much of our crisis response activity
is geared toward meeting the needs of female
victims of conflict, and we make a point of
involving the women who are on the receiving
end of our assistance in the shaping and carrying
out of our relief programmes."

It is clear that in any conflict, women on both
sides are vulnerable. It is regrettable that my Syrian
colleague has again used the Security Council to raise
the impact of the conflict in the Middle East on
Palestinian women, without acknowledging the impact
of that conflict -in particular, dozens of homicide
bombings that have taken place in the past year - on
the women of Israel. As I said last night, we must be
mindful of the responsibility of each and every United
Nations Member State to cease providing safe haven
for Palestinian groups that finance, plan, support or
commit terrorist acts.

Returning to the subject at hand, since resolution
1325 (2000) was adopted, the United Nations
Secretariat and United Nations peacekeeping missions
have made changes to take better account of gender
concerns. We support these changes but agree that
more progress can and should be made.

Although we know women are more likely to
suffer in times of conflict, this does not mean we
should view them merely as victims. We agree that
there remains a lack of awareness on the part of policy
and decision makers that war affects men and women
differently and that women and men bring different
perspectives to the peace process. We commend the
commitment of Under-Secretary Guehenno to
improving the gender awareness of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) to that need.

Although I know the Secretary-General and the
Secretariat have worked to improve gender awareness
in the United Nations, there remains work to be done.
As we look at peacekeeping, peacemaking and post-
conflict peace-building, the Security Council, as well
as regional and subregional actors, needs a systematic
means of integrating women as planners, implementers
and beneficiaries of our collective efforts. The
Secretariat should expand the number of women
appointed to positions at all levels, including high-level
envoys, as well as human rights investigators and
monitors.

Sustainable peace requires the involvement of
women as well as men. Several examples illustrate the
need to expand the participation of women in peace
operations. The concern that United Nations employees
may have been involved in the sexual exploitation of
women in West Africa is a reminder that there should
be a large number of women in peacekeeping missions
and other United Nations efforts. This applies not only
to West Africa, but also to Bosnia and other United
Nations missions. The United Nations zero-tolerance
policy towards sexual exploitation by United Nations
employees is the right way forward, and we encourage
further efforts to ensure all United Nations employees
are aware of the policy and that violators are punished.

Not only can female peacekeepers bring a
heightened awareness of the special risks of women in
conflict, but women often find it easier to express
concerns to other women. We encourage DPKO to
further expand the number of women as peacekeepers,
civilian police and civilian members of peacekeeping
missions.

Women also have a valuable role to play in
conflict prevention and peacemaking. In that regard I
would like to recall the instrumental contribution of the
Mano River Union Women's Peace Network to
generating a dialogue among the leaders of Guinea,
Sierra Leone and Liberia. We all should seek the
assistance of women's groups and other non-
governmental organizations who contribute to so-called
track two negotiations around the world.

Thank you again, Mr. President, for convening
this discussion. I look forward to hearing the further
comments and insights of our other colleagues.

