Mr. Thomson (Fiji): Allow me at the outset to
thank you, Sir, for having convened this important
debate, which provides an opportunity for all Members
to contribute to the discussion on the global women and
peace and security agenda.

Fiji recognizes the importance of resolution 1325
(2000) and acknowledges the progress that has been
made globally towards achieving its objectives.
We appreciate the specific actions taken in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), as identified
in the Secretary-General's report (S/2012/732), and we
thank the Secretary-General for his report. We also
appreciate the increased coordination and coherence
in policy and programming in the area of women and
peace and security through the work of UN-Women,
and particularly in the Pacific region through a
strengthened UN-Women's office in Fiji.

We recognize, however, that national implementation
will remain the key to meeting the objectives of the
resolution. In that respect, Fiji is working within
the framework of its Roadmap for Democracy
and Sustainable Socio-Economic Development to
create enabling environments for women in both
the public and the private domains. Recognizing the
importance of women in public leadership positions,
the Fiji Government has a target of achieving at least
30 per cent representation of women in all Government-
appointed boards and committees. Meanwhile, Fijian
authorities continue to implement and raise awareness
of the Crimes Decree (2009) and the Domestic Violence
Decree (2010), which contain provisions, inter alia, on
sexual violence and trafficking.

Since our open debate in the Security Council on
this subject last year (S/PV.6642), the Pacific region
has taken the lead in developing and launching a
regional action plan on women, peace and security.
The plan will support national efforts to ensure that
women are included as active participants at all stages
of conflict prevention, resolution and peacebuilding.
It is a landmark achievement for our region, and I
would like to acknowledge the collaborative efforts
of various United Nations agencies with regional
intergovernmental organizations and with the Fiji-
based civil society organization FemLINKPACIFIC,
which allowed the plan to be articulated at the regional
level.

In considering the crucial role of women as agents
of positive change in conflict prevention, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding, Fiji has made a concerted effort
to increase the number of well-qualified female
peacekeepers that it sends to United Nations
peacekeeping missions across the world. In its most
recent nominations of police personnel for rotation in
the United Nations Mission in Liberia and the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan, 55 per cent of police
personnel nominated for deployment by Fiji were
women. Bearing in mind in particular the growing role
of peacekeeping missions in supporting the capacity
of local authorities, Fiji will continue to send its best
qualified people to mentor and train local counterparts,
in particular in dealing with sexual violence and
encouraging women's participation in helping to build
post-conflict societies.

A discussion of women, peace and security is
incomplete without factoring in the security challenges
posed by the consequences of climate change. This
is so because for exposed countries like Fiji, women
and children are among the most affected by natural
disasters. The realities of climate change and the
consequent proliferation of natural disasters are
inescapable challenges for our people and for our land.
Adverse impacts on food security and access to arable
land, as well as the destabilization of communities,
disproportionately affect women. Women must
therefore be part of the policy formation dialogue at the
community and national levels with regard to responses
to climate change.

We also recognize that women play a leading
role in the rebuilding of communities after natural
disasters. We therefore appreciate the theme of this
year's International Day for Disaster Reduction that
women and girls are the "Visible force of resilience".

Finally, we acknowledge that much progress has
been made, but it is self-evident that the international
community still has a long way to go to ensure that
the dignity, peace and security of women worldwide are
realized.

