The Deputy Secretary-General: I welcome the
Security Council's focus on the practice of human
trafficking in situations of conflict and displacement.

Let us first be clear on what we are discussing
today: human trafficking is slavery in the modern
age. Slavery is not just a past abomination; millions of
people are living as slaves, or in slave-like conditions,
even as we speak today, in this year of 2015, here at the
United Nations, with the Charter of the United Nations
in front of us, here at the horseshoe table.

Most of the victims of trafficking are vulnerable
women and children, deceived or abducted into a life
of suffering, exploitation, torture or servitude. This
ruthless practice has become a global industry, and
it must be stopped. I am heartened that in September
Member States committed, as part of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1), to Goals 5, 8 and 16, to take action on
human trafficking.

There are more people displaced today than at
any time since the Second World War. Millions more
are caught up in conflict and unable to flee. These
human beings are exposed to a wide range of human
rights violations, not the least of which is trafficking.
They are sold and trafficked for sexual enslavement,
prostitution, illegal adoption, slave labour, purposes of
criminality or recruitment as child soldiers.

The Council has heard reports on almost 20
countries engulfed in conflict, or trying to recover from
conflict, where these practices are widespread. The
victims are mainly women and girls, but also boys and
men. Thousands of men and boys have been forcibly
conscripted by the Lord's Resistance Army and other
armed groups. The plight of women and girls held by
groups such as Daesh and Boko Haram is, tragically,
well known. The abduction of hundreds of schoolgirls
from Chibok by Boko Haram captured global attention,
and the memory of that incident still lingers in our
minds.

Thousands of Yazidi women in Iraq have been
abducted and enslaved by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant. As the Secretary-General stated in his
remarks to the Security Council on 13 October 2015,

"the systematic acts carried out by Daesh against
the Yazidi community, which include killings,
torture, rape and sexual slavery, may amount to
war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide.
We must ensure accountability." (S/PV7533, p. 3)

I very much appreciate the presence here today of
Nadia Murad Basee Taha, of the Yazidi community, as
a Witness to the cruel and grim realities.

Trafficking in persons is a crime and a violation
of human rights and must be treated as such. The
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress
and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children, provides a framework for action. With
169 States parties, the Protocol is close to universal
adherence. I urge all countries to ratify and fully
implement it.

Resolution 2195 (2014) recognizes the linkage
between organized crime, including trafficking in
persons, and terrorism; I am sure that Mr. Fedotov will
touch on this. I urge all States to become parties to
international treaties against trafficking in persons, the
smuggling of migrants and corruption and slavery, as
well as treaties that protect human rights, especially the
rights of women and children. We also have the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking
in Persons, which includes provisions on addressing

this problem in conflict settings. I already mentioned,
of course, the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs),
where this subject is also brought up.

But we need to do more. We should more robustly
implement the Plan of Action and the international
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking
in Persons, particularly internationaln conflict settings
and post-conflict reconstruction work, a subject on
the Security Council's agenda. We should also support
the important work of the Inter-Agency Coordination
Group against Trafficking in Persons. Ending human
trafficking also means committing to resolve the
conflicts in which human trafficking thrives.

Horrifying tales have emerged of how women
and children are treated in captivity. But even when
captivity ends, the suffering continues. Last month,
the Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, my
friend and colleague Adama Dieng, met with several
Yazidi victims of trafficking at the Khanke camp for
internally displaced persons, near Dohuk, in northern
Iraq. He asked me to convey his impressions briefly.
He spoke to two girls who had managed to leave Daesh
and reunite with their families. They were indeed free
from Daesh, but, and he stated this very clearly, they
were nor free not from fear and unbearable memories.
Indeed, the scars of such violence last a lifetime.
Victims fortunate enough to be freed need assistance
to regain their rights and dignity and to reintegrate
into society. They must be given a chance to take back
their lives and build new futures. The United Nations
Voluntary Trust Fund for Victims of Trafficking in
Persons, Especially Women and Children, is there to
work on their behalf. I encourage all, Member States
and others, to contribute to the Fund. It is also crucially
important to fight impunity by bringing traffickers to
account and to justice.

In closing, human trafficking is often described
as unthinkable and unspeakable. But it is our shared,
serious and sincere responsibility to think deeply and
speak clearly about the abuses to which innumerable
and nameless victims are subjected. Human traffickers
have no place in the world that we are striving to build.
Let us make sure that they have no space and no way
to operate.

