Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): Allow
me to begin by thanking the Uruguayan presidency for
convening this open debate. I would like also to express
my gratitude to the briefers for their valuable inputs in
this debate.

Women are a key resource for promoting peace and
stability. Resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace
and security focuses on the specific impact of armed
conflict on women and the positive role they can play in
conflict prevention and strengthening peace, stability
and security at local, regional and international levels.

Unfortunately, the current crisis, especially in the
Middle East, has taken abhorrent forms and constitutes
unprecedented challenges to the stability in our region.
Women are among the main victims grappling with the
scourge of violent extremism and terrorism. The spread
of violent extremism, inspired by takfiri ideology,
which has no respect for women, threatens the life
and rights of women and girls. They have suffered
the most and have been targeted for systematic sexual
exploitation and slavery, rape and other forms of sexual
violence by extremists and terrorist groups.

Iran strongly condemns the barbaric acts of the
terrorist and violent extremist groups, such as Da'esh
and its offshoot, Boko Haram, as well as indiscriminate
attacks against civilians, including women and children.
In an environment filled with hate, intimidation,
xenophobic attitudes, racial profiling and discrimination
based on race, religion, ethnicity, country of origin and
language, women easily fall victim to sexual violence
and abuse. Therefore, their opportunities for academic,
economic, political and social progress are gravely
curtailed by these intimidating mind sets and situations.

In some regions, particularly the Middle East,
destructive factors such as foreign intervention,
military invasion, as well as foreign occupation, have
contributed considerably to the collapse of families. As
a result, women and children are bearing the brunt of
menaces that not only destroy their present, but expose
them to long-lasting miseries that will remain for
generations. Under such circumstances, there will be
little room for women's empowerment and development.

The impact of sanctions on gender-responsive
policies and budgeting within respective countries
is another significant aspect. Sanctions, as a form of
collective punishment, flagrantly and indiscriminately
violate the basic human rights of all citizens, particularly
women. The systematic violations of the legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people, including Palestinian
women, under brutal occupation by the Israeli regime
and the illegal blockade on the Gaza Strip constitute
massive deprivation of Palestinian civilians and women
of their rights.

It is unfortunate that women and girls make up a
disproportionate number of the victims of air strikes in
Yemen. As confirmed reports indicate, the unjustified
invasion of Yemen by a Saudi-led coalition has led to
the death of more than 10,000 people and the injury
of more than 17,000 civilians, including at least 1,677
women and 2,260 children.

In closing, let me stress that my delegation believes
that organizing such a debate in the Council should not
undermine the work of the most relevant bodies for
consideration of women-related issues in the United
Nations system, namely, the Commission on the Status
ofWomen, the Economic and Social Council, as well as
the General Assembly.

