Mr. Itegboje (Nigeria): I thank the delegation of
Peru for organizing today's open debate.

Our appreciation also goes to Deputy Secretary-
General Amina Mohammed for her remarks and far-
reaching recommendations. We thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and other briefers for sharing their
perspective on this very important subject.

Nigeria condemns in the strongest terms the
abduction, trafficking and maltreatment of women
and girls by extremist groups, including the heinous
activities of Boko Haram in the Lake Chad region,
particularly in north-eastern Nigeria. The use of women
and girls as sex slaves must also be equally condemned.
In that regard, it is our expectation that this debate will
offer suggestions to address the prevailing challenges
and gaps impeding our ability to acquire the needed
resources to advance the role of women within the
context of the global peace and security architecture.

We acknowledge that the Security Council has
provided the leadership necessary to boost the women
and peace and security agenda, beginning with
resolution 1325 (2000), which set up the framework for
subsequent Council resolutions. In Africa, the African
Union has been a useful platform for the advancement
of the women and peace and security agenda by
emphasizing the engagement of women and youth in
the continent's development. That has been clearly
reflected in the Agenda 2063 of the African Union.

At the subregional level, in September 2010 the
Economic Community of West African States, in
collaboration with the United Nations Office for West
Africa, developed an integrated plan of action for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). The plan
of action emphasizes the importance of the role of
women in conflict prevention, resolution mediation and
peacebuilding efforts, as well as the rebuilding of post-
conflict societies.

Building on the subregional efforts, in August
2013 Nigeria launched a national action plan to fully
implement the relevant provisions of resolution 1325
(2000). The plan reflects the Government's commitment
to ensuring the security of women and girls during
armed conflict and enhancing their active and direct
participation in conflict prevention and peacebuilding.
We are also collaborating with our neighbours, Chad,
Cameroon, the Niger and Benin within the framework
of the Multinational Joint Task Force to defeat the Boko
Haram insurgency, which is targeting women and girls.

Our experience in the Lake Chad region is evidence
that, with determined international collaboration,
terrorism can be defeated. In addition, the Government
of Nigeria has taken steps to cater to victims of Boko
Haram terrorism in its various forms - including
rape and other sexual violence against children, the
abduction of children and other grave violations - by
putting in motion several legal remedies. Some legal and
social remedies undertaken by the Government include
the diligent prosecution of more than 200 detained
Boko Haram terrorists in competent courts of law, as
well as reintegration, reorientation and rehabilitation
programmes and psychosocial programmes designed
to meet the needs of each victim of sexual violence.
The sustained efforts of Nigeria and its international
partners have culminated in the liberation of territories
previously occupied by Boko Haram.

It is to be noted that 80 per cent of the 2 million
internally displaced persons in the north-east ofNigeria
are women and girls. We have taken concrete steps to
meet their humanitarian needs and to ensure that the
necessary conditions are established to enable the
voluntary return of the displaced persons to their places
of origin in safety and dignity. Indeed, as a sequel to
the aforementioned efforts, we welcome the release of
the abducted Chibok and Dapchi girls. Our efforts will
continue until the remaining ones are released.

I wish to conclude by acknowledging the
contributions of civil society organizations as partners
in the prevention, management and resolution of
disputes. The Nigerian Government will continue to
engage them as key stakeholders and partners in the
women and peace and security agenda. Nigeria remains
fully and firmly committed to the promotion and
protection of the rights of women and girls in conflict
and post-conflict situations. In this regard, we will work
assiduously to enhance the participation of women in
peace and security initiatives.

