Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to join others in expressing my
sincere appreciation to the German presidency of the
Security Council for April and to thank it for attaching
such importance to the women and peace and security
agenda, especially the issue of sexual violence in
conflict that we are discussing today.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative on Sexual Violence in
Conflict for their efforts. I also thank all of today's
women briefers, who shared their valuable ideas and
experiences during this important debate.

Sexual violence in conflict and post-conflict
situations is a phenomenon that exposes a number of
imbalances that need to be addressed in a comprehensive
manner. The nexus between this phenomenon and the
general status of women and girls, as well as certain
negative social behavioural patterns, is indeed a basic
one. The issue is also mainly connected to accountability
and fighting impunity, as indicated in the concept note
(see S/2019/313, annex).

Over the past 11 years, the Security Council has
adopted five very important resolutions addressing
several aspects of sexual violence in conflict situations,
including the use ofsexual violence as a tactic ofwar, the
link between organized crime and terrorism, trafficking
in persons, reporting and monitoring mechanisms, as
well as the establishment of the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict. Despite all that, the phenomenon
of sexual Violence against women and girls persists.
Those violations are primarily perpetrated by non-State
entities and terrorist groups. This proves that we still
have a long way to go.

The holistic approach to dealing with sexual
violence in conflict and post-conflict situations starts
before the occurrence of sexual violence. It includes
raising awareness of the rights of women and girls,
changing certain negative social behavioural patterns
and, of course, preventing conflicts in the first place.
In conflict situations, we must provide the necessary
protection for women and girls specifically and make
sure that they are not subjected to sexual violence
by the warring parties. This approach extends to
post-conflict situations, and in that regard Egypt
supports the survivor-centred approach to providing
the necessary care and protection to survivors in a
comprehensive manner.

Egypt believes that women play a Vital role in
society. Women are not merely victims; they perform an
essential role in fighting sexual exploitation and abuse
as part of their general role in the women and peace
and security agenda. We must enhance that important
role. Experience has shown that women are capable
of overcoming a number of obstacles in dealing with
the victims of sexual violence, exposing perpetrators,
fighting impunity and providing the necessary help to
the victims. In that context, we recall the open debate
held in the Security Council on 11 April on women in
peacekeeping (see S/PV.8508).

The Egyptian presidency of the African Union for
2019 focuses mainly on reconstruction and development
in post-conflict situations, based on a comprehensive
approach that includes building the capacities of national
armies and law-enforcement authorities to combat
terrorism and crime and providing the necessary care
for communities in post-conflict situations, including
children, women and girl victims of those conflicts.

Egypt has already developed a number of
programmes and mechanisms specifically for the Sahel
region of Africa, which has been suffering under the
yoke of armed conflicts, the activities of terrorist groups
and organized crime. We are fully prepared to cooperate
with all partners in developing and implementing
projects and specialized programmes that provide
the necessary care and protection to women and girl
survivors of sexual violence, in cooperation with the
Egyptian Agency of Partnership for Development.

Egypt strongly supports the Secretary-General's
zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse.
In that context, the Cairo International Centre for
Conflict Resolution, Peacekeeping and Peacebuilding
is holding training courses for Egyptian, Arab and
African military and police personnel, in cooperation
with United Nations specialized agencies. The aim is
to train these personnel before deployment in how to
deal with situations of sexual exploitation and abuse in
conflict areas.

In conclusion, I reiterate that Egypt fully supports
the Council's efforts to promote fighting sexual violence
in conflict areas and is fully prepared to cooperate with
all relevant parties in that regard.

