Ms. Alberdi: I thank you, Sir, for the honour of
this invitation to address the Security Council on the
issue of women's participation in maintaining and
promoting peace and security. This thematic focus
permits us to stress that women's engagement in
peacebuilding does not start when the fighting stops.

Gender issues must be addressed in conflict
prevention and mediation, in the deployment of
peacekeepers, in integrated missions, in stabilization
and in post-conflict recovery. That is to say, for women
to participate effectively in promoting peace and
security, gender-responsive peacebuilding must begin
from the first moments of conflict resolution.

That is particularly important in conflicts in
which sexual Violence is used as a tactic of war. Unless
women's security is a primary objective of
peacekeepers and systematic abuses of women's rights
are made a primary focus of judicial responses, the
seeds are sown for an incomplete and possibly
unsustainable peace. That is because if abuses of
women's rights are tolerated through de facto impunity
for perpetrators, efforts to restore the rule of law lose
their credibility.

It is important to note that the Security Council
has clearly acknowledged that point in resolution 1820
(2008). In recognizing sexual violence as a tactic of
war that is used to crush opposition, subordinate
communities and silence women, that resolution
expands on resolution 1325 (2000). It acknowledges
that there is no security without women's security. If
sexual violence is a security problem, it requires a
security response from the earliest moments of
peacekeeping. We trust that the Secretary-General's
report (S/2008/622) on resolution 1820 (2008) will
provide practical steps to strengthening women's
security.

Other security institutions are making the
connection between women's security and
peacebuilding. The United Nations Development Fund
for Women (UNIFEM) was pleased to support a
meeting of the French presidency of the European
Union (EU) this month to improve the linkage between
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008) and their
implementation in EU security, police and justice
missions.

Women's participation in conflict prevention,
community reconciliation and respect for the rule of
law cannot be left to a post-conflict phase. It must be
addressed from the start. Business as usual will not do.

The rest of my remarks address points where
practices in peacemaking, peacebuilding and building
sustainable peace must change.

Regarding peacemaking, the impact of the public
physical presence of women in peace processes should
not be underestimated. UNIFEM. recently reviewed
official figures on women's participation in peace
talks. While data are hard to obtain, as negotiations are
sensitive, we found that women averaged 7 per cent of
negotiators in the five comprehensive agreements for
which data was available. They averaged 24 per cent of
official observers in three recent peace processes for
which data was available. They barely figure at all
among appointed envoys, mediators and facilitators.

That does not tell the whole story, of course,
since women's peace networks are constantly engaging
in peace processes on a more informal basis. An
example is the International Women's Commission for
a Just and Sustainable Palestinian-Israeli Peace, which

UNIFEM. has supported since 2005. The Commission
has developed a shared vision of a resolution to the
conflict, but has no means by which to interject that
vision into the official process. That illustrates why
more rigorous implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) is so important. We are pleased that
International Women's Commission members are here
today and that, on Friday 31 October, they will
participate in an informal briefing of Council members
hosted by the Government of Belgium.

However, women's participation in peace
processes must not be left to informal initiatives on the
margins. Peace talks must accommodate a structured
representation of women's concerns and interests.
International institutions supporting conflict mediation
must have gender experts and must propose concrete
methods to bring women to peace talks. During the
past year, UNIFEM. supplied a gender adviser to the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General in Uganda to
support gender sensitivity in the work of the United
Nations Department of Political Affairs there. There
should be gender advisers in all mediation efforts.

Today's political leaders are often peace
mediators of the future, so the recruitment of women
mediators depends on the numbers of women in public
office. UNIFEM's experience has demonstrated the
effectiveness of special quotas to promote women in
leadership roles, notably in post-conflict Rwanda,
where, since September, women comprise 56 per cent
of the National Assembly members.

With regard to peacekeeping, women's needs for
protection during and after conflict are different from
those of men and often require a specific protection
response. This year, UNIFEM. collaborated with the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and
United Nations Action against Sexual Violence in
Conflict, supported by Canada and the United
Kingdom, to identify such a response. Former force
commanders and police commissioners from
peacekeeping missions were asked to identify tactics to
enable them to detect imminent attacks on women and
children and to prevent those attacks. New doctrine,
guidelines, procedures, incentives and even force
composition and equipment are required to ensure that
practices on the ground are changed. UNIFEM, DPKO
and the United Nations Action initiative are now field-
testing an analytical inventory of best practices in
protecting women and children - a task that will be

finalized next spring for use in training uniformed
personnel.

If measures are not taken to prevent the
widespread and systematic targeting of women, that
violence can spill over into the post-conflict
environment. We know that, in some contexts, attacks
on women increase after conflict. If a country and the
international community fail to prevent and punish
violence against women, it pushes up the cost of
peacebuilding. The cost is in delayed stabilization and
reconciliation in countries where the rule of law cannot
take root. Such costs and the delay of real peace can be
avoided through decisive and early action to signal an
end to impunity.

With regard to peacebuilding, recovery and
peacebuilding require gender-responsive institutional
reforms to ensure that women benefit from the peace
dividend as much as men. Justice and security
institutions are the first on the list, but efforts are also
needed to ensure that institutions for economic
recovery develop women's productive capacities and
that social service institutions respond to their needs.

Currently, there are few means for women to
identify and track funds allocated for their recovery
needs. At the third meeting of the Sudan Consortium in
May, UNIFEM. and the Initiative for Inclusive Security
partnered with the Government of Norway to support
the participation of women leaders from diverse civil
society groups in the Sudan. In their own analysis, less
than 2 per cent of the over $2 billion that has been
pledged to date has targeted women's empowerment.

Women's experiences of early recovery and
peacebuilding demonstrate that there must be
structured representation of women at all post-conflict
donor conferences and that a mechanism to track funds
dedicated to women's empowerment and recovery
should be in place in all humanitarian and post-conflict
development funds.

We look forward to seeing these issues addressed
in the forthcoming report of the Secretary-General on
early recovery and in all United Nations peacebuilding
and recovery efforts. Let us work together to ensure
that women's voices are heard in peacebuilding at both
national and international levels.

