Mr. Soini (Finland): I wish to express my
appreciation to Ms. Nadia Murad, Dr. Denis Mukwege
and Ms. Inas Miloud for their statements today. I also
want to thank the Secretary-General and Foreign
Minister Maas for organizing this important debate.

Violence against innocent people is used as a weapon
of war to cause fear and shame. Ending the abuse of
civilians in conflicts is possible; it is a question of our
resolve. The international norms exist; we just need to
make sure they are respected. This very Chamber is the
place where change can and must start. The members of
the Security Council bear an enormous responsibility.
There can be no excuses. Every act against civilians in
every conflict must be condemned by all actors.

Sexual violence in conflicts affects not only those
directly targeted, but also their families, communities
and entire societies. Actors such as Ms. Murad and
Dr. Mukwege have helped to bring the consequences
of these dreadful crimes to light. They deserve our
respect, but they deserve action even more. Preventing
conflict-related sexual violence starts during times of
peace. Respect for the human rights of women and men
and the rule of law are of utmost importance. Enhancing
women's full and effective participation in society is
also a foundation for preventing sexual violence. Most
victims are women and girls, but we should not forget
that men and boys are targeted as well. All survivors
have their own experiences of conflict and their own
specific needs. That is why we need survivor-centred
responses, as has been pointed out today.

Efforts to fight impunity for the most serious
international crimes must be strengthened. This
requires capacity-building of national authorities in
order to bring perpetrators to justice. The United
Nations Team of Experts on Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict is doing valuable work in this
regard. Finland, for its part, has supported the work
of Justice Rapid Response and UN-Women to train
experts in investigating these crimes. Measures to
combat and prevent sexual Violence should be part of
all international crisis management operations and
humanitarian aid. For example, Finland, together with
Norway, has deployed a specialized police team to the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan. What we want
them to do is strengthen the capacity of local police in
prevention and prosecution.

Amnesty for these crimes in ceasefires or peace
agreements must be ruled out. Perpetrators need to be
held accountable, otherwise peace can be interpreted
as condoning crime. We need to improve assistance to
victims and access to health care and other services.
I would like to commend the important work of the
International Criminal Court and its Trust Fund for
Victims. Finland will continue to support its work;
our latest contribution was earmarked for victims of
sexual violence.

Protecting innocent civilians is our first priority.
Other considerations must come afterwards. This is
possible, but a change in our attitude is needed and
needed now.

