Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank you, Madam President, for having organized
this debate. I also express my gratitude to Ms. Bangura
and Ms. Allamin for their moving briefings.

It is absolutely unacceptable in this day and age
to hear that many women - too many women - are
subjected to rape on a daily basis in order to obtain
drinking water. Worse still is that this takes place in
places where we have large peacekeeping operations. It
is also absolutely unacceptable to read in newspapers the
tragic news of Yazidi women or of the girls abducted by
Boko Haram. I take these two clearly distinct examples
because we need to treat them differently. I would like
to propose a set of 10 measures to seek to somehow
constrain this tragedy afflicting humankind. But before
doing so I would like to share with the Council two
preliminary reflections.

First, I think we need to modify our conventional
conception of what constitutes a threat to peace and
security. It is unfortunate that we have managed to coin
acronyms such as "DDR", reflecting the great attention
paid to demobilization and disarmament, but failed to
pay sufficient attention to sexual violence in conflict. I
think we need to change that.

Secondly, as the representatives of the United
States and of France mentioned, sexual violence has
become not just a weapon of war but of terrorism, and
we must therefore make the necessary changes in the
United Nations to reflect that.

As I said, I will propose a set of 10 measures aiming
to eradicate this scourge. The first five are for States or
situations where there is no peacekeeping operation.

First, we must spare no effort in referring to
the International Criminal Court all the relevant
information that exists on sexual Violence in conflict,
since there can be no doubt that this constitutes a crime
against humanity.

Secondly, we must achieve universality - the
universal understanding of sexual violence as a crime.
Unfortunately, in many jurisdictions, sexual violence is
merely seen as a moral failing.

Thirdly, we must pay greater attention to the
treatment of victims of sexual violence so as to ensure
their appropriate reintegration into society and access

to basic services. In that connection, I would like to
highlight the leading example of Colombia, which
has done a great job in this regard, and to encourage
Colombia to share its experiences with other States that
have had similar experiences.

Fourthly, I would like to congratulate Ms. Bangura
on the important efforts she has made, as well as to
encourage her to continue in her work seeking contact
with non-State actors to impart an understanding of
the seriousness of these crimes. Ms. Bangura will now
travel to the Middle East, as she as already to many
African States, as part of her efforts to convince
non-State actors and guerrillas of the seriousness of
this phenomenon.

Fifthly, ifwe start from the idea that sexual Violence
is a weapon of terrorism, then, as the Ambassador of
France said, we must modify the mandates of some
sanctions committees, especially that dealing with
Al-Qaida and the Taliban, to include these crimes.

Let me turn now to measures Spain proposes to
be more effective in the fight against sexual violence
in situations where there are already peacekeeping
operations.

First, we need more robust mandates that
specifically address sexual Violence in conflict.

Secondly, we need to provide better training to
our peacekeepers. Contingents must have undergone
a number of specific and sufficient training courses
devoted to issues of sexual violence in conflict before
deploying to peacekeeping operations.

Thirdly, our peacekeeping operations should,
at the command level, be in constant contact with
local forces - meaning police, security forces and
armies 4 in order to address the issue of sexual
violence in conflict and provide advice in this area.

Fourthly, the Department for Peacekeeping
Operations has a truly formidable task, but its relevant
unit has neither the size nor the importance that, in
Spain's View, it should have. I would propose, therefore,
that the unit be strengthened.

Fifthly, we should ask that our special representatives
systematically report on sexual violence in conflict
in both formal and informal meetings of the Security
Council in a strategic, as opposed to merely descriptive,
manner. Many delegations have mentioned the fact
that the review of resolution 1325 (2000) will come
to a close in October. We need to be ambitious in that
respect. The October review of resolution 1325 (2000)
will fall under the Spanish presidency of the Security
Council. I understand that the delegation of the United
States has suggested that it be held at the ministerial
level, and I can assure the Council that it will be. I trust
that our rejection of sexual Violence in conflict will
translate into the presence of a great number of foreign
ministers here in New York. I also trust that we shall
be effective enough so that the girls and daughters of
those women who have experienced such tragedy will
one day be able to say that the United Nations has made
a difference.

