Ms. German (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the Dominican Republic,
I should like to thank the Council for organizing
today's debate. This high-level meeting is eloquent
testimony to the great interest shown by the Security
Council, and particularly the Kingdom of Spain, in
promoting women's rights and their role in the field of
international peace and security. These topics are of
crucial importance in a world where it is important to
further develop a culture of protection and solidarity
with women, adolescents and girls.

Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) on
31 October 2000, we have seen genuine progress
in protecting women in conflict situations and in
moving towards their full and total participation in
equal conditions in international peace and security
processes. We welcome the progress that has been
made in implementing resolution 1325 (2000), but
we understand that we need to coordinate action in
implementing the resolution in order to achieve a more
global approach.

The United Nations system has a crucial role
to play to that end. We must promote truly effective
actions that will allow women to become the main
actors in implementing the resolution and not depend
on the decisions of others. Focusing attention on the
situation of women is even more urgent when we note
that women and their families are those most affected
by civil wars. They are the targets of kidnappings, they
fill the makeshift boats that cross the waters of the
Mediterranean, and they remain in conflict zones while
their husbands flee persecution and repression.

It is important to recall that we have just adopted
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1). This year we celebrate the
seventieth anniversary of the United Nations and the
twentieth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action, which laid the foundation for the
women and peace and security agenda. We are also
celebrating the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), which confirms the importance
of working for the participation of women in conflict-
prevention, conflict-management and rehabilitation
from conflict.

We have an historic opportunity to continue to
promote the development of a focused agenda that
prioritizes the value of women's participation as an
invaluable driving force to achieve sustainable peace
and security. The main role played by women in social,
economic and political development in our societies
makes equal economic and political rights between men
and women logical and correct, especially with respect
to preventing and resolving international conflicts.
We believe that if women have opportunities, they can
contribute at every stage of a peace process, including
peacebuilding.

We support the formal designation by the
Secretary-General of UN-Women as the coordinating
entity within the Secretariat for the implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda. We believe
that the Standing Committee on Women, Peace and
Security must revitalize and revitalize United Nations
action against sexual violence in conflict, including the
prevention of sexual violence, accountability and the
provision of assistance to victims. The Department of
Peacekeeping Operations should also have a strategic
plan to enhance women's leadership and participation.
We understand that the women and peace and security
agenda must become a full part of the Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy, given the role that women play as
victims, drivers and agents of change.

The Dominican Republic trusts that the global
study on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
will be a unique opportunity to formulate an agenda
of global policies on women, peace and security at the
political and operational levels so that we can work
together, focused on action that will make it possible
to redesign appropriately financed strategies to move
forward with this agenda.

In the Dominican Republic, fortunately, there are
no armed conflicts. However, the President is working
for gender equality and for the empowerment of women
in order to guarantee their economic, physical and
political independence. To that end, we decided that all
plans and projects being considered in the context of
the national development strategy to 2030 must include
gender equality. We have also adopted a programme
to ensure that as of 2016 the respective budgets of all
State institutions must include resources earmarked to
achieve gender equality and non-discrimination against
women. In this year, the Dominican Republic adopted a
new law creating a comprehensive system to guarantee
prevention, detection, comprehensive care, prosecution,
punishment and follow-up with respect to to all forms
of violence against women.

We therefore trust that today's debate we will lead
to concrete commitments to ensure that women will
be respected comprehensively as a permanent priority
in maintaining and promoting international peace and
security, which the Dominican Republic supports fully.

