The Secretary-General: I welcome this debate on
women in peacekeeping as we strive for progress on a
key element in the maintenance of international peace
and security.

With the launch of the system-wide strategy on
gender parity, in 2017, the United Nations embarked
upon an ambitious and essential system-wide effort
to enhance women's representation at all levels
and in all arenas. A key priority is to increase the
number of women in peacekeeping - both civilian
and uniformed - which is where we need the most
improvement. This is not just a question of numbers,
but also of our effectiveness in fulfilling our mandates.

Evidence shows that greater numbers of women
peacekeepers lead to protection responses that are more
credible and meet the needs of all members of local
communities. Women in patrol units are better able
to reach both men and women in areas of operation,
accessing critical intelligence and providing a more
holistic View of the security challenges. The presence of
women at checkpoints has been credited with promoting
a less confrontational atmosphere, and more women in
troop contingents is credited with higher reporting of
sexual and gender-based violence and lower incidences
of sexual exploitation and abuse.

Equally, access to women's networks can enable
female peacekeepers to consult with a broader section
of the population, who may have very different
requirements and perspectives on sustainable peace.
This lays the ground for another shared goal: more
representative and inclusive peace processes.
As we approach the twentieth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, we need to do far more to ensure that women's
rights, women's voices and women's participation are
at the centre of peacekeeping decision-making. This is
central to sustainable solutions in all the contexts in
which we work.

Through resolution 2242 (2015), on women and
peace and security, adopted in 2015, the Security
Council called on us to double the numbers of women
in military and police components of United Nations
peacekeeping operations by 2020 and to review the
barriers to their recruitment and advancement. We are
pressing forward on those goals.

The Action for Peacekeeping initiative calls for the
full, equal and meaningful participation of women at
all stages of peace processes, as well as the integration
of a gender perspective into all stages of analysis,
planning, implementation and reporting. I thank the
more than 150 Member States that have signed on to
that commitment. I also thank those Member States
that launched the Elsie Initiative on Women in Peace
Operations at last week's Peacekeeping Ministerial on
overcoming barriers to increasing women's meaningful
participation in peace operations.

The Action for Peacekeeping Initiative builds on the
numerous policies and strategies of the United Nations
aimed at strengthening performance, accountability and
the implementation of women and peace and security
mandates. In support of our commitments in those
areas, we have undertaken a range of actions to support
and promote women's involvement in our operations.

Last year, we launched the gender-responsive
peacekeeping operations policy, which commits us
to promoting leadership and accountability both for
gender equality and for the women and peace and
security agenda. For civilian personnel, each field
mission has developed its own gender-parity strategies,
and our leadership in the field is more than 40 per
cent female. I have also established a working group
on emergency measures for gender parity in peace
operations, to tackle some of the specific challenges
we have identified in recruiting and retaining women
in field environments, including in our rules and
regulations. They include addressing conditions in
missions to provide more suitable accommodation,
facilities, lighting and health facilities.

We must also strive to ensure that the rosters from
which we recruit are gender-balanced and that the gains
we have secured in recruitment in recent years are not
eroded during the downsizing of missions. A set of
proposals in that regard have already been presented to
the Fifth Committee of the General Assembly.

This year we rolled out the uniformed gender-parity
strategy, which builds on the commitment established
in resolution 2242 (2015) and goes further, calling
for more than just a doubling of numbers. Targets
for women's representation range from 15 per cent to
35 per cent by 2028, inclusive of military, police and
justice and corrections personnel. The achievement of
those targets will represent a significant step towards
parity. Since December 2015, the number of women
in uniform has increased by approximately 1 per cent.
That is clearly not enough. But there are some notable
gains on which we can build.

The number of women staff officers and
military observers has almost doubled since the first
Peacekeeping Ministerial in November 2017, with
women now representing more than 13 per cent of
deployed personnel. Also since that first meeting, 27
countries that had previously not deployed any women
at all now do so. And 30 more countries have deployed
more than 15 per cent women military observers and
staff officers, bringing the total number of countries
to 48.

Among police personnel, the representation of
women has increased by 300 - more than 3 per
cent - since the 2017 Peacekeeping Ministerial. Nine
per cent of personnel in formed police units are now
women. Furthermore, the number of female heads of
United Nations police components in the field has
increased, including in Abyei, Cyprus, Darfur and
South Sudan.

Our uniformed gender-parity strategy also sets
targets for uniformed corrections and justice officers in
the field. However, that area has been more challenging

We in the Secretariat will continue to press ahead
in all those areas. But to keep on track, we need
assistance from Member States: first, through increased
nominations of women officers and, secondly, a sharper
focus on women in battalions and formed police units.
I also appeal to Member States and their capitals to
do their utmost to meet the targets in the uniformed
gender-parity strategy, not only through pledges but,
more important, through the sustained recruitment and
deployment of women within their national services.

I am pleased that we are very close to gender parity
in the senior leadership of the United Nations for the
first time in the history of the Organization, and well
ahead of my 2021 commitment - but that is an area
where I can decide alone. I am committed to sustaining
that progress, which makes clear that what is needed
ultimately is political will and persistence. We need to
bring the same spirit to our peace operations. This is
crucial for our effectiveness, credibility and reputation.
We count on Member States' sustained support.

