Mr. Bhattarai (Nepal): Allow me first to
compliment you, Madam President, and to thank you
for having organized today's important debate on
women and peace and security under the Jordanian
presidency this month. I also thank the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive report (S/2015/203),
as well as the Special Representative of Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Bangura,
and Ms. Allamin, representing civil society, for their
briefings this morning.

I had the honour to address the Council in October
2000 on how women were a source of strength in
Nepal and around the world. As many studies had
shown, women tended to be more sincere, more reliable
and more compassionate. In particular, compared to
men, they shunned Violence more consistently and
resolved disputes more peacefully. Women made more
compassionate and, often, more effective leaders.
Empowering women, bringing them into policymaking,
and deploying them in the field as peacekeepers and
peacemakers would add a more empathetic and humane
dimension to our work, and provide us a more holistic
frame with which to View conflicts.

In the 15 years since, all of this has been more than
proved through experience, thanks to the Council's
resolution 1325 (2000) and the subsequent resolutions
on women and peace and security, which rightly
emphasized the need to work concertedly to eliminate
all forms of violence against women and girls, in
particular sexual violence during and after conflicts,
and doing all that is required to unleash their potential.

Over these years, Nepal has made steady advances
at the national level in empowering women, including
those affected by conflict. The Interim Constitution of
Nepal provided for 33 per cent of women participation
in elections at all levels, including in the Constituent
Assembly. It also made it mandatory for women to
comprise 33 per cent of the members of district level
peace committees to address post-conflict issues at the
local level.

Nepal continues to implement resolutions 1325
(2000) and 1820 (2008) through a dedicated national
plan of action. The first of its kind in South Asia, the
plan intervenes in key areas, including participation,
protection and prevention, promotion, relief and
recovery, resource management, and monitoring
and evaluation. An interministerial implementation
committee coordinates its execution and a ministerial
steering committee ensures its oversight. Encouraged
by the continuing positive results, as also shown
by the plan's 2014 mid-term monitoring report, the
Government is making efforts to localize the plan to
subnational levels.

Increasing the participation of women in
decision-making, protecting women and girls from
sexual and gender-based violence, and ending impunity
have been our top priorities. Nepal has a zero-tolerance
policy regarding gender-based violence. Violence
against women and rape constitute serious criminal
offences against the State. Polygamy, child marriage and
enforced marriage are punishable by law. Perpetrators
of human trafficking face severe punishment. A
national action plan on gender-based violence has been
in implementation since 2010.

As a committed and consistent major contributor
of troops and police to United Nations peacekeeping
for several decades, Nepal is determined to raise the
number of women in the national security forces and to
contribute more women to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. Protecting women and girls from sexual
Violence, both during and after conflict, is at the core
of the peacekeeping training ofNepal's security forces.
Nepal has recently set up a transitional justice
mechanism that complies with its international
obligations. Both the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission and the Commission on Investigation of
Disappeared Persons are mandated to look into the
conflict-era cases, establish the truth surrounding
such cases, bring the perpetrators to justice, address
the needs of the victims, and ultimately pave the way
for reconciliation, lasting peace and stability. It is
an important step in our efforts towards seeking to
provide justice to the victims of conflict in addition
to the measures and mechanisms already in place.
The Government is committed to bringing to book
all perpetrators of serious violation of human rights,
including conflict-related sexual violence.

I wish to conclude by reiterating that, as a State party
to several core international human rights instruments,
including the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women and
the Convention on the Rights of the Child, Nepal's
commitment to promoting and protecting human rights,
especially those of women and girls, remains total and
unflinching. We in Nepal are aware that much more
remains to be done at the global, regional, national and
subnational levels to realize the full potential of women
in peace and security, and we pledge our readiness to
work closely together and move forward as a responsible
member of the international community in the interests
of global peace and security.

