Mr. Aisi (Papua New Guinea): Papua New Guinea
appreciates the opportunity to participate in today's
important meeting on women and peace and security
and thanks you, Mr. President, and your delegation, for
organizing it. This meeting follows on from others that
we have participated in since the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), including the open debate on women and
peace and security held on 30 November 2012 (see S/PV.6877), which also commemorated the twelfth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).

The focus of this debate is to address the obstacles
to women's participation in conflict mediation, peace
talks, national dialogue and donor conferences. We
believe that it is important to sustain the momentum
to consolidate efforts at all levels so as to effectively
mainstream women as equal development partners
and agents of change in conflict prevention,
conflict resolution, peacebuilding, peacekeeping
and nation-building for safer and more prosperous
communities and a safer and more prosperous world.
A clear case in point is the excellent contributions
by women to last month's successful conclusion and
adoption of the first-ever global Arms Trade Treaty.

We also agree with the Secretary-General's
conclusions in his 2010 report on women's participation
in peacebuilding (S/2010/466) that their participation is
not only a matter of women's and girls' rights but of

their status as core partners in strengthening the three
pillars of durable peace, namely, economic recovery,
social cohesion and political legitimacy.

We note the important, albeit slow, strides made
internationally over the past decade in addressing the
disproportionate and unique impacts of armed conflict,
violence and tensions, which continue to affect women
and girls worldwide.

Women's and girls' protection and empowerment,
particularly in fragile, conflict and post-conflict
situations - and even in so-called stable
societies - remain a major concern and an overriding
challenge for all of us. Noble initiatives such as
resolution 1325 (2000), the 2010 United Nations seven-
point action plan on gender-responsive peacebuilding
and other international, regional and national peace and
security frameworks that place women and girls at the
centre of peace and security continue to remain largely
unfulfilled.

The unfortunate and sobering reality today is that
women are still part of the battleground. They are
marginalized, harassed, raped, abducted, humiliated,
killed and forced to endure unwanted pregnancies,
sexual abuse and slavery. Women are also still largely
excluded from formal decision-making processes
concerning peace and security.

The challenge for all ofus today going forward is to
work diligently with renewed commitment to heighten
efforts to, among other actions, better institutionalize
all the various processes so that they become integral
parts of national and regional actions.

In the context of my own country, Papua New
Guinea, I would like to share our experience with regard
to women and peace and security in the framework of
the civil conflict we experienced in Bougainville, which
ended more than a decade ago. With the election of the
first President and members of the Parliament of the
Autonomous Bougainville Government, the Council,
on 6 July 2005, successfully concluded the mandate it
had initiated to resolve the decade-long bloody conflict
on Bougainville Island in Papua New Guinea.

It is worth mentioning that the Bougainville
Peace Agreement, despite some challenges, is being
implemented with full commitment at the highest
political levels by the Government of Papua New
Guinea and the Autonomous Bougainville Government.
We are equally pleased with the continuing interest and
engagement of the United Nations with the Government
of Papua New Guinea and the Autonomous Bougainville
Government to address outstanding issues, including
arms disposal, reconstruction and the holding of a
referendum.

Importantly, it is worth recalling that the efforts of
the women of Bougainville in pushing for peace during
the conflict, which culminated in the Bougainville
Peace Agreement, attest to and confirm the notion
that women are agents of change, including in peace
and security. Fortunately, there is growing recognition
of that fact, but, as always, more needs to be done to
maintain the momentum.

I would also commend the support and cooperation
that Papua New Guinea continues to receive from our
bilateral development partners, including Australia, the
United States, New Zealand, the European Union and
others, on mainstreaming gender issues that contribute
to peace, security and national development. Likewise,
we value similar support from regional multilateral
development partners, such as the Pacific Islands
Forum and the Melanesian Spearhead Group.

At the regional level, the launch of the 2012-2015
Pacific Regional Action Plan on Women, Peace and
Security, in 2012, has provided a strong framework
from which national and regional actions can be better
and more effectively developed and coordinated. The
Action Plan was developed jointly by representatives
of the member countries of the Pacific Islands
Forum, representatives of the Council of Regional
Organizations of the Pacific and, importantly, civil
society organizations. In essence, the Action Plan
replicates the basic, but important, tenets of resolution
1325 (2000) as elaborated by the United Nations.

In that regard, we acknowledge the leadership of
Ms. Bachelet and the work of UN-Women in Papua New
Guinea and the Pacific, as reflected in her attendance
at our Pacific Leaders' Summit - to represent the
Secretary-General - held in the Cooks Islands last
year. Such proactive participation has yielded positive
dividends, which include the increasing involvement of
women as partners in consolidating peace and security
in our region.

Apart from the United Nations, we continue
to have strong support from our development
partners - Australia and New Zealand, along with
other partners such as the European Union - which
are prioritizing gender empowerment and equality
by providing capacity-building programmes for our
women and girls in the area of peace and security. The
challenge will be the effective coordination of all the
valuable resources, so that all the efforts to implement
the full intent of resolution 1325 (2000) are properly
realized.

Insofar as civil society efforts to promote issues
relating to women, peace and security in Papua New
Guinea and the Pacific islands region are concerned,
they are increasing as a result of the groundswell
of advocacy work on fostering women's and girls'
development issues, including the important role they
play in fostering peace and security in our communities
and country.

An exemplary group that I wish to acknowledge here
is the Leitana Nehan Women's Development Agency,
which is based in Bougainville, Papua New Guinea, as
well as the FemLINKPACIFIC organization based in
Fiji, along with many other women's committees whose
collective membership contributes to that important
work. At the end of the day, their respective collective
contributions will enhance the work we must all

continue to do to consolidate the vision of resolution
1325 (2000).

Allow me to conclude by acknowledging the
presence of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and the representative of the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security here today.

