Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia): On behalf of Estonia, I
would like to thank all speakers today; a special thank
you goes to the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
for this year's report on women and peace and security
(S/2016/822).

We align ourselves with the statement of the
European Union and of the Group of Friends of
Women and Peace and Security, and we reiterate our
commitment to and support for protecting women's and
girls' rights globally.

The fundamental lesson that this report teaches us
is the sheer level of detail that is required in order to
address the issue of women's rights violations, so that
no one gets left behind. Every topic diverges into a
number of smaller issues; for example, violence against
women breaks down into matters such as stereotyping,
conflict-zone violence, sexual violence and extremist
Violence. If we focus only on sexual violence, for
instance, we start looking at questions of identification,
prevention, detection and victim support. From
victim support, we derive different types of services,
whether it be creating awareness, promoting access or
supplying psychological and physical specialists. This
overall process is a fragile transition that begins with
the facts, figures and estimates we read on paper, and
narrows down to the actual care and support each and
every woman receives personally. Every detail in that
transition will correspond to a certain woman living in
the world. When a detail is forgotten, a woman may be,
too. We, as Member States, must do two things for the
benefit of every single woman in need of help - invest
and collaborate more.

Estonia invests both domestically and globally in
achieving gender equality. At home, we have adopted
national action plans and development strategies aimed
at tackling issues such as stereotyping, violence and
inaccessible victim-support services. Mrs. Kaljulaid,
our newly elected President, is hopefully a testament
to the fact that Estonians can reach the highest ranks
regardless of their gender. However, we continue to
encourage women's participation in all spheres of
society, governance and industry. In the military, for
example, where the majority of participants are male,
we hope to triple the number of females in the next
two years.
Internationally, we remain committed to promoting
the potential of information and communications
technologies (ICT) and innovation for helping to
protect women's and girls' rights. ICT can give access
to voting and education, detect and collect data, offer
victim-support services, and function as a platform
for free speech and global communication. The list
goes on. We must establish more ICT mechanisms
with that goal in mind. In that regard, I would like to
commend UN-Women for collaborating with us in the
area of ICT, as well as for incorporating technology
into their own programmes and supporting a number of
related measures.

That brings me to the subject ofcollaboration. While
intergovernmental cooperation is extremely significant,
everyone should be heard from, and non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) and civil society have the ability
to provide new insights and data that might otherwise
be missed. There can be no doubt that that helps our
joint efforts to ensure that every detail is accounted for
and that no one is left behind. I would therefore like to
stress that representatives of civil society and NGOs
should be given larger platforms and more access to
United Nations meetings and conferences.

As the Secretary-General's report noted, last year
saw a record number of speakers - 113 - in the debate
on this subject (see S/PV.7533). That is no surprise,
since we believe that everyone should have a say in
this global challenge, whether reflective or predictive,
factual or emotional, pessimistic or positive. It is only
when we hear every detail that we can try to solve
every problem.

