Mrs. Grau (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this open
debate on the subject of women and peace and security.
We commend the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report (S/2009/362) on the
implementation of resolution 1820 (2008) and for his
recommendations.

Last year's adoption of resolution 1820 (2008)
was a major achievement. The resolution focuses on
sexual violence during and after conflicts, which is one
of the three pillars of resolution 1325 (2000). The
Secretary-General's report describes the measures
taken by the international community to prevent and
combat gender-based human rights violations. In this
regard, Switzerland has supported various multilateral
initiatives, such as the United Nations Action against
Sexual Violence in Conflict.

It is deplorable that sexual violence continues to
be perpetrated on a widespread basis, in particular as a
tactic of war. Women and girls are particularly at risk

and represent the majority of victims. We urge the
Security Council to call on all parties to armed conflict
to strictly comply with their obligations under
international law, in particular international
humanitarian law. We call on the Council to use the
instruments at its disposal, such as targeted sanctions
and the mandates of peacekeeping operations, to
combat sexual violence in armed conflict.

Switzerland supports the establishment of an
appropriate mechanism within the Security Council.
That would facilitate consideration and action in line
with the measures taken by parties to armed conflict to
comply with their obligations under international law.
In order to ensure a consistent approach, that
mechanism should provide for interaction with the
Security Council's Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict and its informal expert group on the
protection of civilians.

In that context, Switzerland welcomes the
adoption three days ago of resolution 1882 (2009), on
children and armed conflict. It makes sexual violence
an additional criterion for listing parties to an armed
conflict in the annexes of the Secretary-General's
reports. That resolution is a major decision in
strengthening the protection agenda of the Council.
That is why my country decided to join in sponsoring
it. However, it is regrettable that that protection
formula no longer applies once the victims reach
18 years of age.

International law obliges States not only to
refrain from committing violations. It also requires
them to take concrete measures to protect individuals
from sexual violence, bring to justice the perpetrators
and provide reparations for the victims. Yet, the
implementation of those measures remains weak.
States should do more to reform their legal systems in
order to bring perpetrators to justice and to protect
victims and treat them with respect at hearings. The
continued support of the international community is
necessary to help States to develop and to strengthen
their national capacities in that area.

In a broader context, today's debate emphasizes
one key aspect of resolution 1325 (2000). For
resolution 1820 (2008) to have a sustainable impact, an
integrated approach must be adopted. Greater
participation of women in peacekeeping missions
would render the protection and support of victims of
sexual violence more effective. It is also of great
importance for the prevention and combating of sexual
violence that women be more often involved in peace
processes as mediators, representatives of the parties to
the conflict or civil society partners.

Consequently, with a view to the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
I wish to highlight the importance of implementing
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008) in tandem.

