The Deputy Secretary-General: I want to reiterate
my deep appreciation to the Council for giving us this
opportunity to speak on this issue. It is a critical one that
strikes at the core of human rights, which are women's
rights. It is inhumane and strips women of their dignity.
It is a scar for life and often visits families beyond that
one person, and certainly many children that are born
as a result.

In answering the question that was put forward by
the representative of France, this trip in and of itself
was really also a response to what we felt was putting
life into the just texts that the Council has adopted in
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 2242 (2015), but really
trying to explain better what it is that we would be
looking at in countries where we want to see prevention
and sustaining peace a reality and how to make the
investments of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development a reality.

I think that in this trip it was very clear that
both Sustainable Development Goals 16 and 17 were
critical - that without strong institutions we cannot
make the demands of those aspirations that we have
for the Agenda. It is therefore important that we begin
to think of what sort of investments are going to be
needed up front if we are to really see many national
Governments responding to closing the gap between
the reality and the aspirations. I think we got keen
insights into that issue, just as we also did with respect
to partnerships, making many frameworks we have
between the United Nations and other institutions
a reality.

I think in that regard we were trying to walk the
talk and move very quickly into seeing how, with the
African Union, we could change the narrative in making
implementation of the 2030 Agenda and Agenda 2063
a reality. What better entry point is there for looking
at the most vulnerable populations? Which are also
the largest populations? We talk about 50 per cent of
our populations, 50 per cent of our assets that need
investments, need protecting and need their human
rights. It was wonderful to get the response that we got.

This trip was the supposed to also include a trip
to South Sudan. We were not able to go there due to
unforeseen circumstances, but with this response we
will now be able to look not only at the African region
but at other regions as well, in order to draw together
these issues, give a comprehensive view and bring to
everyone's continuous notice the complexities and
different ranges of context, not just in the conflicts that
we have seen in Africa but also across other regions.

It is critical when we do make these trips, as we felt
very strongly in both cases, that what we see and what
we come back with needs follow-up. We lose integrity
when we return from these trips and we cannot follow up
with the promises and the commitments that were made.
In particular, I would like to thank both Governments.

In Nigeria, we heard from young girls that they
faced a challenge. While they were appreciative of the
fact that they had a camp, security and a home, they
were totally devastated by the daily situation of having
to exchange sex for food. This fact made a very powerful
impression on us. How could we let that girl go back?
Well, fortunately for us, one of the recommendations
we made was, very simply, to change the policy. The
people dealing with the distribution of food in camps
should be women, not men. One should start with that
change, and in the course of our interactions with the
Nigerian Government we were able to get it agreed to.
Similarly, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
we heard women talk about the need not so much for
more security from the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo when they returned either into host communities
or their own communities, but for more microcredit. We
could see tents where we they were using coal as fuel
for their cookstoves, which was harmful for children.
Upon our return, we were able to ask those who were
involved with the clean cookstoves programme if
they could scale-up the programme across all the
camps where this was happening, and actually replace
the stoves.

I think that these are concrete things that make a
difference when we go on a field visit, we come back
and something happens. We were also able to expand
the microcredit for those women for that period. But
so much more is needed. So I hope that every trip we
make will result in commitments that become a reality
in people's lives.

Once again, I want to say that we will revert to
members of the Council. We are committed to attaining
zero gender-based violence, particularly in conflict,
and to holding Governments and, hopefully, all those
who perpetrate these crimes to account. It is important
that this be seen as a work in progress. People live in
different realities. I think we saw immense challenges,
but also many opportunities; and we believe that,
together, we can go much further.

I would just like to underscore our appreciation to
the Council for creating more opportunities to make
this work. Council members' visits to many countries,
including Colombia and the Lake Chad basin, have
made it possible for us to raise our ambitions in terms
of what we do.

The meeting rose at 12.20p.m.
