Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, the Senegalese delegation would like to thank
the French presidency for the timely choice of the
topic of today's debate, namely, responding to the
threats of human trafficking and sexual exploitation in
situations of armed conflict. Allow me to congratulate
you, Mr. President, for the meetings that France has
planned for the Council this month. You will have
our full cooperation as you guide the Council, and we
will have a busy month full of reflections and actions
in the service of peace around the world, particularly
in Africa.

I would also like to thank France's predecessor in
the presidency, Egypt, for its outstanding presidency of
the Council.

I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for
his important statement, as well as our briefers
today - Ms. Bangura, Ms. Giammarinaro and
Ms. Davis - for their high-quality briefings and for
the poignant accounts that they have shared with us,
which truly confirm the full gravity of this scourge that
shocks and disturbs the global conscience.

Sexual violence warrants the attention of the
Security Council as a factor behind the displacement
of persons, which Changes the composition of
communities, and as a source of financing for armed
groups, in particular terrorist groups, as well as a
means of humiliating enemy ethnic groups]. That is to
say that this debate is most timely because, on 19 June,
we will be marking the second International Day for the
Elimination of Sexual Violence in Conflict. Although,
for over 10 years, the topic has been a priority of the
Security Council, sexual violence in conflict is a matter
of increasing concern for the international community,
owing to rapes that are being perpetrated on a large scale
with full impunity, unfortunately, in various theatres
of conflict, including in Africa. The phenomenon is
of particular concern, as indicated by the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2016/361), because, for each
reported case of rape in connection with a conflict,
there are at least 10 others that go unreported, as they
are covered up owing to fear, shame or cultural and
social pressure.

As demonstrated by the report, that type of violence
and its disastrous consequences continue despite
efforts to combat such problems. While expressing the
growing concern about human trafficking committed
by non-State groups and terrorists, the report also
recommends reopening the international debate on the
financing ofviolent extremism and the fight against that
scourge by taking into account the new circumstances
encountered today. Moreover, it calls attention to the
economic and strategic underpinnings of selling women
and girls. With regard to the matter of sexual violence,
in particular human trafficking, we believe that it
is important that we have a comprehensive strategy
that is guided by the following priorities: prevention,
protection, reintegration and accountability.

Effective protection requires the appropriate means
and mechanisms to provide victims with a feeling of
trust and security, thereby allowing them to report the
perpetrators. With regard to prevention, vigilant and
quick intervention measures in connection with sexual
violence must be bolstered by providing sufficient
financial and human resources commensurate with the
situation at hand. Furthermore, as part of mediation
aimed at settling conflicts, there is a need to take into
account the challenges spurred on by gender issues so
as to ensure that the issue of sexual violence in conflict
is fully integrated in ceasefire and peace agreements,
the implementation mechanism for such agreements
and, of course, the various phases of peacebuilding.

In that regard, my delegation would like to welcome
the increasing presence on the ground of women's
protection advisers, who are responsible for convening
follow-up meetings focused on information-sharing and
monitoring aimed at dealing with sexual violence in
conflict and at facilitating dialogue between the parties
to a conflict so as to garner commitments to protect
victims. It is also crucial to invest in women's groups
locally so as to combat extremism and the radicalization
of youth. Accordingly, the example of the monitoring
and early-warning rooms for women - the Senegalese
equivalent of the women's situation room - a
mechanism that has existed in Senegal since 2012 and
the primary mission of which is to mobilize women and
girls to play an active role in the prevention of conflicts
through mediation, clearly illustrates the role played by
women's groups.

At the regional level, the prevention of sexual
violence should first begin with the implementation of
legal provisions and international texts ratified at the
level of the African Union (AU), such as resolution
283, adopted by the African Commission on Human
and Peoples' Rights, on the situation of women and
children in conflict. Nonetheless, it is important to note
that, in addition to prevention, suppression is extremely
important, in particular with regard to ensuring that
perpetrators are dissuaded from committing crimes.
There should also be a demonstration of the fact that no
high-level official or military person is above the law
and that no woman or child is without the protection of
the law.

Sadly, terrorist groups have distinguished
themselves in the area of human trafficking, in
particular in connection to sexual exploitation in armed
conflict, as the Secretary-General recalled earlier when
he spoke of the tragic kidnapping of girls in Chibok
by Boko Haram. My delegation remains convinced that
protection and women's empowerment must be at the
centre of any strategy aimed at fighting terrorism in
order to respond once and for all to the issue of gender.
In that regard, it is urgent to recall the great need to
implement resolution 2195 (2014), on the links between
terrorism and transnational organized crime, and the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime. We also believe that it is imperative
to collaborate with traditional religious leaders, who can
play more than a minor role in implementing strategic
public relations, thereby allowing us to counter and
neutralize extremist and terrorist narratives.
I would like to recall that the responsibility to
end sexual violence in armed conflicts falls on the
shoulders of the parties to conflict, with the support
of the international community. That will require a
combination of measures, in particular prevention,
assistance and protection. But it is also necessary to act
in a proactive manner to dissuade, detect and eradicate
human trafficking, especially by extremist and
violent groups, as was underscored by the presidential
statement on human trafficking adopted in 2015
(S/PRST/2015/25).

In conclusion, I am pleased to reaffirm Senegal's
continued commitment to the fight against sexual
Violence. That commitment is illustrated by the
sponsorship of the President of Senegal, Mr. Macky
Sall, of the launching of United Nations campaign
to that end, with the collaboration with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Bangura,
to whom we reiterate our full support.

