Mr. Itegboje (Nigeria): I thank the delegation of
Egypt for organizing this briefing. I also commend the
Deputy Secretary-General for taking her important
trip to Nigeria and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and for her detailed briefing. We are pleased
to note that the Deputy Secretary-General seized the
opportunity of the visit to highlight the importance of
women's role in achieving peace and development, and
even the Sustainable Development Goals.

We also thank Ambassador Te'te Anto'nio of the
Observer Mission ofthe African Union for his briefing.

It is evident that women and children suffer more,
are extremely vulnerable to violent extremism and are
victims of terrorism in many parts of the world most
affected by the scourge. We condemn in the strongest
terms the abduction, trafficking and maltreatment of
women and girls by extremist groups, including the
heinous activities of Boko Haram in the Lake Chad
region, particularly in north-eastern Nigeria. Indeed,
we condemn the use of women and girls as sex slaves.
In this regard, we welcome the efforts of the United
Nations aimed at improving interagency coordination,
knowledge-building, advocacy and technical country-
level support.

My delegation believes that to achieve an enduring
result in the search for workable solutions to the
challenges of sexual violence in conflict, priority must
be accorded to addressing the enabling environment
and underlying root causes of conflicts, such as poverty,
hunger, human rights abuses, injustice, unemployment,
corruption, lack of inclusiveness and impunity.

Perpetrators of sexual violence must be held
accountable, but the capacity of the State to do so given
the prevalence of weak structures and institutions needs
to be addressed. Beyond the law-enforcement approach,
however, dealing with the political economy of
conflicts in a more holistic manner is crucial to finding
potential remedies to the situation of conflicts around
the world. In this regard, multilateral cooperation
should be enhanced to strengthen States' capabilities in
order to deal with the threats posed by violent conflicts,
criminality and terrorism.

This briefing bears great relevance to the terrorist
activities of Boko Haram in the north-east region of
Nigeria, which have led to a huge displacement of about
2 million people and conflict-related violence against
women and girls that has been widely condemned.
Nigeria has always acted concertedly to ensure
accountability for sexual violence crimes. We have
also collaborated with the United Nations and other
international partners to improve service delivery and
enhance protection measures, both in communities and
in areas where women and girls seek refuge. These
efforts of the Government of Nigeria are in the context
of the great strides made by our military in degrading
Boko Haram.

In spite of daunting challenges, Nigeria has always
been in the vanguard of promoting the involvement of
women in conflict resolution, as well as in the promotion
of peace and security. In May 2017, Nigeria launched
the revised national action plan for the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) and related resolutions on
women, peace and security. The plan reflects our
commitment to ensuring the security of women and
children during armed conflicts and enhancing their
active and direct participation in conflict prevention
and peacebuilding. We have also taken measures to
enhance the security of women and girls in the camps
for internally displaced persons so as to reduce their
vulnerability and promote their safe return to their
homes and reintegration into society.

As part of efforts to counter violent extremism,
Nigeria is taking steps to deradicalize convicted
terrorists through the development of a range of experts
in psychology and counselors to pioneer rehabilitation
efforts, and to utilize Islamic scholars to counter
extremist narratives by training them on aspects of
dialogue and religious counselling. We are also working
assiduously with the affected communities to design
economic revitalization programmes targeted at people
most affected by terrorism and extremism.

We seize this opportunity to assure the Council
that, following the release of some of the abducted
Chibok school girls, the Government has intensified
its efforts to secure the release of the remaining girls,
including freeing them from the ideological grips of
Boko Haram terrorists. Having regained their freedom,
it is equally important that they regain their self-esteem
and be assisted in returning to their families and back
to their schools. Furthermore, emergency teams of
psychosocial counselors and health professionals have
been dispatched to the north-east to assist with the
profiling of victims for appropriate therapies.

In addition, the Government of Nigeria has put
in motion legal remedies for victims of Boko Haram
terrorism in the form of rape and other sexual violence
against children, the abduction of children and other
grave violations. Other remedies of a legal and social
nature taken so far by the Federal Government
include the diligent prosecution of 203 detained Boko
Haram terrorists in competent courts of law, as well
as the reintegration, reorientation and rehabilitation
programmes designed to meet the peculiarities of each
victim of sexual violence.

The Nigerian Government has launched the
Safe Schools initiative, aimed at providing education
and piloting safe education facilities in the conflict-
affected areas of the north-east. Nigeria also endorsed
the Safe Schools Declaration, by which it committed to
implementing the Guidelines for Protecting Schools and
Universities from Military Use during Armed Conflict.

Nigeria's laws and policies on the promotion
and protection of the rights of children reflect our
commitment to the relevant international instruments
to which we are signatory. The Government is operating
an enabling environment that provides women and
children with equal opportunities, protects their rights
and facilitates their full participation in society. A
national child policy is in place to further facilitate the
actualization of the rights enshrined in the Convention
on the Rights of the Child and the Child's Rights Act.
The Child Rights Act, which was signed into
law in 2003, prohibits all physical and mental abuse
of children. The Government was at the vanguard of
supporting and ratifying the Protocol to the African
Charter on Human and People's Rights on the Rights
of Women in Africa. Article 6 of the Charter sets the
minimum age for marriage at 18. The Government
has also adopted a national action plan to monitor
compliance with international human rights obligations.
Within this framework, a Human Rights Commissioner
has been appointed as Special Rapporteur on the Rights
of Children. The mandate for this position is to monitor
and assemble data on child rights abuse.

The Government has also set up agencies with a
mandate to protecting children. The National Human
Rights Commission, established in 1995 to protect and
enforce human rights in general, is very active in the
fight against child abuse. The National Agency for the.
Prohibition of Traffic in Persons works in partnership
with United Nations agencies and other Government
institutions at both the federal and state levels to
carry out the fight against trafficking in persons,
prevent trafficking, rehabilitate trafficked persons
and prosecute offenders, with particular emphasis on
trafficking of the girl child.

A national priority agenda for vulnerable children
2013-2020 has been developed as a strategic framework
to guide the multisectoral operationalization of the
Vision 20:20:20 strategies and objectives ofensuring the
protection of the most vulnerable children in Nigeria.
Funding has been made available to bolster awareness
of the public. The Government has also created the
Children's Parliament, as well as public holidays such
as Children's Day and Day of the African Child. Several
non-governmental organizations also complement the
efforts of the Government in that regard.

The Federal Government has also signed an
agreement with the International Labour Organization
and the International Programme on the Elimination of
Child Labour to establish shelter centres to rehabilitate
trafficked children and reunite them with their families.
In addition, the Government recently adopted a child
labour policy aimed at protecting children against
all kinds of abuse in the workplace and all forms of
labour that militate against the proper development of
the child. This is in line with our approach to fighting
human trafficking, which combines law enforcement
with policies aimed at the prevention of trafficking and
the protection of victims.

The Buhari plan is the current Administration's
comprehensive recovery blueprint, which integrates all
actors and actions into a coordinated set of activities
expected to create traction for the rapid recovery of
the north-east from the wreckage caused by the Boko
Haram insurgency.

Nigeria is aware of the challenges in the fight to
protect children and acknowledges that there is still
work to be done. The Government is firmly committed
to the task of protecting its women and children, and
counts on the continued support of the United Nations
in this regard. The Government will uphold all its
obligations under relevant international instruments
pertaining to international humanitarian law.

If there were any doubt about our commitment
to the protection of human rights, the Government, it
should now be put to rest. On 4 August, the Government
established the National Judicial Commission to look
into human rights abuses committed by military
personnel in the country. Its mandate is to, among
other things, scrutinize the compliance of the armed
forces with human rights obligations and rules of
engagement, especially in local conflict and insurgency
situations; to investigate alleged acts of violation of
international humanitarian and human rights law under
the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria of
1999, the Geneva Convention Act, the African Charter
on Human and Peoples' Rights and other relevant laws
by the Nigerian security agenies; and to look at factors
that might be hindering the quick resolution of local
conflict and offer solutions on how to prevent human
rights violations in times of conflict in the future.

Nigeria commends the work of all the United
Nations agencies - including the United Nations
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in
Nigeria, the United Nations Development Programme,
UN-Women, UNICEF, and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, as well as
international donors - that are actively working with
Nigeria to ensure the restoration of peace, security and
development in the north-east. However, Nigeria also
believes that better the coordination and coherence of
the work of these United Nations agencies in the region
would enhance efficiency in the work being done in
Nigeria. That would achieve better results and avoid
situations where agencies work at cross-purposes.

As we speak, all the service chiefs are in the
north-east. The number of military and paramilitary
personnel have been increased in the internally
displaced persons camps and in the north-east. We
recommit to ensuring that women and children enjoy
full rights, and that those who have perpetrated sexual
violence are dealt with in accordance with our national
laws and international obligations.

