Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): Ijoin previous speakers in
expressing our appreciation to you, Madam President,
and to the United States delegation for convening this
meeting, which my delegation supports. The initiative
is timely and appropriate in seeking to shine a light on
the heinous practice of human trafficking, increasingly
perpetrated by violent extremist groups such as Daesh,
Boko Haram and the Lord's Resistance Army, among
others.

The fact that such deplorable acts occur increasingly
frequently in conflict situations constitutes a clear and
present threat to international peace and security. As
such, it merits closer scrutiny and concerted action not
only by the Security Council but by the United Nations
system and, more generally, by the international
community. In that connection, I would like to thank
today's briefers - Deputy Secretary-General Jan
Eliasson, Mr. Yury Fedotov and Mr. Nick Grono for
their invaluable insights and perspectives, which have
greatly enriched our discussions. I have also listened
intently to Ms. Nadia Murad Basee Taha's presentation
and am humbled by her grace, courage and perseverance
in the face of such adversity. My delegation and I were
deeply moved by her account of her experiences and
suffering, which I am sure holds true for all the victims.
We greatly appreciate her presence here today.

Malaysia would like to emphasize its complete
condemnation of every act of intolerance, intimidation
or violence in situations of armed conflict perpetrated
by terrorists and violent extremist groups, particularly
acts of human trafficking in which victims are
subjected to slavery, torture and even murder. We
unequivocally reject any connection that such groups as
Daesh and Boko Haram seek to establish between such
heinous practices and the precepts of Islam, which is a
religion founded on peace and the dignity of the human
person, whether woman, man or child. On that note,
Malaysia is pleased to join the Council's consensus
in welcoming the adoption of today's presidential
statement S/PRST/2015/25. We believe the presidential
statement represents a concrete first step on the part of
the Council in recognizing the international peace and
security dimension of human trafficking, while at the
same time underscoring the need to take coordinated,
sustained and decisive action against its perpetrators.

It also sits well with the Council's ongoing efforts to
better coordinate the implementation of its own policies
and positions in the fight against terrorism and violent
extremism. While we emphasize the centrality and
importance of respect for and adherence to the precepts
of international human rights and humanitarian law in
that regard, another equally key component is improved
integration and coordination of efforts undertaken
within the framework of international criminal law,
specifically the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and its Palermo
Protocols.

In responding to the call in the concept note for
concrete, action-oriented discussion, I would like to
share the following three proposals.

With a view to addressing the scourge of human
trafficking in a comprehensive and holistic manner, we
stress the importance of putting in place reintegration
activities and programmes, especially for women and
children who have been freed, not only to protect
them from re-victimization and stigmatization,
but also to enable them to believe that there is hope
after victimhood. While mindful of the context of
conflict in which the kind of human trafficking we are
discussing today occurs, we would like to stress how
important it is that States subscribe to and implement
instruments such as the Palermo Protocols, which
include provisions on measures aimed at achieving the
physical, psychological and social recovery of victims
of human trafficking.

Improving coordination with existing initiatives,
for example, means introducing the outcomes and
visions outlined in the presidential statement into the
work of the Council's Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict, which, based on resolution
2225 (2015), is also paying greater attention to the
issue of the abduction and kidnapping of children in
conflict situations. Further linkages could be made
with the work of the Committee established pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1999 (2011), concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, and
other relevant sanctions committees.

In conclusion, Malaysia believes that trafficking in
persons poses a real threat to many countries, not just
those in conflict situations. Indeed, due to its location
and relative political and economic stability, Malaysia
has had to contend with the issue for quite some time
now. It is a multifaceted problem that requires extensive
coordination and cooperation from all sides, including
Governments, multilateral partners, civil society and
other relevant interlocutors. Given the complexity and
cross-cutting nature of human trafficking and related
issues, political will at the national, regional and
international levels is a major factor in determining
whether tangible and sustained results and improvement
can be achieved. In that regard, the Council is well placed
to continue making strong, unified pronouncements
backed up by equally effective policy decisions and
measures that unequivocally demand accountability
and deny impunity for perpetrators.

