Mr. Wolff (United States of America):
Mr. President, the United States would like to thank
you and the Permanent Mission of Ghana for choosing
to focus on the important topic of women and peace
and security for this month's open debate. We welcome
the Secretary-General's latest report and agree that
important groundwork has been laid for a longer-term
effort by the United Nations towards the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). However,
much more needs to be done.

The important contribution women can and do
make in decision-making to prevent conflict, mediate
peace processes and assist in post-conflict
reconstruction and rebuilding must be recognized and
endorsed at a national level. Failure to bring women
into these processes in a meaningful way leaves a
critical resource untapped and excludes a large
segment, in many cases, a majority of the population.
This undermines both the credibility and the
sustainability of these processes.

The United States calls on all Member States to
promote gender equality and a greater role for women
in the prevention of conflict, peace processes and post-
conflict reconstruction.

As part of this effort to incorporate women fully
into international efforts to prevent and resolve
conflicts, the United States strongly supports the
appointment of women to senior positions throughout
the United Nations system and, in particular, a special
envoy or representative of the Secretary-General. In
this regard, the United States especially welcomes the
recent nomination of Ambassador Loj as the Secretary-
General's new Special Representative for Liberia.

The United States calls on the Secretary-General
as a matter of urgency to increase the number of

women considered for United Nations special
representative and envoy positions and encourages
Member States to redouble their efforts to nominate
women candidates for these positions.

One of the key challenges we face today is
reducing the tragedy of violence against women and
girls in areas afflicted by armed conflict. It is often
women and children who face the most horrific
consequences of conflict in the world today. Sexual
violence against women is reprehensible in any
context, but it is especially heinous when it is used by
political or military leaders as a tool to achieve
political or military objectives.

It is with this in mind that the United States and
others have introduced a draft resolution in the Third
Committee of the General Assembly entitled
"Eliminating the use of rape and other forms of sexual
violence as instruments to achieve political or military
objectives" (A/C.3/62/L.16). This draft resolution
condemns the use by States and by non-State actors of
rape, typically systematic mass rape, to achieve
military or political objectives. This would be the first
United Nations resolution to focus specifically on this
particularly egregious form of violence against women.
It calls for States to end impunity by prosecuting and
punishing those who use rape as a military or political
tool and to protect and support victims; and it calls for
States, appropriate United Nations officers and
agencies and civil society to develop and implement
comprehensive strategies on prevention and
prosecution of rape. We ask Member States to support
and to consider sponsoring the text, which will be
addressed under the Assembly's agenda item 63, on the
advancement of women.

Given the special vulnerability of the civilian
population during conflicts that threaten the peace and
security of their nations, it is particularly abhorrent
when those charged with restoring peace and stability
become the perpetrators of sexual exploitation and
abuse of women and children. The Council has
addressed this issue in past statements, reiterating its
condemnation of all acts of sexual exploitation and
abuse by all categories of personnel in United Nations
peacekeeping missions and urging troop-contributing
countries to take appropriate preventive action,
including the conduct of pre-deployment awareness
training and to take disciplinary and other action to
ensure full accountability in cases of misconduct
involving their personnel.
The United Nations, as we heard earlier this
morning from Under-Secretary-General Guehenno, has
made considerable and laudable efforts to enforce a
zero-tolerance policy towards sexual exploitation and
abuse by personnel assigned to United Nations
peacekeeping operations and has made considerable
progress in providing appropriate training, as well as
improved oversight of conduct and discipline.

We underscore the need for all allegations to be
investigated properly and for appropriate follow-up
action to be taken.

