Mr. Davide (Philippines): First of all, the
Philippines commends and congratulates you,
Mr. President, and the Security Council for conducting
this open debate on the issue of women and peace and
security. The Philippines also commends the Secretary-
General for the preparation of the background report on
this subject, contained in document S/2008/622.

At the outset, the Philippines draws attention to
paragraph 4 of the report, under the heading: "Impact
of armed conflict on women: critical themes and issues
of concern":

"Despite the Security Council's repeated
appeals to respect the equal rights of women and
their role in peace processes and in
peacebuilding, millions of women and children
continue to account for the majority of casualties
in hostilities, often in flagrant violation of human
rights and humanitarian law. In armed conflicts
and post-conflict situations, women bear the
brunt of shattered economies and social
structures."

The succeeding paragraphs 6 and 7 detail the
horrors of rape and sexual and physical violence
women suffer in some parts of the world. At a time
when the United Nations just celebrated the sixty-third
anniversary of the entry into force of the Charter and
Member States await the commemoration, on
10 December 2008, of the adoption and proclamation
by the General Assembly of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, these findings on the tragic
conditions of women in crisis and conflict situations
shock us, rend our hearts and prick our consciences.

The fifth paragraph of the report states that the
overriding concern for women in crisis and conflict
situations is their physical security and that of their
children. Thus, the Philippines appreciates the role and
contribution of the Security Council, acting within its
mandate, in ensuring peace and security for women. At
this time, where violence against women, particularly
sexual violence, is increasingly being used as a
deliberate and systematic weapon of war, it is
extremely important that the Council remain seized of
the issues of women in crisis and conflict situations. In
this regard, the Philippines welcomes the adoption by
the Council, in June, of resolution 1820 (2008), in
which it recognizes sexual violence as a security
problem when such violence is used or commissioned
as a tactic of war.

The Secretary-General's extensive report on the
efforts by Member States, United Nations entities and
international and regional organizations offers much
encouragement and hope. We commend these

stakeholders for their gender-responsiveness, mainly
guided by Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), as
they tackle the complicated and complex issues of
various conflict situations.

However, the report is also quick to admit that,
despite these efforts, gender-based violence is still
persistent and that the efforts to address this problem
need to be improved and coordinated effectively.

The strategies inspired by resolution 1325 (2000)
that are carried out by United Nations entities and
other organizations have increased their impact on the
ground. However, we would like to highlight the issue
of the sustainability of successful results. In this
respect, the United Nations should lead in giving more
emphasis to the effective transfer of skills and
capacities to the national and local authorities and civil
society actors on the ground. This is important to
enable enhanced national ownership of activities in
support of gender equality and women's empowerment.

Although I speak about capacity-building, I
should also stress that gender training and education in
the context of conflict should include the sensitization
of men and boys on their particular role in instilling a
culture of gender equality and women's empowerment.
Men, who are the predominant actors in conflicts,
should be made aware that they themselves are the best
agents to promote gender equality and to change a
culture of impunity for violence against women to a
culture of respect for the fundamental human rights of
women.

While I have touched upon the role of men and
boys in ending gender violence in conflict, I should
also underscore that the role of women as agents of
peacekeeping, peacebuilding, conflict prevention,
conflict resolution and post-conflict reconstruction is at
the heart of securing peace for women. Resolution
1325 (2000), which puts the spotlight on the role of
women as active agents for their own peace, paved the
way for a paradigm shift. The old paradigm saw
women and girls as mere victims. Now, through
resolution 1325 (2000), there is broad realization that
women themselves are the key to preventing and
resolving conflict. In order to make this happen,
however, there should be affirmative action that
promotes women's participation and leadership in
decision-making. Unfortunately, even with our gains in
the area of gender equality, women continue to be
underrepresented in the processes, institutions and
mechanisms dealing with all aspects of conflict and the
restoration of peace. Women should be provided the
political space, along with the technical knowledge and
capacities, needed to bring out their natural abilities as
peacemakers, peacekeepers and problem-solvers.

I would also like to highlight the need for the
United Nations to improve on its monitoring and
reporting on gender issues in conflict situations.
Inconsistent country-specific and thematic reports that
have scarce information on gender issues in conflicts
will not aid the Council's consideration. Thus, the
Philippines welcomes the efforts of the Secretariat to
improve the monitoring and reporting aspect, so that
the Council can meaningfully and effectively assess
situations and provide the necessary guidance. The
support of Member States in this regard is
indispensable.

In conclusion, it is clear that there remains a gap
between our aspirations for women affected by conflict
and the actions on the ground. This gap should never
widen. It should be decreased through strategic
international cooperation, particularly through regional
approaches that maintain the focus on gender-based
solutions to conflict. Accordingly, the Security Council
should maximize its role as a catalyst for and an
instrument of cooperation. It should take advantage of
its prominent and unique role in the international
community to rally more collaborative actions to
support gender-responsiveness when dealing with the
various dimensions of conflict. That would be another
way to give authentic meaning to the forthcoming
celebration of the sixtieth anniversary of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, which proclaims in the
opening paragraph of its preamble that
"recognition of the inherent dignity and of the
equal and inalienable rights of all members of the
human family is the foundation of freedom,
justice and peace in the world".

