Mr. Salam (Lebanon): Allow me first to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this important and
timely debate. Allow me also to thank His Excellency
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon; Mrs. Asha-Rose
Migiro, Deputy Secretary-General; Ms. Michelle
Bachelet, Under-Secretary-General for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women; Mr. Alain
Le Roy, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations; His Excellency Mr. Hamidon Ali,
President of the Economic and Social Council; and
Ms. Thelma Awori for their briefings. I would also like
to take this opportunity to welcome the Ministers
participating in our debate today.

As we mark the tenth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), let us take this opportunity
to examine the progress that has been achieved, as well
as the challenges that persist. Over the past decade, the
United Nations system, Member States and civil
society have made significant efforts to implement
resolution 1325 (2000) through a wide spectrum of
measures and initiatives. Considerable progress has
been made in increasing awareness of the threat that
sexual violence constitutes to peace and security and of
the cost of excluding women from peace processes. In
the 10 years since the adoption of the resolution, many
steps have been taken on the ground, including

increasing the number of gender advisers, the adoption
of guidelines for field action and the elaboration of a
System-wide Action Plan. Member States have
organized consultations and developed national action
plans, and civil society organizations have stepped up
their activities to support the role of women in areas of
conflict and post-conflict. The creation of a new United
Nations gender entity and the appointment of President
Michelle Bachelet as its head, the appointment of
Ms. Margot Wallstrom as the Special Representative on
Sexual Violence in Conflict and the creation of a
High-Level Steering Committee for Women, Peace and
Security have generated unique momentum within the
United Nations and beyond.

However, despite these important efforts, the
conditions that women and girls face in situations of
armed conflict continue to be abhorrent, and effective
methods for monitoring the impact of the measures put
in place to protect them are lacking, as pointed out by
the Secretary-General in his report (S/2010/498). Rape
continues to be used unabated as a weapon of war, as
the events of July 2010 in the eastern provinces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo shockingly
reminded us. Out of 300 peace agreements negotiated
since 1989, only 18 contain even a passing reference to
sexual violence, which remains the least-condemned
war crime. Of particular concern is the problem of
sexual violence against displaced women, a
phenomenon that is widespread and growing. One way
to ensure prevention and a more effective response to
such acts of violence is through the dissemination of
the guidelines established by the Inter-Agency
Standing Committee.

As they care for their families and raise their
children, women play a crucial role in restoring the
fabric of society and overcoming war wounds. Yet,
their own wounds are still not being properly remedied.
In that regard, reforming the security sector and
ensuring respect for the rule of law in a gender-
responsive manner is of crucial importance. Conflict
and post-conflict societies should be assisted in those
areas at the earliest possible moment in order to ensure
that the police and military do not abuse the very
population whom they are supposed to be protecting.

In recent peace negotiations, women represented
less than 8 per cent of the participants and less than 3
per cent of the signatories. That endangers the
prospects for long-lasting peace since women are
crucial partners in shoring up three of its pillars:
economic recovery, social cohesion and political
legitimacy, as affirmed by the Secretary-General in his
recent report (S/2010/466).

Including women in peace talks is not enough by
itself. In some post-conflict societies, women who have
been victims of sexual violence, widows and orphan
girls are ostracized, exacerbating the challenges that
they must overcome and compromising the prospects
for enduring peace. Hence, more concerted efforts must
be made in order to raise awareness among men and
sensitize them to the importance of safeguarding
women's rights for durable peace and the well-being of
society as a whole.

A shortfall in the financing of women's needs in
post-conflict recovery plans persists. Donors could play
a very constructive role in that regard by supporting
women's and girls' education. Donors should also help
women to attain economic independence through land
ownership, micro-enterprise and skills training.

As pointed out by the Secretary-General, Member
States must ensure that their support for women's
engagement in peacebuilding is consistent. While
Governments have the primary responsibility to take
action in their countries, when need be, they must be
able to count on the predictable support of United
Nations partners. Despite the increase in female
participation in United Nations missions, only 3 per
cent of uniformed peacekeepers and 8 per cent of
United Nations police are women. Increasing their
numbers would help improve the sense of security of
women in vulnerable situations.

Finally, efforts to implement resolution 1325
(2000) should be more coherent. There is, therefore, a
need for a strategic framework that includes
well-defined targets and indicators. The preliminary set
of indicators annexed to the Secretary-General's report
(S/2010/498), is an important tool for taking stock of
the progress achieved and for tracking the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in conflict
and post-conflict situations. The indicators should not
be seen as a reporting obligation, but rather as a means
to facilitate Member States' engagement. Progress
should not be measured exclusively through data and
figures, and each indicator should be read in its
specific context.

Over the next decade, our success in protecting
women in conflict situations will be measured by the
real impact that our actions have on the ground. The
framework and tools are there. Let us make sure that
we back them with the necessary political will.

