Ms. King (Australia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important debate. We very much
appreciate your initiative, as well as the briefings we
received this morning. In the two and a half years since
the Council committed to taking more effective action
to prevent and address sexual violence in conflict, we
have witnessed a significant number of United Nations
actions designed to turn rhetoric into action. The work
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict has been integral to this
effort. The landmark adoption of resolution 1960
(2010) 12 months ago demonstrated the Council's
willingness to take measures to end the scourge of
sexual violence in conflict. It is critical that the
Council and Member States implement resolution 1960
(2010) fully.

Australia strongly supports the work of the
Special Representative, particularly the increasing use
of field visits and direct engagement with parties to
conflict. We encourage the Council to receive regular
briefings from the Special Representative when she
considers issues related to sexual violence to be
relevant to its deliberations. That would help the
Council to undertake its preventive role.

We know that conflict situations are usually
characterized by the breakdown of law and order. The
impunity that can prevail in such situations has a
particularly devastating impact on the victims of sexual
violence. Accountability for crimes of sexual violence
is critical to changing behaviours. The increased
engagement of the Council with the parties listed in the
Secretary-General's report (S/20l2/33) is an important
element in developing such cultures of accountability,
as is the consideration by sanctions committees of
targeted and graduated measures against persistent
perpetrators of violence.

We encourage the Council to remain seized of the
need to deploy women protection advisers to
peacekeeping and special political missions. The
inclusion of relevant information in country-specific
reports and in mission mandates must also be
considered. We also join South Africa in encouraging
the inclusion of more women as uniformed personnel
in peacekeeping operations, and welcome India's
statement today that it is willing to increase its own
contribution in this regard.

We welcome the recent deployments of the Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
3
Conflict. South Sudan's use of this expertise to guide
the planning of its justice system should be particularly
welcomed. Integrating the voices of women into design
will better ensure gender-responsive justice systems.

Over the past two and a half years, we have
witnessed a renewed dedication by the United Nations,
as well as troop- and police-contributing countries, to
developing and implementing tools to prevent and
address sexual violence, consistent with their mandate
to protect civilians. The rollout through scenario-based
training for peacekeepers of the United Nations toolkit
to address conflict-related sexual violence was an
important development, and Australia was pleased to
fund it. We encourage troop- and police-contributing
countries to integrate this tool into predeployment
training.

Security sector reform must address conflict-
related sexual violence. The development of human
rights training tools for security officials will help to
extend these efforts to detention and interrogation
facilities, which are often beyond the reach of
peacekeeping missions. Australia is also pleased to be
working with the Department of Political Affairs and
UN-Women to support women's engagement in
decision-making on security sector reform.

Separately, we have supported the development
of a victim management programme for Pacific police,
and developed police manuals on gender-based
violence in Timor-Leste. The Australian Federal Police
is also formulating a police development strategy and
toolkit that include a focus on gender and conflict-
related issues, which will assist our police who are
working with international partners to address conflict-
related sexual violence.

Australia continues to build on its work to
implement Resolution 1325 (2000). We are consulting
closely with civil society to develop the first Australian
national action plan on women, which includes work to
protect the human rights of women and girls affected
by conflict, particularly in relation to sexual violence.
Last year, we appointed a global ambassador for
women and girls, and the protection of women and
girls in conflict zones is a core component of the
ambassador's mandate.

We look forward to the Secretary-General's next
report outlining recommendations for advocacy and
action to be made by the United Nations joint
consultation forum. The momentum of the past two
years must be harnessed for further action and results.

