Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): First of all, let me express our
heartfelt condolences to the people and the Government
of Sri Lanka on the heinous terrorist attack perpetrated
on innocent civilians by cowardly groups. We condemn
it in the strongest terms, and we stand in solidarity with
the people and Government of Sri Lanka.

We are greatly indebted to Germany for organizing
this important debate on the women and peace and
security agenda and the prevention of conflict-related
sexual violence. We must also thank the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive tenth annual report on
conflict-related sexual violence (S/2019/280), as well
as all those who have provided briefings for us this
morning. The report of the Secretary-General clearly
highlights the current trends and our concerns about
sexual violence in conflict. We sincerely hope that it will
allow us to draw up a clear framework of commitment
and seriously address the challenges involved in the
prevention of conflict-related sexual violence.

Sexual exploitation, abuse and violence in conflict
situations demands the strongest possible actions
and responses. One of those responses must be the
mobilization of international efforts to galvanize
effective and organized prevention measures to deal
with those challenges. We all know that sexual violence
is a common part of the tactics of terrorist organizations
in conflict and post-conflict situations everywhere. The
need to intensify efforts to prevent such violence and
hold accountable those who are responsible requires
global attention. At the same time, as reports from
the United Nations peacekeeping missions in Africa
currently make clear, it is Africans who are most
affected by this problem today. It is obvious that we
need to apply much greater efforts to stop the activities
of armed groups and other parties to conflict. We must
take action - urgent action - to deal with those areas.

In the context of Africa, we strongly welcome
the Secretary-General's recommendation of engaging
religious and traditional leaders to help mitigate the
suffering of survivors. Equally, we believe that a central
part of any recovery plan must be to strengthen the
capacity of the national institutions of conflict-affected
countries by providing finance and technical expertise
for their prevention efforts.

The Security Council should continue to encourage
prevention and capacity-building to address the root
causes of conflict. Those, of course, include persistent
problems of gender inequality and even backward
discriminatory practices. There is also a very real need
to encourage and promote the meaningful participation
of civil society organizations. They are absolutely
necessary to bring about changes in structural gender
inequality practices. The Council should employ all and
every means at its disposal and make every effort to
enhance and sustain a global response against conflict-
related sexual violence.

In that connection, the African Union (AU) has
demonstrated its commitment to fighting impunity
and holding accountable those responsible for conflict-
related sexual violence. One aspect of that should be
the continuous training of all peacekeeping personnel,
whether on United Nations or AU missions, on issues
related to gender and conflict-related sexual violence. I
am glad to be able to say that that has been prioritized
in Ethiopia's deployment of peacekeepers.

Finally, let me once again affirm the commitment of
Ethiopia to criminalizing sexual violence and working
with the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
and others, to prevent conflict-related sexual violence.
We welcome the Secretary-General's commitment to
increasing women's representation in United Nations
activities, whether as special representatives and
envoys, in field operations or among military observers,
police and human rights and humanitarian personnel.
We also appreciate and support his suggested measures
to prevent conflict-related sexual violence and his call
for a policy of zero tolerance. At the same time, we
reiterate the necessity that we should agree to a strong
and clear framework of action to respond effectively to
these challenges.

