Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French):
My delegation would like to begin by thanking you,
Sir, for taking the initiative to organize this debate to
assess the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on
its tenth anniversary, which the Council is celebrating
today. We would also like to pay tribute to your
country, Uganda, for the efforts made to organize this
important meeting. My delegation also thanks the
Secretary-General for his important communication.

We welcome the presence here of Ms. Michelle
Bachelet, Under-Secretary-General for Gender Equality
and the Empowerment of Women and thank her for
introducing the annual report of the Secretary-General
on women, peace and security (S/2010/498). Lastly, we
would like to welcome the participation of the
Ministers who have come here to lead their delegations;
Mrs. Asha-Rose Migiro, Deputy Secretary-General; His
Excellency Mr. Hamidon Ali, President of the
Economic and Social Council; Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations; and
Ms. Thelma Awori. We thank them for their respective
contributions.

In your concept paper, Mr. President, you invite
us to review the progress made ten years after the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) by the Council. We
would like to speak on two points - the progress we
have made and the challenges that remain ahead as we
seek to achieve the effective implementation of this
major resolution.

The adoption of this resolution has marked a
historic step in the United Nations consideration of the
participation of women in the peace process and the
strengthening of protection for women and girls from
violence in conflict and post-conflict situations.
Council resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and
1889 (2009) have made it possible to better coordinate
the efforts of the international community aimed at
ensuring a greater involvement of women in seeking
solutions to problems of peace and security. As
the report of the Secretary-General rightly points out,
this issue is now an integral part of the Security
Council's agenda. Similarly, many reports of the
Secretary-General on peacekeeping operations contain
information on actions that are aimed at guaranteeing
the participation of women in conflict prevention,
management and peacebuilding.

At the national level, many countries have taken
the issue on by adopting action plans that seek to give
effect to the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council. For its part, Gabon has taken concrete
measures that make it possible today for many women
to assume important responsibilities, including at the
highest levels in all branches of the army and the
police force. Their role in seeking solutions to security
problems in our country is crucial.

The President of the Republic, His Excellency Ali
Bongo Ondimba, has given expression to this
important endeavour by promoting a woman of great
experience to the high-level functions of the Minister
of Defence. She now has the onerous responsibility of
steering government action in the areas of defence and
security.

Within the framework of the United Nations, we
must welcome the efforts of the Secretary-General
aimed at ensuring an increasing participation of women
in positions of responsibility in peace missions. That
has been the case in the Central African Republic,
Liberia, Timor-Leste, Nepal and Cyprus.

Operationally, the important contribution of
women in the various areas of peacekeeping operations
is an achievement that deserves to be noted, as
Ms. Bachelet and Mr. Le Roy have done so well. I
would like to reaffirm here that the readiness of Gabon
to continue to work closely with the United Nations
and other Member States in order to assume its share of
the responsibility in strengthening the progress
achieved thus far.

While we are pleased with those important
achievements, we are forced to acknowledge that much
remains to be done in order to reach the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). This leads
me to my second point.

Everyone agrees that women and children are the
main targets of armed conflict. They make up the
majority of refugees and displaced persons in the
world. Violence against women and girls is a flagrant
violation of human rights. Those responsible for such
heinous crimes should be prosecuted and brought to
justice. In this area, the Security Council must ensure,
through its sanctions committees, a scrupulous respect
for international humanitarian law in armed conflict
situations and promote capacity-building for States in
the area of criminal justice in order to bring an end to
impunity. Therefore, peace missions must be equipped
with greater operational capabilities for the protection
of women and girls. Indeed, the real challenge here is
to transform the strategic vision expressed in resolution
1325 (2000) into a tangible reality.

From this point of view, the recommendations
contained in the Secretary-General's report warrant our
consideration. As for the indicators, the Secretary-
General's report points out that many of them will not
be operational until two years from now. We therefore
encourage the Secretary-General to continue his
consultations with Member States and regional groups
on the practical modalities of those indicators.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to
provide its full support to the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2010/22) that was adopted at the beginning of
this discussion. We express the wish that, under the
leadership of Ms. Michelle Bachelet, whose
appointment we once again welcome, the new entity,
UN Women, will enable better coordination and more
effective action by the United Nations in implementing
resolution 1325 (2000) throughout the upcoming
decade. We are convinced that it is with the essential
contribution of women that we will manage to achieve
our aspirations for more peace and security in an
international environment characterized by recurring
conflict.

