Mr. Koriisi (Hungary): I align myself with the
position of the European Union (EU) as communicated
by the head of the EU delegation a short while ago.

We are convinced that women's participation in
the maintenance of peace and security is in itself a
basic human right.

In this context, we are pleased that this issue has
achieved a prominent place on the international
agenda. We believe that the involvement of women in
peace negotiations and conflict mediation should be
supported. Furthermore, let us remember that peace
negotiations and post-conflict reconstruction are not
only about achieving an end to hostilities, but also
about the beginning of a new future.

We have to recognize that violence against
women, including sexual and gender-based violence,
poses a real threat to broader security and creates a
serious challenge to the full and active participation of
women in peace processes. We believe that systematic
sexual violence, used as a tactic of war through the
deliberate targeting of civilians, in particular women
and girls, significantly aggravates the situation during
an armed conflict. Those lasting negative impacts may
seriously impede the recovery and reconciliation
processes as well.

I would like to take the opportunity to confirm
that the Government of the Republic of Hungary is
strongly committed to implementing resolution 1325
(2000). We stand firmly behind endeavours aimed at
mainstreaming gender issues in the strategies, policies,
programmes and actions aimed at promoting the
participation of women in decision-making and peace
processes. Upon assuming the Presidency of the
European Union for the first semester of 2011,
Hungary intends to maintain the current momentum by
organizing a conference as a follow-up to the series of
events marking the tenth anniversary of United Nations
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000).

I strongly believe that enhanced cooperation in
the field of women rights, peace and security and the
joint commitment to foster the implementation of this
agenda will ensure that women fully enjoy their
fundamental rights, which are the basic components of
lasting peace and security.
