Mr. Guehenno: I want to begin by thanking the
Security Council and all Member States for their strong
support and engagement on a very important issue.
Without a steady, long-term, persistent commitment,
we will not resolve that issue. For our part, we will
continue to pursue this effort aggressively. As we
pursue it aggressively, more allegations will surface;
that is an unpleasant part of having the kind of
transparency that we want to have so that
investigations can be held when they are needed.
There, we will work closely with the Office of Internal
Oversight Services (OIOS). We hope that OIOS will
get all the resources it needs to develop these
investigations so that no stone is left unturned, so that
every effort can be made, so that there will be follow-
up, so that there will be no impunity and so that there
will be accountability.

I want to say a word on the two challenges that
have occupied the Council yesterday and today: the
challenge of sexual exploitation and abuse and the
challenge related to procurement. I believe that the
challenge of sexual exploitation and abuse is actually a
more daunting one, because what we are facing there is
essentially a change of culture that goes far beyond the
United Nations: it affects all societies and all armies
around the world. That is why the effort has to include
a strong partnership between the Secretariat and
Member States.

The challenge related to procurement is a more
complex one, for two reasons: first, because there are
issues of possible fraud, mismanagement and
inadequate rules; and secondly, because this is a cross-
cutting issue. While the issue of fraud has to be dealt
with aggressively by OIOS, pursuing its investigations,
the questions of mismanagement and of inadequate
rules involve two departments: the Department of
Management as the central actor in the procurement
process, with its procurement office; and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, because we
define the needs that then lead to contracts managed by
the Department of Management. That is why we have
to work closely together. I am encouraged to see how,
at this stage, the two departments are working closely
together to address this challenge.

Finally, let me say a word to Ambassador
Oshima, who was kind enough to say that he did
not envy me. I would say that when one goes to a
mission - and I will be travelling to a mission in a
few days' time - one sees the expectations of the
people there and sees the difference that the
peacekeepers are making on the ground. I think the
difficulties that we face are part of the effort that needs
to be undertaken to strengthen this vital instrument of

peacekeeping. So it may be hard: it may sometimes be
unpleasant; and when we receive news of sexual
exploitation and abuse or possible fraud it hurts us
deeply. But at the same time, when one sees the
difference that is being made on the ground, one thinks
it is worth all the effort.

