Mr. Ileka (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): At a time when the month of your
presidency is drawing to a close, please allow me, Sir,
to commend you for the skill and competence with
which you have accomplished your difficult task. My
delegation would also like to commend you for your
praiseworthy initiative in organizing this important
debate on women and peace and security, marking the
third anniversary of the unanimous adoption by the
Security Council of resolution 1325 (2000). That
resolution was the result of many years of work among
Governments, non-governmental organizations and
United Nations agencies.

My delegation is pleased to participate in the
current meeting. It is pleased that the Council wished
to retain this item on its agenda and to follow up on the
implementation of the provisions of resolution 1325
(2000), thereby showing its determination to remain
involved in the work to ensure gender equality in the
area of peace and security.

I would like to take this opportunity not only to
thank Mr. Guehenno and Ms. Smythe for their
invaluable introductory presentations on the item under
consideration, but also to pay a well-deserved tribute to
Ms. King and her entire team in the Division for the
Advancement of Women for the work they are doing in
promoting the status of women, and for their efforts to
increase the participation of women in the sphere of
conflict prevention and settlement. I would also like to
take this opportunity to welcome the appointment of an
interim Gender Adviser in the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO).

When the Namibian presidency convened a
meeting of the Council to discuss the status of women
and peace, a large number of delegations, including my
own, welcomed the initiative. The adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) by the Council was thus a
historic turning point that allowed us to draw the
world's attention to and heighten its awareness of the
effects of conflict and the important role played by
women in settling disputes and maintaining peace. It
was the first Council resolution dealing exclusively
with women in armed conflict. Among other things, it
drew up a complete programme on women, peace and
security, designed, inter alia, to ensure their full
participation on an equal footing in peace processes
and peace-building activities and provided for training
on the role of women for the personnel of
peacekeeping operations.

The commemoration of the third anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) is a timely
reminder that the Council had asked Member States to
involve women in all peace efforts. The Council had
called on the Secretary-General to implement a
strategic plan of action to that end and to draw
international attention to women's priorities. It also
highlighted the contribution of women to peace
processes.

Lasting peace and security cannot be achieved
without the emancipation and full participation of
women, since their contribution at the local level to
maintaining cohesive communities in conflict, along
with their experience in peace processes and social
reconstruction, are undeniable. States must therefore
make the necessary effort to ensure women's
participation at all phases and levels of the peace
process so as to ensure political stability to the benefit
of all. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Transitional Constitutional provides for the State's
obligation to take measures in all areas, especially in
the economic, social and cultural spheres, to ensure the
full participation of women in the nation's
development.

My delegation welcomes the opportunity afforded
by this debate to stress once again the basic importance
of peace and security to achieving parity between the
sexes and allowing women to participate in the
decision-making process.

At its twenty-third special session, the General
Assembly reaffirmed the international community's
dedication to the creation of a conducive atmosphere
for and to the implementation of policies to promote,
protect and guarantee women's enjoyment of their
civil, cultural, economic, political and social rights,
including the right to development, with a View to
achieving equality, development and peace. The
promotion of sustainable development, which involves
fighting poverty, hunger and disease, needs long-term
action to promote equality between men and women.

Similarly, the report of the Secretary-General on
women, peace and security remains timely. Indeed, it
offers an assessment of the challenges facing women
and girls in armed conflict and a series of useful
recommendations on how the international community
can contribute to meeting them.

Congolese women certainly belong to this group.
They have taken up the challenge by playing their role
and resolving to uphold the values and ideals of peace,
stability and democracy. Congolese women are deeply
involved in the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation or resettlement process
by striving to fulfil the specific needs of widows,
female combatants, soldiers' wives and their own
families. They also take care of women, girls and
children affected or infected by HIV/AIDS, the
exponential growth of which has been especially
exacerbated by recurrent rapes used as a weapon of war
in the ongoing conflict. Finally, Congolese women are
to be found in fields as varied as health care,
particularly for children, peace campaigns and
education to cope with the violence of armed
aggression.

For its part, the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is resolved to address the needs
of women in conflict zones and to support the role of
women in the peace process. Mr. Joseph Kabila,
President of the Republic, is sparing no effort to ensure
that gender issues are taken into account and
appropriately addressed at every phase of the ongoing
transition process, along with scheduled reforms,
particularly in the electoral, judicial, and legislative
fields, and, above all, the essential reconstruction and
national reconciliation.

The Government has planned a sweeping
programme in this regard that requires the significant
involvement of the international community. We take
this opportunity to thank Ms. Noeleen Heyzer,
Executive Director of the United Nations Development
Fund for Women (UNIFEM), for her support during the
issuance in Kinshasa of the report on women, war and
peace. Her recent visit to my country was seen as an
expression of support for Congolese women, who have
paid a heavy price during the armed aggression that has
lasted some five years now.

My delegation particularly welcomes the
announcement on the opening of a UNIFEM. office in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. This happy
initiative will allow Congolese women, the principal
victims of the war, fully to play their role in the
reconstruction of the country and the improvement of
their tenuous status. Moreover, my delegation supports
the efforts of the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to ease
tensions and to urge the establishment of peace-
building mechanisms, as well as the role played by the
High Commissioner for Human Rights. We hope that
everything will be done to ensure that attacks on the
physical integrity and dignity of women are prosecuted
and punished under international law as war crimes and
crimes against humanity.

We support the recommendations to establish
mechanisms to investigate cases of exploitation of
women, whether their perpetrators be parties linked to
the conflict or messengers of peace. In this connection,
my delegation welcomes the presence of women in
United Nations peacekeeping operations, which
improves access to and support for local women. This
presence, while allowing better protection for women
caught in the trap of armed conflict, also increases the
capacities of such operations and encourages their
personnel to be more thoughtful and responsible. We
believe that it would be useful to draft a code of
conduct for peacekeeping personnel and a system of
notification of sexual violence in the context of
peacekeeping.

In conclusion, my delegation reiterates that the
Democratic Republic of the Congo attaches the highest
importance to the implementation of positive measures
to draw attention to the needs of women in conflict
zones. The Government recently dispatched a team to
the eastern part of the country to analyse the violence
being committed against women and girls, especially in
Ituri, where the humanitarian situation is most
alarming. The women and children of Ituri continue to
be subject to terrible violence and tensions. My
delegation takes this opportunity to express its deep
concern over the persistence of this violence against
women and children in the eastern part of our national
territory, particularly in Ituri.

Following the example of Ms. Petronille Vaweka,
a member of the Ituri Pacification Commission -
whose courage in working to restore normalcy in Ituri
we hail - Congolese women are involving themselves
directly in the promotion of peace in their country. The
Congolese women's search for liberating peace must
now be supported, because the return of peace to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo can help Congolese
women in their fight against poverty and all forms of
violence and discrimination against them. They have a
right to that peace, without which all hope for human
dignity, well-being and development is vain and
compromised.

