Ms. Bird (Australia): Gender parity in peace
operations has vast potential to improve effectiveness,
capability and credibility. We have made pledges to do
better and set targets to go higher. But the number of
uniformed women in the field remains extremely low
and, frankly speaking, the rate of change has been
glacial. That failing is undermining United Nations
efforts to fulfil mandates and sustain peace.

Women make up half the world's population,
suffer disproportionately and differently in conflict,
and have in-depth knowledge of local context and
community needs. Yet women only make up 4 per
cent of military and 10 per cent of police personnel
in United Nations operations. That is compromising
our engagement with local communities, limiting our
situational awareness and inhibiting the protection
reach of peacekeeping missions.
Australia welcomes the Secretary-General's
firm commitment to gender equality, supported by
the uniformed gender parity strategy. We support
the Elsie Initiative for Women in Peace Operations,
which aims to accelerate the pace of change and
enhance the deployment of women as peacekeepers.
The appointment of women into senior leadership
positions is crucial yet continues to face the greatest
barriers. In January, the United Nations Peacekeeping
Force in Cyprus became the first-ever peacekeeping
mission to be led by a female Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Force Commander and Senior
Police Adviser. Australia was proud to be a part of
that milestone, but to take 70 years to achieve it is far
too long.

We must acknowledge that a major reason why
so few women are deployed to United Nations peace
operations is because women are underrepresented in
security forces across the world. Increasing the number
of women relies on Member States putting initiatives in
place to support the recruitment, retention, promotion
and deployment of women within their security forces.
This is not just about numbers, but also about cultural
and organizational change. This includes removing
gender restrictions on all occupations, increasing
flexible employment options and reducing gender
stereotyping and sexual harassment.

Australia is committed to the full inclusion
of women in our defence and police forces and to
mainstreaming a gender perspective across operations.
The same applies to United Nations peacekeeping
missions. Australia has translated this commitment
at the United Nations by achieving and exceeding the
uniformed women targets. We have provided gender
advisers to United Nations missions and stress the
importance of adequately resourcing these positions in
all missions. We also fund the participation of female
peacekeepers at United Nations training courses to
increase the numbers, qualifications and readiness of
women for a peacekeeping deployment.

Finally, evidence shows that women and men serve
better together. United Nations peace operations exist
to support the most vulnerable people in the most
difficult conditions. They require and deserve the most
capable and effective missions we can provide. This can
be done only if we draw on the full human resources
at our disposal and implement a gender perspective in
all operations. In this, the United Nations must lead
by example.
