Mr. Van Den Akker: I speak on behalf of the
European Union (EU) and its member States. The
candidate countries Albania, Montenegro, North
Macedonia, Serbia and Turkey; the country of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine,
the Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves
with this statement.

Experience clearly shows that the full, effective
and meaningful participation of women in peace
operations is critical to helping a country transition
from conflict to sustainable peace. The United Nations
has taken important steps in that regard. The European
Union in particular welcomes the recently adopted
uniformed gender-parity strategy for the period 2018-
2028, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and Department of Field Support's policy on gender-
responsive United Nations peacekeeping operations
and the efforts taken in the context of the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative. A concrete example of those
efforts is the United Nations Peacekeeping Force
in Cyprus, which became the first United Nations
peacekeeping operation to have a female Force
Commander, and now has all its components headed by
women, as well as a female Special Representative of
the Secretary-General.

Despite progress, almost 20 years since the
adoption of the Security Council's landmark resolution
1325 (2000) and the subsequent resolutions on women
and peace and security, we are still lagging behind. The
15 per cent goal for military observers and staffofficers,
set at the London 2016 Peacekeeping Ministerial, was
not met in 2018. Fewer than 5 per cent of military
contingents and less than 8 per cent of the members of
formed police units are women, while among individual
police officers the numbers are slightly better, at 20 per
cent. As for Government-provided corrections and
justice personnel, the proportion of women stands at
25 per cent. Only 28 per cent ofcivilians in peacekeeping
operations are women.

We face very similar challenges at the EU level.
Women compose around 30 per cent of all staff in
EU civilian missions, and about 5 per cent of military
missions and operations. The first female Head of
Mission was appointed to an EU civilian mission in
2015, and five out of 10 civilian missions have women
in place as Head or Deputy Head of Mission. Despite
those improvements, the growth that we have witnessed
has been too slow to achieve our ultimate goal:
gender equality in peacekeeping and peace-resolution
processes, which entails far more than increasing the
number of female peacekeepers.

While the prime responsibility of addressing
barriers and improving procedures for deployment
lies with troop- and police-contributing countries,
the European Union is fully committed to doing its
part. When the EU and the United Nations agreed
to reinforce the EU-United Nations long-standing
partnership on peacekeeping and crisis management in
the margins of the General Assembly last September,
we made women and peace and security the first, out
of eight, joint priorities for our cooperation in the three
upcoming years, 2019-2021, as well as a cross-cutting
priority across all areas of cooperation.

To ensure progress in the first year of
implementation, our missions and operations are
already working together on the ground to enhance the
integration of a gender perspective throughout their
activities. We are mapping ongoing cooperation on the
ground, on the basis of which we will identify strategic
areas for further cooperation. Moreover, as mentioned
during the United Nations Peacekeeping Ministerial on
29 March, we have agreed to organize a joint United
Nations-EU workshop in Brussels on enabling factors
for engaging more women in all roles and areas of
expertise and at all levels of peacekeeping and crisis
management. The aim of that joint effort is to build on
already ongoing work and existing data in this area and
arrive at a set of practical recommendations that will
be widely shared. We hope to encourage the practice of
regular informed and practical exchanges on enabling
factors for engaging more women in peacekeeping
among EU member States, other United Nations
troop- and police-contributing countries and experts in
this area.

To make a real difference and if we are to fulfil
the commitments that we collectively made in Action
for Peacekeeping and the Declaration of Shared
Commitments, progress on the participation of women
in peace operations needs to go hand and hand with
progress on all other aspects of the women and peace
and security agenda. We would recall five key priorities
in that context.

First, we should ensure adequate financing for
peacekeeping operations to deliver on their women and
peace and security and human rights mandates.

Secondly, a minimum number of gender units and
gender advisers should be set for all United Nations
missions, and their deployment should be reinforced in
settings where women's rights are particularly at stake
and conflict-related sexual violence is widespread.

Thirdly, gender-sensitive training should be
encouraged for all United Nations peacekeeping
missions' components to create a non-hostile
environment for women, mitigating, therefore, the
occurrence of gender-based violence incidents and acts
of hatred against women across contingents, as well as
sexual exploitation and abuse incidents.
Fourthly, all Member States should be encouraged
to adopt national action plans, including adequate
budgeting and detailed operative actions, to ensure
women's full participation in the security sector.

Fifthly, the collection of data related to the
composition of all mission components should be
ensured, along with a consistent procedures to strictly
monitor the deployment of women and their effective
participation in all the peacekeeping processes and at
all levels.

The instruments, strategies and political
commitments are there; now is the time for
their implementation. We sincerely thank Germany and
France for placing the women and peace and security
agenda at the centre of their presidencies, and we once
again reiterate the EU's full commitment to engage in
those common efforts.

