Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Belgium fully aligns itself with the statement made by
the representative of Sweden on behalf of the European
Union, and thanks the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2009/465) on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).

Belgium also wishes to thank your delegation,
Mr. President, for having taken the initiative to
organize this very important debate.

With regard to the fight against sexual violence,
this past year will be a landmark in the annals of the
United Nations. In just over one year, the Security
Council has adopted resolution 1820 (2008), expanded
the follow-up mechanisms of resolution of 1612 (2005)
and recently, with the adoption of resolution 1888
(2009), provided the United Nations with practical
tools to tackle sexual violence in the field.

Belgium, which had the privilege of participating
in the drafting and adoption of resolution 1820 (2008)
while it held a seat on the Security Council, welcomes
the cohesion and vision the Council has demonstrated
in this field throughout this period. We hope for the
swift appointment of the new special representative of
the Secretary-General on sexual violence and
establishment of the team of experts called for in
resolution 1888 (2009). We are ready to assist these
two mechanisms in carrying out their missions.

The fight against sexual violence is one thing; the
broader question of the role of women and their place
in peace negotiations, peacebuilding and reconstruction
processes is quite another. Resolution 1325 (2000) is
and must remain, in our view, the key instrument
guiding our actions in this area. However, as far as the
implementation of this resolution goes - excuse me
for speaking frankly, Mr. President - the international
community really has nothing to be proud of. We must
keep our eyes on the bigger picture.

Of course, some progress has been made. Fifteen
years after the Beijing Conference, notably thanks to
the industry of the Commission on the Status of
Women, we can affirm that questions relating to gender
have found their place in official United Nations
discourse. We also recognize the efforts that have been
made by the Secretary-General to ensure greater
representation of women at a high level in the United
Nations administration, even though there remains a
long way to go.

If we make the effort to look beyond our New
York bubble and cast an eye towards the situation on
the ground, we are forced to recognize that the
situation of women living in countries in conflict or
emerging from it has not really improved since the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) nine years ago. For
Belgium, this status quo is unacceptable. It is
specifically the lives of such women that we committed
to improving when we adopted resolution 1325 (2000).

As far as Belgium is concerned, the situation is
very simple. A year from now, we will celebrate the
passage of 10 years since the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000). We therefore have one year left to fill the
gap that exists between the programmes envisioned in
New York or our capitals on the one hand, and, on the
other, their financing and implementation on the
ground. Without significant efforts in that direction, it
will be a sad anniversary indeed that we celebrate next
year.

What can we do in one year? Probably a great
deal more than we imagine. First, several essential
measures can be taken easily, almost overnight, and at
very little cost to the United Nations. Such measures
might include, for example, increasing the number of
women in United Nations mediation teams and in
particular the appointment of a female chief negotiator.
Similarly, a gender adviser should be appointed in the
Department of Political Affairs.

Secondly, and in order to ensure that the specific
needs of women are truly taken into account and
earnestly responded to in peacebuilding and
reconstruction processes, we must put our money
where our mouth is when it comes to gender budgeting.
We must allocate sufficient resources to women's
programmes. This is an effort which it behoves each
and every one of us to undertake with urgency, not
only here but also at the national level.

Thirdly, we must support and encourage the
growing presence of women among the Blue Helmets
and police officers in peacekeeping operations. We can
all strive in this regard to develop women's units and
enhanced expertise on gender issues within our own
armed forces and police forces.

Fourthly, Belgium cannot emphasize strongly
enough the importance and usefulness of developing
national action plans for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). Belgium is proud to announce
that it developed such a plan of action last year and is
ready to share its experience with any Member State
that may be interested.

In conclusion, with regard to developing such
national action plans, Belgium wonders whether the
Peacebuilding Commission could play a more
significant role in the countries in which it is active. In
the Central African Republic, the Commission, Chaired
by Belgium, has already striven as far as possible to
ensure the implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000)
and 1820 (2008). It would take but a small additional
effort to develop a national action plan in partnership
with the national authorities, and Belgium is prepared
to help.

