The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Austria, Bangladesh,
Canada, Croatia, Egypt, El Salvador, Fiji, Germany,
Guinea, Iceland, Indonesia, Italy, Kenya, Liechtenstein,
Malaysia, Myanmar, Namibia, Norway, Peru, Samoa,
South Africa, Sri Lanka and Sweden, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, the Security Council has extended
invitations under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Ms. Rachel Mayanja, Special Adviser to the Secretary-
General on Gender Issues and Advancement of
Women, and Ms. Noeleen Heyzer, Executive Director
of the United Nations Development Fund for Women.

It is so decided.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Ms. Sweeta Noori, Country Director for Afghanistan of
Women for Women International, and Ms. Helene
Dandi, Regional Adviser for West Africa of the
Network of African Women for Peace.
It is so decided.

I invite Ms. Noori and Ms. Dandi to take the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council Chamber.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Ms. Elsie-Bernadette Onubogu, Gender Adviser of the
Commonwealth Secretariat.

It is so decided.

I invite Ms. Onubogu to take the seat reserved for
her at the side of the Council Chamber.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Anders B. Johnsson, Secretary General of the Inter
Parliamentary Union.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Johnsson to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 8/2005/636, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on women and peace and security. I
should also like to draw attention to document
8/2005/664, which contains a letter dated 24 October
2005 from the Permanent Representative of Romania,
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept paper for this meeting.

I welcome the presence of the Deputy Secretary-
General, Her Excellency Ms. Louise Frechette, at this
meeting.

By way of introduction, I would like to say that it

is a particular pleasure for me to open the debate today
to observe the anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) on women, peace and security. This
resolution was indeed a turning point in the activity of
the Council, as it underlined the essential contribution
women make to peace and security. Five years after its
adoption, this meeting will express our collective
resolve to enhance the role of women in conflict
prevention and resolution. I trust we shall have a
successful debate.
During the preparations for the meeting I have
seen goodwill, commitment and support from many of
our partners and I would like to take the time to thank
as many of them as members' patience will allow.

I turn first to our colleagues from the Permanent
Mission of Denmark to convey our appreciation for
their dedication and professionalism in organizing the
Arria formula meeting held two days ago. It goes
without saying that the work, the views, the concerns
and the lessons non-governmental organizations can
share with us enjoy the recognition of the Council, and
of our countries, in particular. We cannot hope for the
successful implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
without a broad and inclusive consultation with the
representatives of civil society.

My thanks go also to the Office of the Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women. Our colleagues in the United
Nations Secretariat have been helpful and contributed
substantively to the outcome of our meeting today.

Later on I will invite participants to view a video
featuring an interview with a woman who was a former
peace negotiator and who is currently a member of
parliament in Burundi, as well as interviews with other,
similar women leaders. The film illustrates women's
participation in rebuilding conflict-torn societies. I
want to express my gratitude to the United Nations
Development Fund for Women for providing us with
this inspiring documentary.

Finally, I would like to thank all speakers in
advance. I can assure them that their observations and
recommendations will be well received and will be a
subject for future reflection in the Council.

I now invite the Deputy Secretary-General, Her
Excellency Ms. Louise Frechette, to take the floor.


