Mr. Radomski (Poland): We commend Peru for
convening today's important debate. Poland aligns
itself with the statement to be delivered later by the
observer of the European Union. I would like to thank
Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed for
her remarks. I also thank Ms. Pramila Patten, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, for her comprehensive briefing.
We greatly appreciate her tireless and dedicated work.
We are honoured by the presence of Ms. Razia Sultana
among us today, and we deeply appreciated her moving
and inspirational testimony on behalf of the Rohingya
women and girls who have suffered from sexual
violence. As a voice representing civil society, hers is
important for all of us to hear.

We are outraged by the persistent and widespread
incidence of sexual violence in armed conflict. As many
speakers have noted, sexual violence is increasingly
used as a tactic of warfare and constitutes a flagrant and
unacceptable violation of international humanitarian
law and human rights law. We are all aware that the
already staggering number of reported cases of sexual
violence in conflict represents a mere fraction of
the true number. One of the greatest challenges that
the victims of these crimes are facing is the lack of
accountability for their perpetrators. The recent report
of the Secretary-General (S/2018/250) highlights the
various challenges that we face in addressing conflict-
related sexual violence. I would like to emphasize three
areas that merit our particular attention today.

First, we welcome the focus of this year's report
on economic empowerment as a tool for eliminating
conflict-related sexual violence. Poverty and social
exclusion are risk factors associated with gender-
based violence. The economic empowerment of women
means ensuring proper funding for programmes that
address the economic and social needs of survivors,
as well as implementing initiatives aimed at changing
the conditions that enable violence to occur in the first
place. We also believe that there is a need for a broader
discussion in the Security Council of the importance
of women's economic empowerment in post-conflict
settings in more general terms. Peacebuilding
and recovery funding still largely ignore women's
economic role.

Let me now turn to the second question of the
stigmatization of victims of sexual violence. Beyond
the immediate cruelty of sexual violence and its
consequences, victims are still all too often stigmatized
and rejected by their families and communities. In their
desire to avoid stigma and discrimination, the majority
of victims do not report rape or other forms of sexual
violence. That not only contributes to a culture of
impunity, it also prevents survivors of sexual violence
from accessing medical care and legal assistance. We
support the Secretary-General's call to traditional,
religious and community leaders to address harmful
social norms and help to redirect the stigma ofrape from
the victims to the perpetrators. In particular, we want
to draw attention to the social stigma experienced by
children conceived through rape. Women with children
born of sexual violence are the most marginalized
of all. Children born of rape are often ostracized by
their families and communities. Children living on
the margins of societies are not only deprived of basic
human rights, but are at a higher risk of being recruited
by armed and organized-crime groups, thereby posing
a direct threat to peace and security.

My third point relates to sexual violence directed
against men and boys in armed conflicts. We welcome
the attention that the Secretary-General's report gives to

this issue. The devastating effects of sexual violence on
male survivors and their families should be discussed
openly in this forum. The great reluctance of many men
and boys to report sexual violence makes it very difficult
to accurately assess its scope. Almost certainly, the
limited statistics that exist vastly understate the number
of male victims. For male survivors, sexual violence
remains hidden owing to cultural taboos. The hesitancy
of male survivors to speak about sexual violence makes
impunity for such crimes even more likely. We urge
States to remove all structural and legal obstacles that
prevent the investigation and prosecution of rape and
other forms of sexual violence committed against men
and boys.

The latest Secretary-General's report makes it clear
that we should spare no effort in combating sexual
violence. Only by shedding light on the issue can we
lift the long shadow of sexual violence in conflict
from all its survivors and prevent it from happening in
the future.

