Mr. Eler (Turkey): Women and girls are among
those most affected by the growing number and
intensity of conflicts around the world. They continue
to be specifically targeted conflicts, often subjected
to such sexual violence and various forms of political,
economic and social discrimination. It is women who
are most affected by mass displacements, protracted
crises and humanitarian emergencies. They are also
vulnerable in post-conflict situations, mostly during
contested political processes, ceasefires and the early
days of the implementation of peace agreements. The
risks of sexual and gender-based violence, in either in
rural or urban settings, are growing and transforming.

Against the backdrop of the threats and needs
facing civilians, especially women and girls, a stronger
and more inclusive approach is required in order to
achieve the goals set by resolution 1325 (2000) and its
subsequent resolutions. Strengthening our political will
comes as a first step. We also need to find creative ways
to respond to the challenges facing women and girls at
all stages of the conflict cycle. We should be cognizant
of the lessons learned and best practices.

In conflict situations, working to eliminate
the root causes of conflict would be the best way to
prevent sexual violence and threats against women
in a sustainable manner. In the short-to-medium
term, protecting against gender-based violence, the
prosecution of such acts, seeking a multisectoral
response and continuing to provide humanitarian
assistance to women and girls is imperative. Adherence
to the principles of international humanitarian law in
this context is particularly important.

Ensuring the inclusivity of decision-making and
policymaking, as well as peace processes, mediation
efforts, peacekeeping and peacebuilding is another
important step. The social and economic empowerment
of displaced women and girls must be among the
priorities. Inclusion and empowerment are the best
tools in combating violent extremism. Continuing to
strengthen the integration of the protection of women
and girls, and deepening the gender perspectives in
the United Nations system's normative frameworks,
entities and practices would be a final step towards
promoting protection.

Today in order to contribute to the debate on best
practices and lessons learned, I would like to stress in
particular the challenges and threats facing displeased
women around the world, based on our own experience
resulting from the tragic conflicts just across our
borders. In response to the enforced displacement
due to the tragedies in Syria and Iraq, Turkey has
taken key steps to ensure durable solutions to policies
encompassing the principles of prevention, protection,
participation and empowerment.

It terms of participation, we prioritize women's
participation in camps by including them in
decision-making and camp administration. Camp
management staff has been trained to facilitate
and encouragement women's participation and
representations in camp community relations.

Regarding protection, adequate numbers of women
staff are employed in camps to maintain quality healthy,
education and security services for women and girls.
The psychosocial and reproductive health needs of
women are given particular emphasis. For instance, the
psychosocial support service centres project, financed
by the Office ofthe United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and implemented by the Ministry of
Family and Social Policy, establishes 11 centres outside
and 20 centres inside the camps in order to address the
psychological needs of women and their families.

On prevention, special measures were put in
place to prevent assaults within camps and to protect
groups. Outside camps, measures are taken to promote
the monitoring and prevention of domestic and sexual
violence where significant populations of displaced
people live.

In terms of empowerment, the enrollment of girls
in schooling and continuing education for women is a
priority policy for Turkey. Over 68,000 Syrian children
are enrolled in education and close 40,000 adults have
received vocational training. The displaced families
and women have the opportunity to attend lectures
on issues such as maternal health, child mentality,
psychosocial support, human rights and the domestic
violence. It goes without saying that the international
community's strong support to these efforts is crucial in
order to make sure that there will be no lost generations
in our region just because we can not offer them hope
and opportunity for their future.

We are looking forward to the various review
processes to be conducted this year on strengthening
the United Nations response to violent conflict, among
which the global review of the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) will be ofparticular importance.

In conclusion, I would like to congratulate the
Chilean presidency for their efforts to connect the
women and peace and security agenda with the general
protection of civilians to debate.

