Mr. Swe (Myanmar): My delegation greatly
appreciates the initiative taken by you, Mr. President,
in holding an open debate on women, peace and
security on the sixth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000). As a result of that landmark
resolution the international community looks upon
women, not merely as victims in conflict situations, but
also as valuable contributors in the resolution of
conflicts and as active participants in rebuilding their
communities. We also wish to thank the four senior
United Nations officials for their briefings and for the
good job they do for the cause of women and girls.

The 2005 World Summit Outcome, by clearly
underscoring the fact that "progress for women is
progress for all," gives special importance to the
promotion of gender equality and the elimination of
gender discrimination. The Summit Outcome also
identifies gender mainstreaming as a tool for achieving
gender equality. My Government fully shares this view.
We also share the view that gender equality plays an
essential part in advancing development, peace and
security. In our national efforts to promote gender
equality, tradition and culture play an important part.

Myanmar traditional law guarantees the free and
equal rights of women, including the right to own and
inherit property. It also ensures secure tenure of
property and housing for women.

The Government of the Union of Myanmar, hand
in hand with such organizations as the Myanmar
Women's Affairs Federation, the Myanmar Women
Entrepreneurs Association and the Myanmar Maternal
and Child Welfare Association, promotes policies to
ensure that the needs and priorities of women, girls,
men and boys are addressed systematically.

The results of all these efforts are most evident in
the area of education. The enrolment of girls now
equals that of boys in the primary and secondary
levels. At the tertiary level, overall enrolment of
women surpasses that of men.

Myanmar's traditions, culture and values, which
abhor and prohibit the sexual exploitation of women,
strongly contribute to the Government's endeavours to
protect women and girls from human rights abuses,
including sexual and gender-based violence. We fully
support the zero tolerance policy with regard to
violence against women and girls.
My delegation shares the view that development,
peace, security and human rights are interlinked and
mutually reinforcing. In situations of conflicts, women
and girls are among those who suffer most. My country

suffered from almost five decades of insurgency.
Through the determined efforts of the Government we
have been able to achieve national reconciliation, with
17 major armed insurgent groups returning to the legal
fold. The representatives of the former insurgent
groups have now joined other delegates in the National
Convention that is laying down the basic principles of
our new constitution. Women of Myanmar are also
taking an active part in the National Convention
process.

Terrorism constitutes one of the most serious
threats to international peace and security. It knows no
national boundaries. Women in Myanmar, with the
Myanmar Women's Affairs Federation at its forefront,
have taken on nationwide campaigns to condemn
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.

In implementing resolution 1325 (2000), we also
need to strengthen the capabilities of the United
Nations system in the area of gender. My delegation is
pleased to note, from the report of the Secretary-
General, that United Nations entities are focused on
developing policies and operational tools to facilitate
gender mainstreaming and that regular gender training
is provided for all categories and levels of
peacekeeping personnel. We are also happy to learn
that progress has been made in implementing United
Nations action plan for implementing resolution 1325
(2000), including in such areas as conflict prevention,
early warning, peace making and peace building. The
report also shows that much more needs to be done.

My delegation is encouraged by the establishment
of the Peacebuilding Commission and hopes that the
Commission, by complementing national efforts, will
play an important part in promoting the role of women
in the consolidation of peace.

