Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): I thank you, Madam
President, for organizing such an important meeting,
and congratulations on your leadership of the Council
this month. I would also like to thank previous speakers
for their statements and the Secretary-General for
his recent report (S/2014/693) on women and peace
and security. I look forward to his global study of
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and the
upcoming high-level review of the resolution.

This debate could not have come at a more timely
moment. War and conflict affect more lives today - all
over the world, but particularly in Afghanistan and
the wider region - than at any time in recent history.
Millions of families have been forced to flee their
homes, and millions of women and children have been
left vulnerable, bearing the brunt of the burden of those
tragic circumstances.

The people of Afghanistan, particularly women
and girls, have suffered immensely as a result of
almost 40 years of war and conflict. The violence in
my country has shattered their lives, interrupted their
educations, threatened their livelihoods, destroyed
their communities and pushed them from their homes
to other countries or to unfamiliar cities and slums.

Afghanistan's refugee situation remains the largest
protracted such situation in the world, and this year
the number of internally displaced persons (IDPs) has
increased due to a resurgence of insecurity in parts
of the country. Women suffer disproportionately in
situations of displacement. They often lack access
to the most basic services and resources and are at a
higher risk of discrimination and human rights abuses.

In the past year, there has been a rise in the violent
activities of the Taliban, terrorists groups and other
anti-Government armed opposition and the greatest
increase in civilian deaths ofthe past 13 years, including
many of women and girls. The Taliban and other
anti-Government elements continue to launch targeted
attacks and intimidation campaigns against women
from all spectrums of society, from schoolgirls to
female leaders, including women police officers, human
rights defenders, media personnel and politicians.
Insecurity has also hampered the Government's ability
to prosecute human rights abusers and uphold the rule
of law, thereby exacerbating women's vulnerability
to sexual and gender-based violence, domestic abuse,
harassment, forced marriage and other crimes.

Despite those challenges, Afghanistan has arrived
at an important turning point that offers tremendous
opportunity for strengthened progress on the women
and peace and security agenda. Last month, the new
President was inaugurated, representing the first
democratic transition from one elected president to the
next in the country's history. In this year's presidential
and provincial council elections, millions of women
participated as voters, and hundreds played a significant
role as candidates and as campaigners, despite facing
threats and intimidation. Their involvement set the tone
for an Afghanistan in which women participate and
contribute equally to the country's future.

President Ghani Ahmadzai and the national unity
Government are committed to women's full and
equal participation at all levels of governance and
decision-making. The President made that clear in his
inaugural address, in which he pledged to promote
women's advancement in Afghanistan and praised his
wife, Rula Ghani, for the role she would play as an
active public figure dedicated to promoting women's
rights. This gesture is a first for our young democracy.

Just a few days ago, Afghanistan signed the women
and peace and security national action plan, which aims
to make progress on the four main areas ofparticipation,
protection, conflict prevention and relief and recovery.
We appreciate the Government of Finland's support for
the development of the plan and remain committed to
implementing the women and peace and security agenda
through key institutions and the national action plan for
the women of Afghanistan. We are also dedicated to
promoting the participation of women in the security
sector and aim to increase the number of women police
officers from the current 2,230 to 10,000 by 2017.

As Afghanistan prepares for the full transfer
of security responsibility from international to
Afghan forces at the end of 2014, the President and
new leadership of the country are committed to a
comprehensive reform agenda. Over the next two
years, Afghanistan will hold district and parliamentary
elections, reform electoral laws, convene a loya jirga to
consider amendments to the Constitution and conduct
a reinvigorated outreach and reconciliation process
with the armed opposition. Throughout, the active role
of all segments of the Afghan population, particularly
Afghan women, will be essential. The Government of
Afghanistan believes adamantly that their participation
is critical to preserving and enhancing the gains of the
past 12 years and to the future stability, democracy,
prosperity and peace of the country. In that regard,
the international community's continued support for
Afghanistan's efforts to advance women's rights and
status remains crucial.

Afghan women have suffered immensely as a
result of Taliban rule, extremism and decades of war.
Only when they are free from violence, want and fear
will we be able to secure stability and lasting peace
in Afghanistan. For those reasons, we welcome the
opportunities provided to us by the upcoming twentieth
anniversary of the Beijing Conference on Women, the
fifteenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) and the
adoption of the sustainable development goals to make
further progress on the issue of women and peace and
security, and the agenda for women in Afghanistan and
for women around the world.

