Mr. Guehenno: Four years ago, the Security
Council adopted its landmark resolution 1325 (2000)
on women, peace and security. Since then there has
been a tangible and positive shift in international
understanding of the impact of armed conflict on
women and girls. There has also been growing
recognition that peace and security cannot be built
through the exclusion of more than half of a country's
or the world's population. Women and girls have an
essential role to play in rebuilding war-shattered
societies, not through token representation but as full-
fledged and rightful participants in the process.

My distinguished and respected colleagues
scheduled to speak throughout the day will elucidate,
from various expert perspectives, the magnitude of the
challenge that has been overcome and that yet also
remains to be tackled in the implementation of this
historic resolution. For my part, I am honoured to
introduce the Secretary-General's report (S/2004/814),
to which 25 countries contributed information, and to
highlight for the Council the range of issues that it
addresses.

I will begin with the good news, and I hope the
Council will not mind if I turn to the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and peacekeeping
first. I am sincerely proud that in his report the
Secretary-General highlights that it is in this sector
where much of the most significant progress in
implementing resolution 1325 (2000) has been
achieved.

For example, full-time gender advisers are now
deployed and are playing a prominent role in 10 of the
17 United Nations peacekeeping operations. In 2000,
there were only two gender advisers in total. Gender
policies and training for peacekeeping personnel are
now standard features of our daily discussions,
whereas in 2000 they were considered novel
innovations. Furthermore, this year DPKO adopted a
policy on human trafficking and produced a package of
anti-trafficking guidance for peacekeeping operations.

Humanitarian and development agencies have
much to be proud of as well, as the report illustrates.
The Inter-Agency Standing Committee Task Force on
Gender and Humanitarian Assistance has developed
strategies to facilitate gender mainstreaming in all
humanitarian activities. Individual departments and
agencies such as the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) have developed a
gender mainstreaming policy and action plan. The
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has
made five commitments to refugee women.

The report points to ongoing technical assistance
activities provided to several countries under the
coordination of the Division for the Advancement of
Women. It recognizes the initiative of the United
Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) to
advocate a stronger system-wide approach to
addressing gender justice issues in post-conflict
situations. The report also illustrates the ongoing
efforts by the Electoral Assistance Division of the
Department of Political Affairs and the Office of the
Special Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of
Women to advance the participation of women in
electoral processes.

The report describes the development of gender-
sensitive disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) programmes in a number of post-
conflict countries, although it acknowledges that those
are initial steps which need to be further elaborated.
Agencies such as UNICEF and the United Nations
Development Programme are among those most
actively engaged in those efforts. DPKO and UNIFEM
are working in partnership to develop standard
operating procedures on gender and DDR, and the
Department for Disarmament Affairs has designed a
gender mainstreaming action plan.

All of these different parts of the United Nations
system are not working in isolation. The Office of the
Special Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of
Women and the Task Force on Women, Peace and
Security have played an important role in advocating
and supporting a coordinated approach to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). The Mine
Action Service has played an important coordinating
role in its area of expertise.

Likewise, as the High Commissioner for Human
Rights knows best, there has been growing cooperation
among all international human rights actors on the
implementation of the resolution. The Secretary-
General's report covers how human rights observers
from the United Nations system, regional organizations
such as the African Union and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, non-governmental
organizations and civil society are forging critical
alliances to ensure better monitoring, reporting and

investigation of violations of the human rights of
women.

I have mentioned just a sample of examples of
how much has been accomplished to implement
resolution 1325 (2000), but the report equally calls
attention to how much is left to be done.

In the humanitarian arena, the Secretary-
General's report emphasizes that there is indeed ample
scope for even more effective coordination among
United Nations entities, non-governmental
organizations and refugee and displaced women's
groups and for more funding for women-specific
programmes.

The report calls for greater understanding of how
truth and reconciliation processes have met the needs
of women, calling for a review of the extent to which
they have participated in them to date.

The findings of the report show that women's
knowledge and experiences are underutilized in the
prevention of violent conflict, while gender
perspectives have been neglected in early warning
exercises and the development of response options.

The report further calls attention to the fact that
peace processes and negotiations remain
overwhelmingly male-dominated arenas where
women's contributions largely remain outside the
formal processes. The report recommends a review of
recent peace processes that analyses the obstacles and
opportunities for full participation by women.

The report acknowledges the wide scope that
exists for building gender-sensitive approaches to
reporting, highlighting that a gender analysis of 264
reports of the Secretary-General to the Security
Council from January 2000 to September 2003
revealed that only 17.8 per cent made multiple
references to women and gender concerns, while 67 per
cent of the reports made no or only one mention of
women or gender issues.

The report also addresses the issue of gender
recruitment. The number of female uniformed
personnel in our peacekeeping operations is still far too
low. As of June 2004, women constituted only 1 per
cent of military personnel and 5 per cent of civilian
police personnel assigned by Member States to serve in
United Nations peacekeeping operations. As concerns
international civilians in all United Nations peace
support operations, the percentage of women increased
from 24 per cent in 2002 to only 27.5 per cent in 2004.

At the highest level of decision-making in peace
support operations, there are only two female Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General out of a total
of 27. To address that gap, the report proposes a two-
pronged approach that emphasizes both the need to
increase the participation of women in senior positions
and the need for all senior staff to demonstrate
commitment to the promotion of gender equality.

The report also stresses that there is still a lot that
can be done to strengthen our collective ability to
prevent and respond to gender-based violence. Member
States and United Nations entities - notably OCHA,
UNICEF, the United Nations Population Fund,
UNHCR, UNIFEM. and the World Health Organization,
as well as international and national non-governmental
organizations, are conducting training, producing
guidelines and delivering medical supplies for treating
the consequences of gender-based violence. The report
notes those concrete actions, but appeals for even
greater efforts in that area.

To attain sustainable results, gender-based
violence - whether manifested in the form of mass
rape, the sexual exploitation of women and girls,
domestic violence or trafficking - must not be treated
in isolation. We must recognize those crimes as part of
a broader and endemic assault on the rights of women
and girls in conflict. A commitment to preventing and
responding to gender-based violence must serve as a
critical priority in any framework for post-conflict
peace-building. That approach is still lacking in our
collective efforts.

This is also a collective responsibility. We cannot
expect to effectively address the problem of gender-
based violence if the burden of responsibility for doing
so rests with women alone. That problem is one that
plagues families, communities, nations and the global
community as a whole, and as such requires the
engagement of men and women as partners, working
hand in hand to end the scourge.

Finally, the report focuses particular attention on
one form of gender-based violence: sexual abuse and
exploitation by humanitarian and peacekeeping
personnel. The report notes that, this year,
approximately 70 allegations of sexual exploitation and
abuse were made against United Nations peacekeeping
personnel in Bunia alone in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Those allegations have been investigated
by the United Nations Office of Internal Oversight
Services and we await the final conclusions.

To stop those abhorrent acts, the United Nations
system needs to work hand in hand with Member
States. In the report before the Council, the Secretary-
General reiterates his full commitment to the full
implementation of the special measures for protection
from sexual exploitation and sexual abuse, as set forth
in his bulletin. He urges Member States,
intergovernmental and regional organizations, and
international and national aid and civil society
organizations to apply the same standards to
peacekeeping personnel, including military and civilian
police.

The report notes the efforts DPKO is
undertaking - working within the framework of the
United Nations system-wide Task Force on that
issue - to help Member States and its personnel
address that problem. Disciplinary directives for
civilian, military and civilian police personnel have
been compiled. Training materials on the prevention of
sexual abuse and exploitation have been designed and
focal points on that issue have been created in several
peacekeeping missions.

The issue is being taken seriously in the
Department, but it must and will be given even greater
priority in the coming year. Our work cannot be
considered complete on that front for as long as sexual
exploitation or abuse is being committed by a single
peacekeeper or humanitarian worker. Even one incident
is simply unacceptable.

To conclude, the report of the Secretary-General
now before the Council illustrates the progress
achieved to date in the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). The status of implementation presented in
the report is a faithful reflection of the fruits of our
collective efforts at the national, non-governmental and
intergovernmental level, but it is also an unequivocal
call to action on several crucial fronts. It is a call that is
to be heeded in the interests of the millions of women
and girls in war-shattered societies who are victimized
by conflict, but who also hold the key to building
sustainable peace in their countries, as they themselves
know best.

