Mr. Grunditz (Sweden): I am pleased to address
the Council on behalf of the Nordic countries: Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden. I would like to
begin by expressing my appreciation to the Azerbaijani
presidency for organizing this open debate, and to
thank the Secretary-General, the Executive Director of
UN Women, the UN High Commissioner for Human
Rights, and in particular Ms. Brigitte Balipou of the
NGO Working Group on Women Peace and Security
for their valuable statements.

The Nordic countries strongly welcome the
Secretary-General's report (S/2013/525) and the
adoption of resolution 2122 (2013) on women, peace
and security. We commend the Council for the progress
made and trust that the new resolution will enhance a
more rapid, complete and systematic implementation of
all the resolutions on this matter.

We welcome the focus of this debate on the rights,
perspectives and participation of women in the rule
of law and transitional justice in conflict-affected
situations. The rule of law is an integral part of the
engagement forpeace and security. The Nordic countries
have a strong commitment to the rule of law and to its
main principles of legality, equality, accountability and
participation.
We firmly believe that the rule of law must
encompass the whole population - women and men,
boys and girls - if it is to be worthy of its name.
Nevertheless, women's perspectives, capacities and
needs continue to be overlooked in efforts to establish
the rule of law in conflict or post-conflict contexts.
To promote the rule of law while excluding women is
not only a paradox; it undermines the achievement of
sustainable peace and security.

Safeguarding women's access to justice, applying
a gender-sensitive approach to transitional justice
mechanisms and including women in post-conflict
reparations programmes are paramount steps in the
establishment of the rule of law, and thus paramount to
peace and security. The campaign to improve women's
access to justice must therefore include a scrutiny of
the systemic barriers of gender inequality, including
economic empowerment, women's citizenship rights,
their legal capacity, property rights, as well as safe
transportation and safe access to witnesses and victim
protection programmes. In order to play a role, women
must also have access to their basic rights in all phases
of conflict. We therefore welcome the Secretary-
General's call for expanded access to sexual and
reproductive health services.

Conflict-related gender-based crimes must be
investigated. Resolution 2106 (2013) and the recent
Declaration of Commitment to End Sexual Violence
in Conflict are two vital steps towards fulfilling our
obligations. We fully support the work of Justice Rapid
Response and its partnership with UN Women in
addressing sexual and gender-based Violence. However,
let us underline that gender justice is not merely about
women's needs as Victims, but also about women's
valuable contributions to bringing about peace and their
participation at the forefront of transitional justice and
in rule of law measures, such as justice system reform.

At the strategic level, gender awareness in the rule
of law and transitional justice is crucial for women's
access to justice and for the enjoyment of rights. It
has a direct impact on their political and economic
empowerment. A systematic follow-up to ensure the
inclusion ofthe women, peace and security agenda in the
day to day work of the Council is therefore necessary.
The number, influence and leadership of women in
conflict-resolution and in post-conflict governance and
peacekeeping must increase.

The Nordic countries support and encourage the
findings in the progress report by UN Women to be
moved forward, alongside the Secretary-General's
recommendations in his report. We applaud the efforts
of the regional and subregional organizations to
implement resolution 1325 (2000), and we commend
the ongoing work of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) membership to adopt an
OSCE-wide action plan.

We welcome the fact that the recently concluded
Arms Trade Treaty includes a legally-binding
provision on gender-based violence and a call for a full
implementation of the Treaty's provision on preventing
gender-based violence and violence against women and
girls when assessing arms transfers.

We pay tribute to the work of civil society to
promote gender equality and women's role in conflict
resolution and in conflict prevention. Let us not forget
that the very origin of resolution 1325 (2000) derives
from the tireless and courageous efforts of women's
NGOs. We must continue to support and encourage the
women-led civil society in peacebuilding and conflict
prevention.

Finally, we welcome the Secretary-General's call
for a 2015 high-level review of the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) and his call for new and
ambitious targets.

