Mr. Akbaruddin (India): We thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate on an
issue that is of serious concern for the international
community. I also thank all the speakers who briefed
us earlier today.

In the past two decades, a considerable strengthening
of the normative framework on the various aspects
relating to women and peace and security has occurred
at the Security Council and the within the broader
United Nations system. Nevertheless, the scourge of
sexual violence in situations of armed conflict has yet
to abate. That is partly on account of the proliferation
of armed conflicts and their evolving nature, involving
various non-State actors and the spread of terrorism
in such situations across large parts of the world. The
more vulnerable sectors of society, especially women,
suffer ever more in such violent conflicts.

The rapidly expanding transboundary nature
of terrorist financing, supply of arms, recruitment
and training of foreign fighters has led to a situation
where whole regions are impacted and no country is
in a position to effectively counter that menace alone.
Many parts of the world are experiencing large-scale
refugee crises that emanate from situations of armed
conflict and terrorism. Large trafficking networks run
by transnational criminal groups compound the misery
of vulnerable communities, especially women.

Tackling such complex challenges demands closely
coordinated and collaborative efforts among nations.
Sadly, we are far from being able to come together to
overcome such challenges collectively. One glaring
example is the lack ofprogress on the issue of finalizing
a comprehensive convention to counter international
terrorism that can strengthen the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

As we have pointed out on earlier occasions and
at other forums, the issue of women and peace and
security must also be seen in the wider societal context
that involves gender and development issues, which
are dealt with outside the Council. In View of the
cross-border dynamics of armed conflicts, it is in our
collective interests to contribute to the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 70/1), which would
greatly help prevent conflict situations. Gender equality
and empowerment, access to health care, education and
employment and strengthening democratic institutions
and processes are all important aspects of a holistic
approach to prevent conflict. The normative work done
in that regard outside the Council is as important as the
need for the Council to do more.

Over a shorter term, the need to institutionalize
the involvement of women in conflict prevention
and resolution is well recognized. However, such
involvement will be more effective only when it
emerges from local initiatives and national efforts.
When imposed from outside, their effectiveness will
remain limited. The international community has a
role to assist and facilitate such efforts across regions.
That requires not only normative advice, but capacity-
building and institution-building at the grass roots level
of governance.

As pointed out in the Secretary General's latest
report on the subject,

"[p]rosecution is essential to prevention, because
it can deter potential perpetrators and contribute to
restoring faith in the rule of law." (see S/2016/36I, para. 10).

The absence, obstruction or protracted pace of justice
is unhelpful. The international community has an
important role in helping build adequate resources
and capacities for criminal investigation, prosecution,
justice-delivery systems, protection of victims
and witnesses and legislative reform to improve
accountability across countries. In addition, the
sanctions committees of the Security Council need
to address the issue of proactively listing terrorist
individuals and entities involved in situations of
conflict-related sexual violence.

India is strongly committed to a zero-tolerance policy
on sexual violence and abuse and provides adequate
predeployment training and gender sensitization to its
peacekeeping forces. The deployment of Indian female
police peacekeepers in Liberia served as a role model
to the local women to participate in policing and the
relevant rule of law frameworks. Such participation
enables improved intelligence about conflict-related
sexual violence and trafficking.

As part of our continuing efforts to strengthen the
relevant legal frameworks within India, earlier this week
India unveiled comprehensive draft legislation aimed at
the prevention and protection of trafficking of persons
and the rehabilitation of trafficked persons. The draft
legislation aims to unify our existing anti-trafficking
laws and to protect victims and prioritize their needs.
India continues to work closely with United Nations
agencies, including UN-Women and the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, on related issues.

India stands ready to engage with its partners to
work towards addressing the issue of sexual violence in
armed conflicts and to help build a sustainable peace.

