Ms. Colakovie (Bosnia and Herzegovina):
Bosnia and Herzegovina appreciates the convening
of the Security Council's semi-annual debate on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We would
like to thank the Secretary-General and the Executive
Director of UN Women for their comprehensive
briefings. And we extend a warm welcome and our
gratitude to the representatives of civil society for their
presentations today.

We believe that the Security Council, UN Women
and the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict will ensure
that the United Nations works in a concerted and
coordinated manner that will strengthen the capacity
of the United Nations system to match its commitment
to gender equality with the leadership, resources and
expertise needed to advance achievements on the
ground. The development of additional indicators to
track the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) is
a significant step in broadening the women and peace
and security agenda.

We also recognize the positive contribution of the
Security Council to the rule of law, which is one of
the key aspects of conflict prevention, peacekeeping,
conflict resolution and peacebuilding. We fully agree
with the prevailing position that justice, including
transitional justice, is a fundamental building block
of sustainable peace in countries in conflict or post-
conflict situations. Delivering justice and security in
respect ofthe rule oflaw mitigates conflict, helps reduce
the risk of relapse into further conflict and creates
conditions conducive to sustainable development.

With regard to the most recent report of the Secretary-
General (S/2013/525), we note with satisfaction that
the attention from the international community to the
issue of sexual violence in conflict has increased. We
therefore call upon all stakeholders to continue their
efforts to reduce and eliminate the high incidence of
threats faced by women and girls in contemporary
armed conflicts. However, we realize that despite the
urgency with which practices in implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) have improved, there remains a
deficit in opportunities for women on both the national
and international levels. To exercise leadership, there
remains an ongoing underrepresentation of women in
conflict prevention, conflict resolution, protection and
peacebuilding processes and efforts.

Conflicts create situations in which women and
children are the ones most affected by the deterioration
of living conditions and fundamental rights. Violence
and the deprivation of rights often go hand in hand with
conflict. Efforts to fight impunity, provide assistance
to Victims and hold perpetrators accountable must be
intensified and better coordinated. Regrettably, sexual
and gender-based violence often continue after peace
deals are reached, due to insufficient investment in
protection and prevention strategies, or weak security
and justice institutions. We are aware of the fact
that peace cannot be sustained unless women play a
critical role in the process. We therefore underscore
the importance of the full and effective involvement of
women at all stages of peace processes and of giving
them an equal role in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts, as well as in early peacebuilding.

We affirm our commitment to the rule of law as
an imperative for political dialogue and cooperation.
In that regard, with the aim of improving the overall
situation of women victims of rape, we are making
efforts to finalize the drafting of a programme for
victims of rape, sexual abuse and torture in Bosnia
and Herzegovina for the period 2013-2016. At the State
level, a draft transitional justice strategy has been
developed to create an acceptable platform for efficient
and realistic mechanisms and activities to correct the
injustices and heal the traumas resulting from the
armed conflict in the 19905.

We also emphasize that Bosnia and Herzegovina
fully supports the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), the provisions of which have been incorporated
into the Bosnia and Herzegovina gender action plan
and the action plan for the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). Besides defining goals and activities, the
action plan includes an introduction, an analysis of the
de facto situations, and eight goals with strictly defined
activities, deadlines, the definition ofresponsibility and
partners. In this regard, through the action plan, we have
shown our dedication to increasing the representation
of women in decision-making positions at all levels of
power in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In addition, we are
undertaking efforts to increase the number of women in
military and police forces and to ensure their inclusion
in executive positions within such forces.

Increasing the number of women in peacekeeping
missions and introducing gender perspectives into the
training of participants in peace missions are further
priorities for us. We are also making additional efforts to
strengthen capacities in fighting trafficking, decreasing
the danger of mined areas, improving support networks
for women and girls who were victimized during the
war, and increasing the knowledge and capacities of
civil society. Furthermore, the gender equality agency
started a project on the implementation of the resolution
1325 (2000) action plan at the local level in cooperation
with the non-governmental organization Women BH
and with the financial support of UN Women. This
project represents an innovation not only in Bosnia and
Herzegovina but also at the regional level.

While much has indeed been accomplished, a great

deal remains to be done to obtain real results for women
on the ground. To that end, it is of vital importance for
all United Nations stakeholders, and especially the
Security Council, to continue to use appropriate tools at
their disposal for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). At the same time, Member States need to take
decisive action accompanied by clear goals, baselines
and indicators to monitor and assess its implementation.
The goals for the future have already been identified.
We must now find the will and persistence to achieve
them. I assure the Council of Bosnia and Herzegovina's
full cooperation in this endeavour.

In conclusion, I wish to underscore that we support
the Council's adoption today of resolution 2122 (2013),
which we were pleased to sponsor.

