Mr. Sial (Pakistan): My delegation wishes to join
others in congratulating the Ugandan presidency for
convening this important open debate on women and
peace and security as we mark the tenth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). Pakistan
believes that it is an important occasion to assess the
progress made by the United Nations in addressing the
situation of women in conflict and post-conflict
situations.

As we gather to commemorate the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
the situation of women and girls in conflict situations
remains far from satisfactory. The report of the
Secretary-General on the occasion of the tenth
anniversary notes that

"Despite an apparent firm foundation and
promise, 10 years after the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), significant achievements are
difficult to identify or quantify. The conditions
and opportunities that women and girls face in
situations of armed conflict continue to be
abhorrent" (S/2010/498, para. 3).

Resolution 1325 (2000), in addition to other
issues, also underscored the desirability of expanding
the role and contribution of women in United Nations
field-based operations. The Secretary-General has
observed in his report that significant progress in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) has been
made in the peacekeeping arena. However, more needs
to be done.

As the largest troop-contributing country,
Pakistan fully recognizes the important role of women
in peacekeeping operations. We are proud of our
women who have served as police officers, doctors and
nurses in difficult and dangerous operations in Africa
and the Balkans. Currently, we have 58 women
deployed in five peacekeeping missions, including 38
in the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur. We are willing to deploy even more police
women in Darfur subject to the completion of their
deployment formalities.

We fully support the mainstreaming of the gender
perspective in peacekeeping operations and believe that
the appointment of gender advisers in the field and at
Headquarters has served a useful purpose. We are
supportive of all steps that increase the participation of
women in peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities.

Pakistan is equally conscious of the importance
of the gender sensitization of peacekeeping troops and
is complying with this important aspect by
incorporating the two United Nations standard generic
training modules in its training doctrine. We are
therefore fully supportive of the efforts of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations in developing
training materials that could be used in the
predeployment and induction training of personnel.

We believe that peacekeeping missions must also
be provided with adequate resources for the discharge
of their mandates. It is unrealistic to expect that they
would be able to fulfil their complex mandates without
the availability of required resources.

The protection of civilians, including women and
girls, will remain one of the important mandated tasks
and objectives of peacekeeping. However, it is
important not to lose sight of the fact that only a
peaceful and secure environment can ensure protection
of civilians and that such conditions can be maintained
only by capable and resourceful national authorities.

The gender perspective in peacekeeping must be
dovetailed with a comprehensive peacebuilding
endeavour, factoring in particular requirements of
women in post-conflict zone. For long-term peace,
economic recovery and social cohesion, women's
access to health, education and entrepreneurship is
essential. In this context, the Secretary General's report
on women's participation in peacebuilding
(S/2010/466) candidly puts forth a seven-point action
plan. Women's participation in the mediation and
policy formulation of various peacebuilding efforts
targeted at particular requirements for women can be a
force multiplier. However, such action plans should run
in harmony with overall peacebuilding strategies, with
due regard to broad institutional contexts and strict
professionalism.
We believe that while the Security Council has
come a long way in integrating the issue of women,
peace and security into its actions, it needs to
demonstrate greater political will while ensuring
accountability in the implementation of the resolution.

