Mr. Suescum (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank the delegation of China for convening this
important debate. My thanks go also to Ms. Rachel
Mayanja, Ms. Ine's Alberdi, Ms. Sarah Taylor and
Mr. Alain Le Roy for their detailed presentations on the
progress made and the challenges facing us in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security.

Over the past eight years, the Security Council
has closely followed the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). The report of the Secretary-General
(S/2008/622) clearly indicates that the overall peace
and security architecture of the United Nations has
been more sensitive to women's needs in situations of
armed conflict and post-conflict societies. However, a
noticeable gap remains between policies and their
implementation, and we need to do more to mainstream
gender perspectives in conflict prevention and
resolution as well as in peacebuilding. Full
participation and involvement by women in all
peacebuilding efforts and in the promotion of peace
and security increase the likelihood of success and
sustainability in these processes and of post-conflict
stability.

That obliges the international community and, in
particular, the Security Council to focus their efforts on
including women in peace processes to the greatest
extent possible. To that end, a number of creative ways
to involve women in peace processes have been
identified over the past few years, and we must make a
careful effort to document and promote such models so
that they can be reproduced and adapted to each
specific situation.

In our view, it is critical to include women in
negotiations and in the preparation of the strategies and
objectives of mediators. That will facilitate the analysis
of men's and women's differing needs, interests and
links to power in a particular conflict situation, of the
inequalities between them and of their roles in society.
We are not suggesting the imposition of a quota for
women in such processes; we want to promote the
greatest possible impact of their participation on
outcomes and their implementation.

It is also essential to enhance women's
participation and the consideration of women's needs
in peacebuilding and peacekeeping operations across
the board. In many cases, for example, we ignore the
gender dimension in the process of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration. That means that
women and girl fighters prefer to remain armed, absent
protection and absent incentives to do otherwise.

To achieve all of those objectives, professionals
involved in mediation and peacebuilding should have
the tools they need to mainstream the gender
perspective in their work. Reports of the United
Nations and of various early warning mechanisms
would benefit from the identification and analysis of
empirical data disaggregated by gender and other key
factors. Sources for such indicators are limited and in
some cases non-existent. For that reason, as mandates
are carried out, Security Council members and, in
particular, donor countries should provide the technical
and financial resources required for the preparation and
exchange of such information.

It is indispensable to understand that gender
equality is not the same as strict equality between men
and women; rather, women and men must have the
same opportunities to exercise their rights and meet
their responsibilities. If we understand and support that
principle, women will be able to better play their role
as essential agents in the promotion of peace and
development.

