Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): I wish to join preceding speakers in
thanking the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2009/362) and for his presence at this meeting. I
also welcome his personal commitment to combating
the phenomenon of sexual violence in armed conflict.

Both resolution 1820 (2008) and resolution 1882
(2009) on children and armed conflict, which was
adopted last week, represent important steps towards
the development of a system of comprehensive
practical measures to protect civilians, particularly
women and children, in situations of armed conflict.
All the resolutions that have been adopted in that
regard contribute to ongoing efforts to establish and
codify international humanitarian law, which must be
implemented. Today's open debate on this issue will
undoubtedly help to strengthen efforts and initiatives in
this area, and we wish to commend the United
Kingdom delegation for organizing it.

The changing and complex nature of armed
conflict has caused great harm to large numbers of
civilians, in particular the most vulnerable groups, girls
and women, whom it has made more vulnerable to
sexual violence. We agree with the Secretary-General
that sexual violence dehumanizes its victims, inflicting
intense psychological and physical trauma, and is often
accompanied by fear, shame and stigma, which usually
cause victims not to report such crimes.

The widespread and systematic perpetration of
sexual violence diminishes the prospects for early post-
conflict recovery and peacebuilding, and usually
unleashes a vicious circle of attacks and
counterattacks. In our View, that justifies the great
importance attached to continued efforts to develop
practical mechanisms for preventing such heinous acts
and violations against these vulnerable groups.

Here, we express our regret at the continued
attacks on civilians in armed conflicts, including acts
of sexual violence and violence based on ethnicity,
gender or religion or aimed at achieving specific
political goals. We strongly condemn such practices,
which constitute clear violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law.

Indeed, the relevant Security Council resolutions
will be devoid of any value if they are not implemented
in all conflict areas, including the occupied Palestinian
territories and other occupied Arab territories, which
have been subject for many decades to the systematic
commission of violations and inhuman practices
against civilians, including severe human rights
violations against women and children.

We had hoped that the report now before the
Council would address violence against women in
general and refer to the blatant violations of
international law being perpetrated in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including starvation and denial
of access to medical supplies, hospitals and clinics, as
well as to the torture and harassment being endured by
Palestinian women in Israeli prisons. Such practices
constitute physical and psychological violence, and we
ask that they be taken into consideration in future
reports. The same applies to the violations that have
been committed in Afghanistan and Iraq.

Some progress has undoubtedly been made in
efforts to combat violence against women in conflict
areas, particularly in Africa. However, we must
continue to support Governments in protecting their
citizens by helping them to formulate and implement
comprehensive strategies to combat sexual violence,
bearing in mind each country's specificities and
particular needs. We agree with the Secretary-General
that inadequate measures to prevent sexual violence,
protect civilians, combat impunity for sexual violence
and address continuing discrimination against women
and girls, as well the failure of some parties to conflicts
to honour their commitments, have contributed greatly
to the exacerbation and spread of sexual violence.

Therefore, countries must make greater efforts to
build their national capacities to combat this
phenomenon. That, of course, will require the reform
of judicial systems to bring them into conformity with
recognized international norms. There is a need to
ensure that the perpetrators and masterminds of sexual
violence are denied any kind of amnesty or immunity
in order to guarantee justice for the victims.

Furthermore, efforts must be made to raise social
awareness of issues related to sexual violence and of
the need to avoid marginalizing or stigmatizing its
victims and to rehabilitate them. In this respect, I
welcome the initiatives undertaken by various United
Nations entities, including the Peacebuilding
Commission and peacekeeping operations, in the areas
of peace and security, human rights, humanitarian
affairs and development, as well as efforts to provide
strategic advice, raise awareness, promote institutional
reforms, offer support and services to victims, and
provide monitoring and protection. We hope that all
those efforts will help put an end to sexual violence
and impunity for such crimes. It is also necessary to
increase women's participation in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding operations.

We have taken note of the recommendations that
the Secretary-General makes in his report. We agree
with him that it is essential that all United Nations
actors ensure full respect for ethical, humanitarian and
safety standards for researching, measuring and
collecting data on sexual violence. We endorse all of
the report's recommendations.

We welcome the Secretary-General proposal for
the establishment of an independent commission of
inquiry to investigate sexual violence in certain
conflict areas. We are ready to engage with other
Council members in a positive discussion on that
recommendation.

