The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Albania, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Belgium, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Cote d'Ivoire, Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Estonia, Finland, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Norway, Panama, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of
Korea, Romania, Rwanda, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and the United Republic of Tanzania, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: On behalf of the Council, I wish
to acknowledge the presence in the Chamber of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Regional Cooperation
of Burkina Faso, His Excellency Mr. Bedouma Alain
Yoda, and the Minister of State for Cooperation and
Francophonie of France, His Excellency Mr. Alain
Joyandet.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
2
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/489, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Albania, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Benin, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Canada,
Chile, Costa Rica, Cote d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Panama, Poland, Portugal,
the Republic of Korea, Romania, Rwanda, Senegal,
Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United
Republic of Tanzania and the United States of America.

I wish to draw the attention of members to
document S/2009/362, containing the report of the
Secretary-General pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1820 (2008).

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Austria, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, France, Japan, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mexico, Russian Federation, Turkey, Uganda,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Viet Nam


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1888 (2009).

I now have the privilege of making a statement in
my capacity as Secretary of State of the United States
of America.

I am very grateful to speak before the Security
Council on this important issue. I want to thank
everyone who has worked very hard to reach this point
09-53396
on this resolution and, of course, to have it adopted
unanimously. We are here to address an issue that has
received too little attention, not only in this Chamber
over the past six decades, but also, I would suggest, in
all of our halls of Government across the world. It is an
important issue that goes to the core of our
commitment to ensure the safety of the United Nations
Member States and their citizens.

Under the United Nations Charter, the 15
members of this Council bear primary responsibility
for maintaining international peace and security.
Satisfying that responsibility includes our protecting
the lives and physical security of all people, including
the women who comprise half the planet's population.
This responsibility is particularly acute in
circumstances where peace and stability are
challenged.

Even though women and children are rarely
responsible for initiating armed conflict, they are often
war's most vulnerable and violated victims. The
resolution we have adopted today represents a step
forward in our global efforts to end violence
perpetrated against women and children in conflict
zones, and it builds on two prior Security Council
resolutions - resolution 1325 (2000), which calls on
all parties in conflicts to respect women's rights and
increase their participation in peace negotiations and
post-conflict reconstruction efforts; and resolution
1820 (2008), which affirms the ambitions set out in
resolution 1325 (2000) and establishes a clear link
between maintaining international peace and security
and preventing and responding to sexual violence used
as a tactic of war to target civilians. Yet, despite these
actions by the Security Council, violence against
women and girls in conflict-related situations has not
diminished; in fact, in some cases it has escalated.

Reading the headlines, one might think that the
use of rape as a tactic of war happens only occasionally
or in a few places, such as the Democratic Republic of
the Congo or the Sudan. That would be bad enough,
but the reality is much worse. We have seen rape used
as a tactic of war before in Bosnia, Burma, Sri Lanka
and elsewhere. In too many countries and in too many
cases, the perpetrators of this violence are not
punished, and so this impunity encourages further
attacks.

Last month, I travelled to Goma in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, where over 1,100
09-53396

rapes are reported every month. I met with survivors of
sexual violence, and the physical and emotional
damage to individual women and their families from
these attacks cannot be quantified, nor can the toll on
their societies. The dehumanizing nature of sexual
violence does not harm just a single individual, a single
family or even a single village or a single group; it
shreds the fabric that weaves us together as human
beings. It endangers families and communities, erodes
social and political stability, and undermines economic
progress. We need to understand that it holds all of us
back.

Also, our failure as an international body to
respond concretely to this global problem erodes our
collective effectiveness. So we must act now to end
this crisis, not only to protect vulnerable people and
promote human security, but also to uphold the
legitimacy of this body.

The international community has made progress.
Many peacekeeping mandates now include Security
Council requests for strengthened measures to prevent
and respond to sexual violence. In Chad and the Sudan,
United Nations peacekeepers have clear instructions
underscoring their responsibility to protect local
populations against sexual and gender-based violence.
I recently met with United Nations troops in Liberia,
who provide an excellent example of the steps a United
Nations mission can take, both through its own actions
and in cooperation with the host Government, to
prevent violence against women and girls. It is also
very important that the United Nations Mission in
Liberia includes an all-women police unit from India.
That all-women police unit has helped to motivate
more Liberian women to become police officers, and
the Mission has launched a joint United Nations-
Liberian campaign against rape.

These steps are essential but, alone, they are not
sufficient. Resolution 1888 (2009) identifies specific
steps that the United Nations and Member States can
and should take to improve the Organization's response
to sexual violence committed during situations of
armed conflict. It calls on the Secretary-General to
appoint a special representative to lead, coordinate and
advocate efforts to end sexual violence. We expect that
person to engage at high levels with civilian and
military leaders to spearhead the United Nations
activities on this front. It also calls on the Secretary-
General to rapidly deploy a team of experts to work
with Governments to strengthen the rule of law,
3
address impunity and enhance accountability, while
drawing attention to the full range of legal venues that
can be brought into play, including domestic,
international and mixed courts that bring local and
international judges and prosecutors together to
strengthen local justice systems.

We must also recognize that ending conflicts
outright is the most certain path to ending sexual
violence in conflicts. So pursuing peace and successful
post-conflict transitions should be our highest priority.
In States where conflict is taking place and in those
that are moving beyond it, local police must receive
better training, the rule of law must be strengthened,
and survivors must be ensured full access to justice and
protection throughout the judicial process. We envision
that the team of experts called for in the resolution will
help us to strengthen initiatives like those.

Beyond the measures outlined in the resolution,
the Security Council should take additional steps.
Protecting women and children should be a critical
priority for all troops who wear the blue helmet. To
reflect this, new and renewed peacekeeping mandates
should include language condemning sexual violence
and giving further guidance to peacekeeping missions
to work with local authorities to end it. We must seek
to ensure that our respective military and police forces,
especially those that will participate in peacekeeping
missions, develop the expertise to prevent and respond
to violence against women and children. This will be
helped by increasing the number of women who serve
in United Nations peacekeeping missions. When I
visited the Mission in Goma, I was very impressed at
how integrated it was in every way - staff from every
country, every kind of person represented, and many
women in the leadership as well as in the ranks.

Let us not forget that it is often women who lead
the call for peace in communities shattered by
violence. We have seen women in this role from
Liberia, Rwanda and Northern Ireland to Guatemala.
Even when they suffer terrible losses in conflicts they
had no part in starting, women have the will to reach
across divisions, find common ground and foster
understanding. As they seek peace, so must we by
making sure they are part of all efforts. So I urge
United Nations Member States to make sure that their
foreign assistance programmes include measures to
prevent and respond to violence against women and
children and to ensure that women are included in
designing and implementing those programmes.
In his speech to the General Assembly last week,
President Obama challenged nations of the world to
assume responsibility for the challenges confronting
us.

Certainly, the challenge of sexual violence in
conflict cannot and should not be separated from the
broader security issues confronting the Council. It is
time for all of us to assume our responsibility to go
beyond condemning this behaviour and take concrete
steps to end it, to make it socially unacceptable, to
recognize that it is not cultural; it is criminal. And the
more we say that, over and over and over again, the
more we will change attitudes and create peer pressure
and the conditions for the elimination of this violation.

When I was in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, I was told of an old proverb that says, "No
matter how long the night, the day is sure to come".
Well, I hope our work today, and every day going
forward, will hasten the time when thousands of
women around the world will be able to feel
comfortable in walking the streets of their cities and
villages freely again, to work outside their homes,
collect firewood and water without fear, play with their
children, spend time with their husbands and enjoy all
the blessings of life in freedom, peace and security.

That is our dream for a better future for them and
for us, and I thank this body for the strong commitment
that this resolution represents.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council. I kind of like being a president, so this may
go on a little longer than anticipated.

I now invite the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, to take the floor.


