Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): Croatia thanks the
Argentine presidency for convening this annual debate
on women and peace and security, because it is an
important issue that requires our full and constant
attention.

Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union. I would
like to make some additional remarks in my national
capacity.

Croatia welcomes the focus of today's debate on
refugee and internally displaced women and girls, in
particular the women's role as leaders in displacement
and refugee settings and, in the broader context, their
role in addressing the root causes of the conflicts that
resulted in the displacement. We also welcome the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2014/693), as well
as the presidential statement (S/PRST/2014/21) adopted
earlier today.

Today's debate comes at a timely juncture, in
light of the forthcoming 2015 high-level review of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), as well as a
massive increase in global forced displacement. For the
first time since the Second World War the number of
refugees and internally displaced persons has exceeded
50 million people worldwide. Half ofthat population are
women and girls. That is not only a reason for our deep
concern; it is also an incentive for concrete actions.

Croatia is particularly worried about the recent rise
of radicalization, violent extremism and terrorism that
leads to new mass displacements, increased incidents
of sexual and gender-based violence, targeted attacks
on women and girls and those defending their rights,
and other atrocities and human rights violations. One
of the reasons why my country pays so much attention
to that matter is the fact that Croatia itself experienced
war and a long and painful refugee crisis. In the 1990s
we provided protection and assistance for hundreds of
thousands of internally displaced persons, as well as for
refugees from Bosnia and Herzegovina, most of whom
were women and children.

We know from our own experience how war can
affect women and girls. Women suffered violations of
their human rights, including rape and maltreatment.
Rape was used as a tactic of war and an instrument
of ethnic cleansing. We have seen the impact of the
violations on women's human rights, on their lives and
on their physical and mental health. Our own experience
teaches us the importance of adequately addressing
conflict-related violations of women's rights, including
sexual violence, and of providing necessary assistance,
health care, psychological counselling and financial
support for those women.

Displaced women and girls are among the most
vulnerable groups in the world. The reasons often
lie in the entrenched gender-based stereotypes and
discriminatory legal frameworks and practices,
including gender-based discrimination in access to
documents and resources, education and employment,
poor reproductive health care and exclusion from
decision-making processes.

However, women should not be seen only as victims
of conflict. They are also agents ofpeace and should be
an integral part of decision-making in the process of
restoring and maintaining peace and rebuilding their
societies. Still, the sad fact is that women continue to
face significant barriers to successfully participating
and playing roles in those processes. To ensure their
equal participation and to guarantee the protection of
their rights remains one of the major challenges.

Crises and conflicts increase the economic and
social vulnerability of women and girls. Nevertheless,
the post-conflict period also offers opportunities to
transform societies in order to change the entrenched
patriarchal norms, including by addressing long-
standing inequalities, empowering women and ensuring
their roles as leaders and agents of democratic changes
in their respective communities.

At the ministerial side event that Croatia organized
on the margins of the General Assembly's sixty-ninth
session this autumn, as a sort of follow-up to the
Peacebuilding Commission ministerial meeting held a
year ago - a meeting chaired by the Croatian Foreign
Minister - we had the privilege to hear inspirational
stories of women from Afghanistan, Myanmar, South
Africa and Croatia who help bring about peace,
development and reconciliation in their communities.

We believe that it is very important that the post-
2015 sustainable development framework contributes to
achieving gender equality, women's empowerment and
women's rights. We particularly stress the importance
of providing women and girls with equal access to
education - but also of educating boys and men.
Resolution 1325 (2000) and the subsequent resolutions
on women and peace and security set out a visionary
agenda for achieving gender equality as a prerequisite
for peaceful, inclusive and just societies. What we
need now is to translate the existing commitments into
concrete actions that will bring tangible benefits for the
advancement of women and girls with regard to their
political and economic empowerment, as well as the
full realization of their human rights, both in times of
conflict and in times of peace.

Let me conclude by stressing once again that
Croatia strongly supports any effort aimed at increasing
the role of women in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts and in peacebuilding, promoting women's
equal participation and full involvement in all efforts for
the maintenance and promotion of peace and security
and ending impunity for sexual violence in conflict,
preventing and punishing acts of sexual violence, as
well as bringing justice, services and reparations to
victims.

We wholeheartedly advocate the advancement of
the women and peace and security agenda because
we strongly believe that if peace and security are to
be sustained, women must be empowered, their voices
heard and their participation guaranteed.

