Mr. Guterres (Timor-Leste): Allow me from the
outset to express my delegation's appreciation to you,
Sir, for convening this meeting on the anniversary of
the adoption of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000). This commendable initiative highlights the
commitment that the Council attaches to the role of
women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts
and in peace-building processes. Resolution 1325
(2000) recognizes that women and children are the
most vulnerable group both during and after conflict
and establishes a framework within which to ensure
their full participation in all aspects of the peace
process.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
express my delegation's appreciation to Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno and Ms. Smythe for their
detailed presentation this morning because it is
particularly useful to have insight from the field.

We recognize the significance of this resolution in
the area of peacekeeping and endorse the
recommendations of the Secretary-General contained
in his report on women, peace and security of 2002
(S/2002/ 1154). We also welcome the appointment of a
Gender Adviser in the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations; it will further contribute to ensuring a
gender perspective in all areas of peacekeeping
operations. However, more needs to be done to fully
implement resolution 1325 (2002) at all levels. Timor-
Leste welcomes the efforts of the United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) as reflected
in Secretary-General's note (A/58/ 168), which reviews
and updates the activities conducted by UNIFEM. in
2002. In particular, we commend the Independent
Experts' Assessment of the Impact of Armed Conflict
on Women and Women's Role in Peace-building,
issued in 2002.

In Timor-Leste, UNIFEM. has played a key role in
addressing gender equality and women's empowerment
by strengthening their economic security and rights,
promoting human rights and supporting women in
governance and peace-building. In reference to the
latter, UNIFEM. provided training to various groups of
women in political processes and participation. The
close collaboration among Timorese women, UNIFEM,
non-governmental organizations and other relevant
United Nations agencies resulted in a high percentage
of women being elected to the Constituent Assembly in
August 2001. In fact, 27 per cent of Timor-Leste's
National Parliament is comprised of women, almost
achieving the 30 per cent quota set out in the Beijing
Platform for Action.

In May 2003, UNIFEM. re-established its office in
Timor-Leste with the objective of training women
candidates for local elections and to continue its
dynamic partnership with the Government of Timor-
Leste in achieving the objectives of gender
mainstreaming and economic and political
empowerment in all facets of governance and civil
society.

In addition, with the technical and advisory
support provided by the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET) to the National
Police Service, the number of women on active duty in
that law enforcement body now makes up more than 20
per cent of the total number of police officers.

Timor-Leste is committed to a nation-building
process which promotes a culture of peace, with full
respect for human rights, fundamental freedoms, the
equality of all citizens and non-discrimination. Based
on that, the National Parliament ratified a package of
international human rights conventions on 10
December 2002, notably the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women (CEDAW) and its Optional Protocol, the
International Convention on the Elimination of all
Forms of Racial Discrimination, the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights and the Convention on the Rights of
the Child. My country will do its utmost to meet
international human rights standards in its laws,
policies and practices. To that end, Timor-Leste would
like to extend its appreciation to the donor community
for its commitment and support.

In that context, the Office for the Promotion of
Equality in the Cabinet of the Prime Minister, in
cooperation with UNIFEM, will draft Timor-Leste's
first national report to the Committee on the CEDAW,
due in March 2004.
The Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court, a landmark treaty, recognizes that specific acts
of sexual and gender violence constitute serious crimes
under international law. In addition, the Statute
guarantees the fair representation of women on the
bench and requires the inclusion of judges with legal
expertise on violence against women and children.

Finally, let me reaffirm Timor-Leste's
commitment to the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), which is essential to the achievement of the
Millennium Declaration Goals. We share the View
previously expressed here that sustainable peace and
lasting security cannot be achieved without the full and
equal participation of women in conflict resolution and
peace-building. For those reasons, we would like to see
this issue remain a regular item on the Security
Council's agenda.

