Mrs. Grau (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Allow me to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this debate, as well as the seminar on resolution 1325
(2000), which your country held in Hanoi in July, and
which Switzerland had the pleasure of supporting. I
would also like to associate myself with the statement
made by the Permanent Representative of Costa Rica
on behalf of the Human Security Network.

Today's debate is the eighth on the subject held
since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). The
Security Council has adopted seven presidential
statements concerning its implementation. On one of
the key aspects of this resolution - sexual violence in
armed conflict - we have seen impressive progress. I

refer here to resolution 1820 (2008), and, very recently,
resolution 1888 (2009), which were adopted as a result
of the commitment of the United States of America and
which should now be implemented. Generally
speaking, the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) remains unsatisfactory. The facts and figures set
out in various studies, including by the United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM), speak for
themselves.

The question thus remains: how can we ensure
that the agenda effectively moves forward and that
what we have committed ourselves to implementing is
actually implemented?

First, Switzerland recently evaluated its 2007
national action plan and continues to improve that
instrument. Thanks to our pool of experts, we will
increase the number of female personnel seconded to
peacekeeping operations and as mediators. We will
improve gender training in all aspects of our foreign
policy, including in our programmes to promote peace
and development cooperation. Switzerland is pleased
to share its experiences with other countries and
partners.

Secondly, as a member of the Group of Friends of
1325, chaired by Canada, Switzerland will actively
support the preparations for the tenth anniversary.
However, if we want to have a reason to celebrate, a
strategic approach and an intelligent agenda are
required. It is essential to enhance the responsibility of
the Council, to increase the leadership in this area and
to improve overall follow-up on the resolution.

To that end, the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security, in close cooperation with
Switzerland, has developed a concept for monitoring
the resolution's implementation. This initiative,
entitled "Accountability and Action for the Tenth
Anniversary of Security Council Resolution 1325",
will include monthly assessments of all Council actions
and, by means of concrete proposals, will contribute to
the systematic implementation of the resolution.
However, if this project is to be successful, more
partners will be required. We invite all States to join
our efforts by providing political and/or financial
support.
Thirdly, the Council already has excellent
instruments at its disposal. The mainstreaming of
gender aspects in all peacekeeping operations, the
consistent use of the sanctions regime and the
establishment of a strong, high-level gender unit are
key elements for improving the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).

We must think about how the Council can use
existing instruments more strategically and even about
establishing new ones. The informal expert group on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict could
address the resolution's prevention aspects. As far as
protection is concerned, the model mechanism
developed for children under resolutions 1612 (2005)
and 1882 (2009), combined with new instruments
provided for in resolution 1888 (2009), is a promising
example. A pool of experts or a commission for the
promotion of women to high positions could respond to
the resolution's aspect of strengthening the role of
women.

There is much work ahead of us. Let us begin
today, here and together.

