Mr. Elnour (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset of our statement, my delegation should like to
express its appreciation to the presidency of Uruguay
for organizing this open debate on sexual violence in
conflict used as a tool of war and terror. I should also
like to take this opportunity to express our thanks to the
Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Amina Mohammed, as
well as to Mr. Adama Dieng and Ms. Mina Jaf, for their
useful briefings to us this morning.

I should also like to express our sincere thanks to
Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura for her efforts during her
tenure in her post. Allow me to wish her, as well as
her successor, Ms. Pramila Patten, every success. We
remain prepared to cooperate with her Office.
My delegation condemns all forms of sexual
violence against women or the use thereof as a tool of
war or terror. The international community must join
its efforts in order to confront this heinous crime and
its root causes, and to prevent the trafficking in women
and girls. As the Sudan is a transit country for this kind
of crime, a law against human trafficking was drafted
and adopted in 2014. In addition, a conference was held
in my country on trafficking in Eastern Africa, at which
the Khartoum declaration was issued and agreements
were signed between the Sudan and a number of
neighbouring countries to confront the groups that
are violating human rights, particularly those of such
vulnerable groups as women and children.

My delegation stresses that the Sudan is committed

to making every possible effort to protect and
promote women, particularly in areas of conflict. That
commitment was demonstrated in a number of efforts
that bore fruit in the adoption and implementation of a
number of national strategies and plans. An independent
commission on human rights was created, based on the
Paris Principles and with particular attention given
to the situation of women in camps for internally
displaced persons. That was done in cooperation with
the United Nations Environment Programme and the
human rights division of the United Nations country
team in the Sudan. Finally, in that vein, the Sudan has
been committed to the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security.

As stated in the report (S/2017/249) ofthe Secretary-
General, many positive legislative and executive steps
have taken place in the Sudan recently. They are
clearly and strongly related to combating violence
against women and to fighting sexual and gender-
based violence in conflict. They aim it particular at
promoting the rule of law and the administration of
justice through important steps in the implementation
of resolution 1888 (2009). Hence, the mandate and
terms of reference of the Attorney-General have been
fully separated from the Ministry of Justice to ensure
complete independence, confirming the judicial role
of the Attorney-General. Furthermore, last year the
National Council amended the penal code in order
to confer new powers on the Attorney-General. The
Sudanese penal code directly and clearly condemns the
crime of rape. Furthermore, there has been an addition
to define the crime of sexual harassment. The Attorney-
General of the Special Criminal Court on the Events in
Darfur also now includes the crime of rape.

My delegation should also like to make the
following clarifications before the Council concerning
a number of paragraphs and statements in the Secretary-
General's report to the Council that are related to the
situation in Darfur.

First, my delegation emphasizes that information
in paragraph 64 of the report does not reflect the
current reality of Darfur. Furthermore, it is not in line
with resolution 2340 (2017), of 8 February. We believe
this to be a clear contradiction, particularly as Darfur
has recently seen a considerable improvement in its
security and political conditions, with the subsiding
of the conflict. Resolution 2340 (2017) and previous
reports of the Secretary-General, as well as the reports
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur, have all stressed over the past three or four
years that there has been considerable improvement in
the security and political conditions in Darfur.

Secondly, paragraph 67 of the report reflects the
figures provided by my Government on cases of sexual
and gender violence reported during the year 2016 - a

total of 112 cases. The court considered 40 cases and
issued 13 sentences, including two death sentences for
violators. Let me state that detailed analysis of these
cases, particularly the age groups and relationships
between perpetrators and victims, shows that the
vast majority of those cases reflect social problems
unconnected with conflict-related sexual violence.
Perhaps more factual figures could have been provided
had there been more extensive consultations with the
Attorney-General in Darfur.

Thirdly, there are direct accusations in the report of
the involvement of Sudanese Armed Forces and other
regular forces in sexual crimes in the province ofDarfur.
Let me stress that all our forces are fully committed
to implementing specific national instruments on the
subject as well as fulfilling all international human
rights rules and international humanitarian law.
Since they were established in the last century, the
Sudanese Armed Forces have been very professional.
They have fulfilled their duties with respect to the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID), working to protect the Mission's
members and equipment. In addition, numerous reports
of the Secretary-General reports have borne witness
to the fact that our forces have pursued and captured
perpetrators of attacks against UNAMID.

The Government's armed forces, like those of all
States in the world, are charged with fighting to restore
the rule of law against armed groups acting under mere
political slogans. In this regard, we need not delve
into the perspective and practice of international law
in relation to outlaw groups. However, reports of our
Government forces' involvement of in the crimes we
are considering here do not meet even the lowest level
of evidentiary legitimacy.

The Government of the Sudan wishes to stress its
eagerness to promote the rights of women and protect
women from violence. In this context, we renew the
expression of our wish to continue cooperating with
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict and all other bodies
relevant to the issue. But once again, my delegation
reiterates its call for more accuracy from the sources
of information used in the Secretary-General's reports
and for the sharing of such information with concerned
States before it is included in a report.

My country believes that the treatment of this
subject requires a careful comprehensive review of the
pillars of peacekeeping as it is an essential component
of combating these heinous crimes. We also see a
need for preventive diplomacy and for confronting
the root causes of conflict. In most African conflicts,
underdevelopment with all its economic, social and
humanitarian consequences is often at the root of
conflict. We also see a need to promote the role and
status of women and to build capacity in States.

Each of us must make the intellectual effort required
to confront the ideological root causes of sexual
violence in conflict. We must intensify our efforts to
combat terrorism and illegal migration because these
phenomena are closely interconnected. Further, greater
cooperation and coherence within the United Nations
system is required to combat sexual and gender-
based violence in conflict and to bring perpetrators to
account for such heinous crimes. Moreover, victims
must be compensated and assisted psychologically,
physically, socially and financially so that they can be
reintegrated into society, enjoy a livelihood and build
their communities, societies and countries.

