Mr. Neil (Jamaica): Mr. President, my delegation
would like to commend you for arranging this
discussion on the issue of women, peace and security,
which was previously brought before the Council on 25
July this year under the presidency of the United
Kingdom. This no doubt speaks to the importance
which the Security Council now attaches to the gender
dimensions of conflict, an aspect which for years had
been overlooked.

It has been two years since the adoption of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women,
peace and security, a milestone in the recognition of
women's contribution to the maintenance and
promotion of peace and security and in addressing their
specific concerns, particularly in the context of armed
conflict. My delegation was therefore pleased to
receive the recently completed study on women, peace
and security and expresses its appreciation to the
Special Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of
Women, Ms. Angela King, for her role as coordinator,
as well as to the Inter-Agency Task Force on Women,
Peace and Security. We also look forward to the
assessment report which will be produced by the
United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM) on women in peace-building.

The second anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) is an opportune moment for a
critical analysis of how far we have come in
implementing its goals. Resolution 1325 (2000) is a
yardstick by which the Security Council is held
accountable to the international community at large in
its efforts to effect change; its effectiveness is
integrally related to the extent to which it is being
operationalized.

In this regard, Jamaica supports the proposal
made by the delegation of Colombia for a plan of
action for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).

I will elaborate on a few aspects of the report
which my delegation deems to be of particular
importance.

First, the international legal framework for
women's human rights is crucial in ensuring their
protection, especially in relation to crimes against
women and girls during armed conflict. The report
states that over the past decade the international legal
framework has expanded to address most of the
particular crimes experienced by women in armed
conflict. We note that the statutes of the two ad hoc
international Tribunals in Yugoslavia and Rwanda, as
well as that of Sierra Leone, all include gender-based
violence and have issued indictments related to sexual
violence. My delegation supports the recommendations
made by the Secretary-General in his report and
supports the view that future ad hoc tribunals created
by the Security Council should include provisions
which build on existing statutes and include judges and
advisers with legal expertise on specific issues such as
violation of the rights of women and girls, including
gender-based and sexual violence.

Turning to the question of increased participation
of women in conflict resolution and peace processes,
we fully support the view that the participation of
women and girls and the inclusion of a gender
perspective in peace processes are strategic moves in
ensuring that political, social and economic institutions
facilitate the achievement of gender equality between
men and women. Nowhere is this more important than
in post-conflict peace-building. As past experience has
shown, women can make a significant contribution in
promoting peace, particularly in preserving social order
and educating for peace.

We are pleased to note that there has been some
progress in this area in terms of increased awareness.
The instrumental role of women's groups in brokering
peace in Afghanistan, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Kosovo, Sierra Leone and East Timor are
positive examples of how effective women can be in
the peace process. Despite these achievements, there is
still more to be done in integrating women in all stages
of peace consolidation. We should even aim to go a
step further by ensuring that there are more formal
mechanisms which facilitate women's groups in
political decision-making. As the report clearly
highlights, efforts are needed to achieve greater
representation in formal peace negotiations. Women's
capacities as participants and leaders need to be further
enhanced. We fully support the ongoing United Nations
cooperation with women's groups in the field,
especially through increased training, and we anticipate
further recording of these achievements in subsequent
reports.

The incorporation of a gender perspective into
United Nations peacekeeping operations was an
important objective of resolution 1325 (2000). We
commend the Security Council for its efforts in
supporting informal peace initiatives of women's
groups and networks, including the holding of Arria-
formula meetings with women's representatives. While
the fact that peacekeeping mandates now entail a
gender dimension is welcome, we remain concerned
that the institutional support at Headquarters is
inadequate to meet the needs in the field. The sterling
contribution of gender advisers in Kosovo, East Timor,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Sierra Leone
and Bosnia and Herzegovina provides a vivid example
of the effectiveness of gender units, which can serve as
models for the replication of such units elsewhere. My
delegation therefore continues to advocate the need for
adequate capacity at Headquarters to support gender
advisers in the field so as to ensure the necessary
sharing of policy advice and prior to their formulation,
the incorporation into peacekeeping mandates, of a
gender perspective.

Finally, while we are encouraged by the positive
steps taken in implementing Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000), we believe that more needs to
be done in making gender mainstreaming in peace
operations a reality. In implementing its own
resolution, the Security Council should take the lead in
ensuring that in its missions to regions of conflict it
makes contact with women's groups, and that their
concerns be fully taken on board when considering
peacekeeping mandates.

