The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Mendoza-Garcia (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish) Costa Rica congratulates the Council
presidency for convening today's debate to analyse
the progress in the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda a year after the fifteenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000). That resolution represented a major change
in the inclusion of women in the context of peace and
security, promoting their direct involvement and their
active and meaningful participation in addressing the
disproportionate impact of conflict and violence on
women. In that way, they are recognized not as victims
but as agents of change, where empowered women, on
an equal footing with their male counterparts, are the
basis of peaceful and inclusive societies. We welcome
the briefing by the Executive Director of UN-Women
and the Secretary-General's statement.

Although the positive effect that women generate in
negotiations in peace, conflict resolution, post-conflict
and humanitarian assistance processes has been
recognized, there is still resistance to the adequate and
meaningful integration of women in those processes.
That resistance lies partly in the high cost of political
will and partly in structural obstacles, as evidenced in
the large gap that persists in the presence of women
in leadership positions in entities dedicated to peace
and security activities. For example, during 2015, fewer
than 10 per cent of the management positions in peace
and security activities at the United Nations were held
by women.

Gender balance in senior-level management is
desirable and necessary. Only 22 per cent of the Under-
Secretaries-General today are women. It is clear
therefore that previous commitments to gender parity
have failed the compliance test. We therefore call on
the permanent and elected members of the Security
Council to support without restrictions the commitment
made by the Secretary-General-elect to achieve gender
parity at all levels of appointment at the United Nations,
for which he will present and implement a road map
with clear benchmarks and deadlines, starting with the
selection of senior staff.

Integrating the women and peace and security
agenda throughout the work of the Security Council
should be a priority. It is noteworthy that, in response
to the recommendations outlined in resolution 2242
(2015), several initiatives have been launched, for
example, the Informal Expert Group on Women and
Peace and Security. They have not ignored the need
to fight terrorism in order thereby to improve the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda in every context.

Similarly, we consider it valuable to have gender
perspectives in various areas of action within peace and
security processes, such as in commissions of inquiry,
mediation processes and mechanisms of transitional
justice. Building partnerships with such organizations
as UN-Women, so as to benefit from their experience
and views on those various efforts, is another way to
integrate a gender perspective into all aspects of the
peace and security agenda. Let us welcome also the
systematic inclusion of women-protection advisers in
the strategic planning processes for political missions
and peacekeeping operations, the training of teams
of experts on the rule of law and sexual violence in
conflict, as well as working with associations supported
by UN-Women, such as Justice Rapid Response, which
has facilitated the recruitment and inclusion of female
gender advisers in commissions of inquiry on cases
relating to sexual violence and abuse crimes.

The incidence and widespread use of sexual
violence as a tactic of terror and a weapon of war are
heartbreaking. We urge that such acts be sanctioned
with firm penalties and that impunity be completely
eliminated, including, when necessary, through
referral of cases to the International Criminal Court.
We consider such acts of violence to constitute crimes
against humanity, and we maintain a position of zero
tolerance when it comes to cases of sexual violence
and abuse.

The fundamental point remains to get women
into leadership positions, where they can be involved
in decisions and provide a gender perspective at all
levels of participation and in all activities related to the
peace and security agenda. That should also be linked
with efforts to protect human rights and development.
We must not forget that resolution 1325 (2000) was
conceived as a human rights mandate.

Ensuring equal opportunities and the economic,
social and political empowerment of women is an
imperative, if women and girls are to assume, with
all the tools they need, the desired transcendental and
transformative role in their communities during and
following conflicts.

The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ireland.


