Mr. Menelaou (Cyprus): I am honoured to address
the Security Council on behalf of the Republic of
Cyprus on today's important topic, and we wish to
warmly congratulate you, Madam President, on taking
that initiative. Cyprus would also like to align itself
with the statement delivered by the observer of the
European Union.

Cyprus has direct experience of the subject
under discussion through the role of women in the
context of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in
Cyprus (UNFICYP), and through women's role in our
country's struggle for liberation and reunification.
Resolution 1325 (2000) mandates that women should
participate in making and keeping peace. The adoption
at the highest level of such a resolution is testament to
the Council's recognition of the gender inequities in
that regard. It arises from an understanding of armed
conflict's disproportionate impact on women and girls,
and the importance of enhancing their contributions
to conflict prevention and resolution, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding. Unfortunately, 14 years after the
resolution's adoption, we are still seeing a gap between
the aspirations of the global and regional commitments
and the realities of peace processes. My Government
remains committed to implementing resolution 1325
(2000) within the Cyprus peace process, where there is
admittedly plenty of room for progress.

My delegation welcomes the emphasis of today's
discussion on displaced women and girls as leaders
and survivors. We deplore the fact that in current
conflicts civilians and women are increasingly
purposely targeted and that sexual and gender-based
violence is deliberately employed as a war strategy.
Numerous international and regional human rights and
international humanitarian law instruments are aimed
at protecting women during armed conflict, and yet
today women and children make up three quarters of
the refugee and internally displaced population. The
role of women as leaders is essential in enabling their
protection needs to be identified and responded to.

Cyprus would like to take this opportunity to
underline the important role of women in preventing
and resolving conflicts. It is vital that peacekeeping
operations work to improve the gender balance in
peacekeeping mission staff, including at senior
management levels. The presence of women in
peacekeeping operations empowers women in the host
community to serve as role models; enables women to
train female cadets at police and military academies;
gives women and children a greater sense of security;
improves access and support for local women and
focuses attention on the specific needs of female ex-
combatants during the process of their demobilization
and reintegration into civilian life.

We note with pleasure that five women are currently
leading peace operations, including Lisa Buttenheim
of the United States in my own country. We are also
pleased to note the appointment of Major General
Kristin Lund as Force Commander of UNFICYP, the
first woman ever to serve as Force Commander of a
United Nations peacekeeping operation. The United
Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus is the first
in the world to have a dual female leadership. As
Major General Lund has mentioned, in order to face
a challenge, it is important that the other 50 per cent
of the population be represented in the peacekeeping
forces.

Being under foreign occupation for the past
40 years, my country has had direct experience of
the disproportionate effects of conflict on women.
One third of our population consists of internally
displaced persons, deprived of their human rights
and fundamental freedoms. During all those years,
the country's struggle for reunification has borne
the mark of the women's movement, as women have
provided shelter and relief to victims in the aftermath
of war, struggled to learn the fate of missing persons,
participated in the international legal and political
effort to restore the rights of the displaced, worked to
raise international awareness and promoted a message
of peace, reconciliation and peaceful coexistence.

Our recent history makes us sensitive to similar
experiences worldwide. For that reason, Cypriot women
have been particularly active throughout the years in
international humanitarian organizations such as the
Red Cross and have made important contributions in
solidarity and humanitarian aid campaigns.

In conclusion, I would like to mention the
words of Hester Paneras of South-Africa, the Police
Commissioner of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur and the first woman to hold
the top police position in a peacebuilding mission of
such magnitude:

"Opening up to alternative approaches is very
important, but the most important thing is to show
that it does not have to be like that. You can get out
of it."

