Ms. Murnaghan (Ireland): I will start off by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Guehenno,
Assistant Secretary-General Angela King and Ms.
Heyzer, the Executive Director of the United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM). My
delegation concurs fully with the main findings and
recommendations of their reports as highlighted this
morning, and we look forward to receiving their
detailed recommendations on implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).

The presidency of the European Union spoke
earlier in this debate, and we fully subscribe to the
points made. The earlier speakers have addressed many
of the points that my delegation would have made. For
those reasons and also given the late point at which we
are intervening, I will try to shorten our intervention.
But there are a few points that we would like to make.

I think that it is clear from today's discussion that
there are a wealth of proposals and ideas as to how we
might integrate gender perspectives into peace
operations. The challenge, however, is to ensure that
these recommendations and guidelines are
implemented consistently throughout the system and to
ensure that where the United Nations system deals with
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peace-building, the
gender perspectives are taken into account as a matter
of course.

My delegation would like to see the forthcoming
reports identify appropriate mechanisms to ensure that
gender perspectives are fully integrated into the work
of all parts of the United Nations system. Those could
include, for example, the proposal to establish a gender
adviser in the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations - a proposal that we would fully support.
Similar focal points should be considered for other
departments, including, for example, the Department of
Political Affairs, so as to systematically ensure that
women are involved at every stage of peace
negotiations in the planning, decision-making and
implementation at all levels. Australia has just now
also addressed that point. Provisions should also be
made for the financing of those mechanisms, and
resources should be allocated so that they can fully
support gender offices in the field. In our View, any
mechanisms or focal points should be based in the
departments themselves at a senior enough level so as
to have an impact on the decision- and policy-making
of the department concerned.

With regard to the issue of follow-up monitoring,
we believe that this is crucial. There should be
continuous monitoring and evaluation of how different
parts of the United Nations family are doing and what
steps could be taken to improve the system to ensure a
consistent approach.

We agree very much with UNIFEM. that gender
should be an integral part of all peace operations, in the
same way that security, policing and so forth are also a
part. Gender advisers should be deployed at the outset
of peace operations, including at the planning stage -
as we said a moment ago - and should be sufficiently
senior to have an influence on the decision-making
process. In this regard I think the very positive
experience in Kosovo and East Timor and other
operations which have gender units bear out the idea
that gender should be an integral part of all such
operations.

Last week, in drawing on the lessons learned in
Sierra Leone, Ms. McAskie of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs made a number
of very useful observations. One in particular, she
mentioned that under the structure in Sierra Leone,
humanitarian issues were centralized within the
political and military decision-making of the Mission.
Furthermore, she concluded that the inclusion of
human rights and civilian affairs officers was an
advance over previous operations. We believe that
dedicated gender advisers in positions of influence in
missions would be important to centralizing gender
issues within the wider context of the mission.

On the related point of ensuring that gender is
adequately addressed in the mandate of an operation,
there would be appear to be increasing evidence that
sexual violence is being used as a weapon of war. In
this respect, the ruling of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia that rape and the
enslavement of women can be classified as crimes
against humanity brings into focus the importance of
making adequate provision for gender issues in
mandates. I think that in this particular regard, Ms.
McAskie noted last week that the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone could have
been more comprehensive had it moved it beyond the
norms of gender sensitivity and mainstreaming to
include responses to endemic gender-based violence
and sexual exploitation.

Another point that has been addressed by a
number of speakers, this afternoon as well, is the issue
of training. We see particularly that training is very
important. It applies, of course, to staff at Headquarters
and at the highest levels in the Organization, as well as
to field personnel. As Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno said this morning, awareness starts at the
top.

A point that has been addressed this afternoon, in
particular by the United States and a number of others,
is the issue of women's participation in peacekeeping
operations. We believe too that an increase in the
number of women participating in military, civilian and
civilian aspects, including at the highest levels, would
have an important effect on the atmosphere of a
mission. In this regard, I would just note that Ireland
has been deploying women civilian police officers and
military for 20 years.

It is also important to ensure that gender issues
are fully addressed in the transition from peacekeeping
to peace-building, so that the promotion and equality of
women's rights is integrated into the whole peace-
building phase. Lessons should also be drawn in due
course from the experience in East Timor and
elsewhere.

Finally, just on the particular point of women as
peace-builders - France has also referred to the
importance of involving women in decision-making in
Afghanistan as an example - we, through our own
experience in the issue of the peace process in northern
Ireland, have seen the importance of women as peace-
builders in their own communities. It was in fact
central to the development of the peace process in
northern Ireland and in particular in creating conditions
on the ground that facilitated the process leading to the
Good Friday Agreement in 1998.

That Agreement, in affirming the commitment of
the parties to the democratic process, explicitly
underscores the right of women to full and equal
participation in the political process. Australia and
New Zealand both have referred to the positive
experience of including women in decision-making at
the national level in the Solomon Islands and in East
Timor.

