Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): We thank the Spanish
presidency of the Council for convening today's
important debate on women and peace and security.

The briefings of the Secretary-General, the
Executive Director of UN-Women and representatives
of civil society have all been instructive and very
valuable.

Resolution 1325 (2000) changed the approach to
dealing with women in situations of armed conflict.
The Security Council's engagement with women and
peace and security over the past 15 years has led to
the creation of a robust normative framework for the
protection and empowerment of women in conflict
situations. Subsequent Council resolutions have
provided additional safeguards to protect women from
sexual violence, guarantee their participation in peace
processes and protect their rights.

Despite those commendable achievements, the
situation on the ground remains troubling, if not
alarming. Raging conflicts in the Middle East and
North Africa and violent acts by extremist groups
continue to place women and girls in great peril and
underline their intense vulnerability in those conflict
situations. At a time when the refugee crisis has
acquired disturbing dimensions, a large proportion
of those fleeing conflict zones happen to be women.
Torn from their communities and homes, those refugee
women are not only deeply traumatized, but also face
serious threats to their physical health and indeed to
their personal safety and security.

Pakistan believes that it is the collective
responsibility of the United Nations and the entire
international community to provide much-needed
humanitarian assistance to those refugee women and to
ensure their safety and security in camp settings and in
transit to safer destinations. Here, I must underline the
crucial importance of conflict prevention and conflict
resolution to the women and peace and security agenda.
The hardships faced by displaced women and girls and
the grave crimes committed against them are mostly a
direct consequence of conflict situations. The Council,
we feel, should adopt a hands-on, strategic approach to
conflict prevention and conflict resolution.

Multidimensional peacekeeping missions, such
as those provided for in resolution 2086 (2013), play
a key role in combating violence against women in
conflict and post-conflict situations. As a leading
troop contributor, Pakistan will continue to ensure that
our troops respond to the special needs of women and
girls. We plan to further streamline training on gender
sensitization. Pakistani women have served on the front
lines as police officers, doctors and nurses in various
missions in Asia, Africa and the Balkans. We are proud
of the fact that a Pakistani police officer, Shahzadi
Gulfam, was the recipient of the International Female
Police Peacekeeper Award.

Pakistan's adherence to the ideals of empowering
women and protecting their rights stems from our faith,
our Constitution and the vision of our founding fathers,
Muhammad Ali Jinnah, who famously said: "No nation
can rise to the height of glory unless women are side
by side with men". It was my country that earned the
distinction of electing the first female Prime Minister in
the entire Muslim world. We therefore support Security
Council efforts to pursue its women and peace and
security agenda in accordance with its responsibility
for maintaining international peace and security.

However, the Council's focus should be on the
prevention of sexual violence in armed conflict and
strengthening women's participation in peace processes.
The inclusion of peripheral issues that fall under the
purview of other United Nations organs will only serve
to weaken the wide consensus around the role of the
Council in the women and peace and security domain.

