Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Let me start by
saying how proud I am that the United Kingdom
has already met and exceeded the United Nations
target set in 2015 for doubling female participation
in peacekeeping by 2020. Women currently make up
7 per cent of our contingent peacekeeping troops and
18 per cent of military observers and staff offices. This
is not just a point of principle or about simply saying
the right thing. It is about effectiveness. Just as in our
countries we suffer economically if we do not let all
of our population participate in the workforce, so we
suffer militarily if we exclude women from our armed
forces and from promotion within them. We prevent
ourselves from getting the best people for the job by
limiting the pool available, and we therefore limit our
fighting ability.

On the ground, aside from having the best available
troops, we see real operational benefits from deploying
more gender-balanced forces. As others have, we note
that deploying more peacekeepers enables missions

to engage with a wider range of people in local
communities, which in turn leads to better situational
awareness. Asking peacekeepers to understand local
conflict dynamics and risks without the ability to
engage effectively with local women is like asking
them to patrol with one eye closed. Having more female
peacekeepers in missions can also make it easier for
women and girls who have survived sexual violence
in conflict, or sexual exploitation and abuse, to come
forward and speak about their experiences.

But we do recognize and share the challenges that
most national militaries face in achieving gender parity.
Women still make up only 10.5 per cent of the United
Kingdom's regular armed forces and only 13 per cent of
military officers. Examples set by trailblazing women
such as Air Marshal Sue Gray, who became the first
three-star female officer in the Royal Air Force this
year, have yet to become the norm. So although we are
proud of the progress we have made in increasing female
participation in the United Kingdom's armed forces
and, by extension, in our peacekeeping contributions,
we know that there is much more to do. Having said
earlier that this is not about just saying the right thing,
it is about doing things, I would like to set out a few
things that we think should happen.

We must keep changing mindsets, ensuring that
expanding women's participation is seen as an essential
operational enabler and part of the core function of a
mission, not as a box-ticking exercise. We must keep
taking concrete action to ensure that women have
equal opportunities to participate in peacekeeping.
That must include equal access to information about
opportunities to deploy, equal opportunities to develop
relevant skills and experience and equal access to
adequate accommodation, facilities, equipment and
medical services in the field. The United Kingdom
supports innovative approaches to tackling those and
other barriers to women's meaningful participation
in peacekeeping. We are committed to focusing on
practical action, sharing best practices and lessons
learned and continuing to learn from other troop-
and police-contributing nations. To that end, as we
announced on the margins of the United Nations
Peacekeeping Ministerial, the United Kingdom is
contributing $1.3 million to the newly launched Elsie
Initiative on Women in Peace Operations, and we fully
support the Elsie fund's focus on incentivizing and
assisting Member States in deploying more trained
and qualified uniformed women and maximizing the
impact of women's participation.

It is important that we increase the number
and proportion of women in peacekeeping, but of
course all peacekeepers, male and female, share a
responsibility to conduct peacekeeping operations in
a gender-sensitive manner, and we are determined to
equip our peacekeepers with the skills, knowledge and
understanding that this requires. Since November 2016,
all United Kingdom military personnel deploying on
major international operations have received training
on preventing sexual violence in conflict and on the
women and peace and security agenda. As a training
partner, we are committed to ensuring that the training
that we offer personnel from other countries is gender-
sensitive.

Incorporating gender perspectives in peacekeeping
does not concern women alone. Gender equality is
everybody's business. We all stand to gain from more
effective, inclusive peacekeeping if we redouble our
efforts to achieve high-ambition targets for women's
participation. Flowing from that, I have a question for
our briefers, which is simply to ask, in the spirit of
taking action, what are the most urgent interventions
that they would recommend the United Nations and
Member States adopt to make mission environments
more women-friendly? What are the best examples of
best practices that they have seen in use at the national
level to really enable that agenda to make progress?

