Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Ukraine appreciates
Angola's initiative to hold this open debate. At the
outset, I would like to state that Ukraine aligns itself
with the statement to be delivered on behalf of the
European Union on this subject.

I would like to thank all the briefers, whose presence
today proves the importance of the topic chosen by the
Angolan presidency.

Conflicts and crises in Africa have taken a more
complex turn in recent years. They tend to be followed
by devastating upsurges of violence against women
and girls. We all recall with deep shock the tragic case
of the abduction of 200 Chibok girls from a school in
northern Nigeria by Boko Haram militants in April
2014. In too many places, women and girls are being
wounded, mutilated and killed along with men and
boys. They also suffer gender-based violence. Sexual
violence is used as a weapon of war in conflicts all
around the continent.

Ukraine condemns all acts of sexual violence,
as well as any form of sexual abuse of women and
children, which, in some conflict situations, surpass
the level of war crimes and reach the scale of crimes
against humanity or genocidal slaughter. Considering
the growing magnitude of such crimes, we express our
readiness and commitment to actively contributing to
consolidated international efforts aimed at elaborating
effective steps to address the issue of sexual violence. In
this context, we welcome the decision of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) in the case of former Congolese
Vice-President Jean-Pierre Bemba - the first trial of
the ICC to focus on sexual violence as a weapon of war.
As a non-permanent member of the Security Council,
Ukraine strongly supports the Council's efforts aimed
at addressing the full range of human rights violations
and abuses faced by women in armed conflict and post-
conflict situations.

In the face of the challenges of war and conflicts,
women are increasingly becoming critical agents of
change. According to the global study, there is growing
evidence that women's empowerment contributes
to the success of peace talks and the achievement of
sustainable peace, accelerates economic recovery,
strengthens our peace operations, improves our
humanitarian assistance, and can help counter violent
extremism. Ukraine recognizes the importance of
the equal and full participation of women in all
activities for the prevention and resolution of conflicts,
peacebuilding and peacekeeping. It is also in this light
that we welcome the joint initiative of Spain and the
United Kingdom to set up the Informal Experts Group
on Women, Peace and Security.

Yet, while gender issues are increasingly integrated
into United Nations activities, the challenges in this
area remain grave and widespread around the globe.
Nowhere is that more evident than in Africa. Women
there play important roles as custodians of culture
and nurturers of families, yet in times of conflict they
are hardly represented at peace negotiating tables
or in community reconstruction efforts. Moreover,
according to UN-Women, women constitute fewer than
10 per cent of peace negotiators globally, and only 3 per
cent of signatories to peace agreements.

We commend the fact that a number of African
countries have embraced resolution 1325 (2000) and
already have relevant national action plans in place.
We take equally positive note of the fact that the
African Union has also made significant efforts to
integrate the women, peace and security agenda into
its own security, crisis-response, human rights and
peacebuilding efforts. It is of great importance that
both the African Union and the United Nations have
increased the number of female military and police
officers in peacekeeping missions and set up units that
provide protection to victims of gender-based violence
in Somalia and Darfur. In Rwanda, Liberia, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and other places, the
United Nations provides important support to survivors
of such violence.

Noting the ever changing global context of peace
and security - in particular as related to the surge of
terrorism and violent extremism and the increasing
numbers of refugees and internally displaced
persons - today we need more than ever to ensure
the participation of women in developing strategies
to prevent and respond to these challenges. That trend
was clearly demonstrated during the recent visit of the
Security Council delegation to Mali, where we had a
very useful meeting with a number of local women's
organizations.

In closing, let me stress that, having been involved
with resolution 1325 (2000) from its origins, Ukraine is a
strong supporter ofthe Security Council's women, peace
and security agenda. Recently, we adopted a national
action plan on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), developed in close consultations with agencies
of the United Nations and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, as well as civil society.
The action plan is aimed at promoting women's greater
participation in military, political, economic and social
life, peace and recovery processes, the prevention of and
combating gender-based violence, and the reintegration
of persons affected by the consequences of the ongoing
foreign aggression against my own country. Ukraine
will remain actively engaged in promoting women's
rights, women's participation in peace negotiations and
post-conflict reconstruction, and their protection from
sexual and gender-based violence.

