Baroness Scotland (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom welcomes the leadership shown by
the United States in holding this debate during its
presidency of the Council. Your presence here today,
Madam President, demonstrates just how important it
is for us all to tackle the growing problem of sexual
and gender-based violence if we are serious about
resolving conflict. I rejoice at the sight and the fact that
of the 20 representatives around the Council table,
seven are women, who are here to add their voice to
the wise counsel given by their male counterparts and
colleagues, adding substance and support to the draft
resolution before the Council, which focuses on the
plight of women caught in the pernicious tentacles of
conflict.

May I also commend the Secretary-General for
his vision and for his determination to increase the
number of women who will be able to make their
contribution to the Council's work and the reduction of
conflict.

Before I turn to the issue of sexual violence, I
would like to say a few words about Aung San Suu
Kyi, who, as you rightly reminded us, Madam
President, today spends a further birthday under house
arrest. The Burmese people have suffered under
military rule since 1962. It is fitting that we remember
Aung San Suu Kyi as we talk about women, peace and
security in today's debate, and remember, too, the
many ordinary women of Burma, who have often borne
the brunt of the violence, persecution and economic
deprivation imposed upon them by the military
Government. We call for Aung San Suu Kyi to be
released immediately and for her to be allowed to play
full part in Burma's political process.

In conflict, women and children suffer
disproportionately. Sexual violence is among the very
worst of the atrocities that they face, and it is
increasingly being used as a deliberate method of
warfare. Every day we hear reports from the United
Nations, non-governmental organizations and the
media - and most recently from the International
Criminal Court - about the systematic use of sexual
violence to terrorize civilian communities and
populations, to drive forward ethnic cleansing and to
destroy communities. We have seen it in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, where the
ex-genocidaires from Rwanda are primarily
responsible. We see it in Darfur, in Somalia and
elsewhere. In Zimbabwe, the hired thugs of Mugabe's
regime brutalize and murder the wives and children of
leaders of the opposition Movement for Democratic
Change. Only yesterday, the wife of the newly elected
mayor of Harare was savagely beaten and killed by the
so-called war veterans, in order to intimidate the
opposition party in next week's elections.

In all those places we see the physical and
psychological scars of the survivors of sexual violence
and, chillingly, the silent testimony of the horribly
disfigured bodies of those who did not survive. And we
see the empty, burned-out villages from which the
population has fled to avoid further attacks. And that is
the point. The trauma and injuries caused by sexual
violence are designed to cripple communities, trigger
revenge attacks and cause lasting bitterness. In that
way, gender-based violence feeds the fires of conflicts
that the Council is dedicated to extinguishing.

But some, of course, will say, what is new about
this? After all, it is true that rape and sexual violence
have been associated with conflict since before records
began to be kept. Three things have changed. First,
sexual violence is now being used as a tool of warfare,
rather than it being just a tragic by-product of conflict,
and it is taking place on a much larger scale than we
have seen before. Secondly, we now better understand
how sexual violence damages the prospects of post-
conflict recovery. And, thirdly and perhaps most
important, we have the means to tackle this problem
within our reach.

Resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, and resolution 1674 (2006), on the protection
of civilians, have provided an important foundation.
Many nations, international organizations and
non-governmental organizations are doing valuable
work to tackle sexual violence.

But sexual and gender-based violence is
evolving, and the Council's response must also evolve.
My Government believes that the Security Council
should show leadership on the issue of sexual violence,
first, by recognizing that widespread and systematic
sexual violence can pose a threat to international peace
and security. Secondly, the Council shall ensure that
we provide for women's participation in all processes
relevant to conflict resolution and peacebuilding. The
proliferation of sexual violence against women is, in
part, aimed at excluding and marginalizing women's
roles in society and in rebuilding communities. We
have to correct that.
Thirdly, the Council should propose practical
measures that parties to armed conflict can take to
prevent sexual violence and ensure that those who
commit such crimes are brought to justice. That
includes peacekeepers as well as belligerents. Fourthly,
but not least, the Council should require regular
updates about sexual violence in situations of armed
conflict so that we can better understand how to
prevent it.

We are realistic. Sexual violence will, sadly, not
go away overnight. But resolution 1325 (2000) is a
crucial building block to tackling that growing
problem. The civil populations of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Darfur, Somalia, Zimbabwe
and elsewhere need the Council's continued efforts to
tackle the growing scourge. The United Kingdom
support the draft resolution before the Council in
document S/2008/403 without reservation. We thank
you, Madam President, and all those around this table
who have lent their voice to that end.

