Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): We convey our
appreciation to the Uruguayan presidency for
convening this open debate. We also thank the briefers
for sharing their insights. And we acknowledge the
commendable role played by Ms. Zainab Bangura as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict. We wish her successor the
very best.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2017/249)
is a glaring testimony to the increasing trends and
concerns about sexual violence being used by both
State and non-State actors as part of their ideologies
and operations. Bangladesh joins other delegations in
condemning the use of sexual violence during conflict
as a tactic of war and terrorism.

We align ourselves with the statement delivered on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Women and Peace
and Security.

As Mr. Adama Dieng recounted this morning, there
are far too many instances ofthe egregious use of sexual
violence in conflict. During our war of liberation in
1971, sexual violence was committed on a mass scale
against our women and girls, leaving behind in its wake
200,000 victims. In a war-ravaged country it was nearly
impossible to ensure adequate protection, rehabilitation
and reintegration for such a large number of victims.
The overriding priority was to find custody and shelter
for children born of such violence, who were abandoned
in most cases. It took us more than four decades to
ensure official recognition and compensation for some

of the victims who mustered the courage to make
themselves known and heard. The work of bringing the
perpetrators to account remains an unfinished agenda.

In our modest effort to come to terms with
that painful legacy, we took up the issue of women
and peace and security as a critical element of our
engagement in the United Nations, especially during
our membership in the Security Council from 2000 to
2001. We take heart that the suffering experienced by
hundreds and thousands of women in Bangladesh and
around the world at least paved the way for brave young
women like Nadia Mourad and Mina Jaf to appear and
eloquently make their cases before the Council.

Despite our collective efforts, the magnitude
of sexual violence in conflict is still overwhelming
and appears to be pursued in an environment of near
impunity and denial. In recent times, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and other international inquiry commissions visited
Bangladesh to gather first-hand accounts of persecution
and sexual violence against a group of people fleeing
from a neighbouring country into our territory. We
hope that the perpetrators will be brought to justice and
that those displaced and victimized will be allowed to
return to their homes in safety and dignity, with their
nationality restored.

The inhumane use of sexual violence as a tactic
of terrorism has duly raised alarm in the international
community. The Council responded to that growing
threat by adopting resolution 2331 (2016), which
highlights the nexus between trafficking in persons
and terrorism. Echoing the resolution, Bangladesh
condemns the use of sexual violence by terrorists
and violent extremists in order to generate revenue,
attract or enlist new recruits and perpetuate conflict
and instability.

In our national context, as we remain engaged in a
sustained counter-terrorism drive, we see a rather new
trend among terrorists and violent extremists to use
women and children, mostly family members, to expand
their ranks. In certain cases, some of those women
acted as human shields, along with their children, with
fatal consequences. Our authorities have taken the
utmost caution to ensure that the women and children
rescued from such operations are given due protection,
including in custody, and not exposed to stigma.

Our Prime Minister, Sheikh Hasina, has called
upon all women and mothers to work as sentinels
within their families and to actively contribute to the
whole-of-society response against violent extremism
and radicalization. We remain determined to forge
ahead with our women's development and empowerment
efforts to defeat the violent extremists and terrorists in
one of their fundamental pursuits.

The overriding messages emanating from today's
open debate appear to be largely unanimous and
demand our urgent and unmitigated attention. My
delegation reaffirms the call for, first, shattering the
culture of impunity around sexual violence as a tactic
of war and terrorism through independent and impartial
investigation and prosecution.

Secondly, the burden of stigma must be shifted
from the victims to perpetrators. Adequate protection,
compensation and legal and psychosocial support
for victims must be ensured, while investing in the
capacities of national judicial, law enforcement and
correction systems to provide such support in a
timely manner.

Thirdly, the tools at the disposal of the Security
Council to prevent and resolve conflicts, as well as to
combat terrorism, must be used, including through the
application of sanctions as required, and in coordination
with other relevant organs and entities of the United
Nations system pursuant to their respective mandates.

Fourthly, meaningful participation by women and
girls in peace processes, including in mediation and
peacebuilding, must be ensured.

Fifthly, we must strengthen protection for refugees
and migrants in host countries and societies, with
in-built support for victims of sexual and gender-
based violence.

Bangladesh believes that preventing sexual violence
is an integral part of the mandate to protect civilians
given to peacekeeping missions. We remain committed
to training our peacekeepers on sexual and gender-
based violence, enhancing the participation of female
peacekeepers in our contingents and encouraging
our force and sector commanders to maintain regular
involvement with local communities and civil society
actors, among others. We condemn any allegation of
sexual exploitation or abuse by peacekeepers or other
United Nations staff, and we underscore the primacy
of zero tolerance for such aberrations by those that are
mandated to protect the vulnerable.

The inherent resilience of our women gives us the
conviction that women themselves have the capacity to
act as agents of change provided they find themselves
in an enabling environment. As we continue to work
towards leaving no one behind, we must step up our
collective efforts to address all forms of inequities,
discrimination and obstacles that stand in the way of
unleashing the full potential of our women and girls.

