Mrs. Gallardo Hernandez (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish): El Salvador welcomes your initiative,
Mr. President, to hold this open debate of the Security
Council to commemorate the sixth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security. There is no doubt that the
resolution is the basis for a cross-cutting examination
of gender issues in the area of post-conflict
peacebuilding. In that way it opens up the possibility
for the active participation of women in peace
negotiations and national reconciliation processes.

The Peacebuilding Commission provides a new
opportunity to implement the cross-cutting approach to
gender issues proposed in resolution 1325 (2000).
Establishing lasting peace requires that we promote the
participation of women in decision-making at all
levels, and especially in political and economic areas.

On the basis of our experience, we can say that
the participation of women in peace negotiations is
complementary to peacebuilding efforts. It promotes
reconciliation and the incorporation of women fighters
and insurgents of the opposition movements into
legitimate institutions. That is why we believe it
important that a specific official be appointed within
the Peacebuilding Support Office, who would be
responsible for following up on the incorporation of
the gender perspective in peacebuilding strategies both
in the Organizational Committee and in country-
specific meetings. It is also critical to ensure the
gender perspective in the Commission's substantive
work on peacebuilding, reconciliation and
development.

We must also recognize that the experiences of
women and girls and their participation in the context
of armed conflict, peacekeeping, peacebuilding,
reconstruction and reconciliation are different. Today,
sadly, we know that women and girls have become
strategic targets in armed conflicts, a situation that is
completely unacceptable to the international
community.

El Salvador recognizes the complexity of the
consequences of armed conflict. On the basis of our
own experience, we see, inter alia, how international
migration is in part influenced by that situation. We
therefore deem it appropriate to focus on the gender
repercussions of international migration following a
conflict, particularly when it is a direct consequence of
war. We should also understand how this situation
disproportionately affects women and girls.

It is a widely acknowledged fact that there is an
increasing feminization of international migration. It is
therefore essential to promote a cross-cutting gender
analysis of that phenomenon so as to implement
measures to protect women's human rights.

It is also important to note the linkage between
gender issues and peacekeeping operations within the
United Nations. There have been numerous debates
about the need to promote a gender perspective in
peacekeeping operations in order to mitigate the
negative impact of illicit activities committed by
individuals participating in peacekeeping operations
and related to various types of violence against women.
The time has come for action.

Similarly, we should encourage the initiatives of
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to
strengthen institutional mechanisms to promote the
growing incorporation of gender mainstreaming into
various peacebuilding operations. We therefore favour
the establishment of gender units within peacekeeping
operations themselves.

El Salvador welcomes the United Nations efforts
to implement resolution 1325 (2000), in particular the
guide for national action planning on women, peace
and security drawn up by the International Research
and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women.
We believe that the drafting of national action plans to
implement the commitments undertaken under
resolution 1325 (2000) is undoubtedly an innovative
and necessary step if progress is to be made in gender
mainstreaming in peace and security.

In conclusion, I reaffirm El Salvador's support
for resolution 1325 (2000) and its commitment to
achieving progress in gender mainstreaming in all
domains as an effective strategy for reducing poverty,
empowering women and achieving the sustainable
development that we all desire.

