Mr. Ahmed Khan (Pakistan): I thank you, Madam
President, for having convened this very important
debate today. We also express our appreciation to
this morning's briefers for their thought-provoking
presentations. We are touched by the courage and
determination of refugee women leader Ms. Suaad
Allami. Her story indeed demonstrates how women can
rise to the challenge of armed conflicts by taking charge
of their own lives and leading the struggle against
violence to restore sustainable peace and security.

I also add my voice to those of previous speakers in
agreeing that, as a vulnerable group, women and young
girls bear the brunt of armed conflict. The trauma of
violence and the travails of camp life are felt the hardest
by women and girls. Displacement from their homes
exposes women and girls to sexual violence, rape and
molestation - often used as a deliberate instrument
of war. Camp settings make women and children
vulnerable to trafficking, with stateless and separated
women being the most susceptible.

But that is just one side of the story. Women
and girls are not merely the victims who suffer the
most; they are also the most potent agents of change
in situations of armed conflict. The involvement of
women in peacebuilding can make a real difference in
efforts to contain a conflict and ensure a speedy return
to peace and security. With a little support from the
international community, women can play that crucial
role at every stage of conflict resolution, including in
peace negotiations, peacebuilding and peacekeeping,
and in transitional justice systems.

Let me say that over the past 14 years, the Security
Council's engagement with the agenda on women and
peace and security has laid down a normative structure
and yielded positive results. Despite that commendable
achievement, however, more must be done to ensure
its effective implementation on the ground. The sharp
increase in the refugee population, coupled with the
emergence of various types of extremism, has worsened
the situation for women and girls in several parts of
the world. The international community's efforts
should therefore focus on converting commitments
into concrete and action-oriented measures through
preventive strategies, robust responses and effective
solutions, as part of an integrated global strategy for
women's empowerment and gender equality.

We support the Security Council's agenda on
women and peace and security as outlined in its
mandate - a mandate aimed at preventing sexual
violence in armed conflict and promoting women's
participation in post-conflict peace processes, with a
view to maintaining international peace and security.
The focus should therefore remain on resolving
armed conflicts and preventing relapses into conflict.
Multidimensional peacekeeping and its missions, with
relevant mandates, play an important role in protecting
women and combating sexual violence. As a leading
participant in peacekeeping, Pakistan has contributed
to that global effort. Pakistani women continue to
serve as police officers, doctors and nurses in various
missions in Asia, Africa and the Balkans.

The agenda on women and peace and security should
also include the crucial aspect of women's participation
in conflict resolution. An effective strategy should pay
adequate attention to the four pillars of protection, relief
and recovery, participation and conflict prevention.
Women's participation at all stages of a post-conflict
recovery must be visible and meaningful, and women
must be encouraged to take leadership roles in the drive
towards ending conflict and restoring sustainable peace
in their societies. Ultimately, we hope that those crucial
aspects of the agenda on women and peace and security
will be part of the debate at the 2015 high-level review
of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

