Mr. Antonio de Aguiar Patriota (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Prime Minister Rajoy Brey and
the delegation of Spain for convening today's debate
and for their commitment to the women and peace and
security agenda.

(spoke in English)
I also thank the Secretary-General and the
Executive Director of UN-Wornen and Ms. Julienne
Lusenge, Ms. Yanar Mohammed and Ms. Alaa Murabit
for their briefings.

I congratulate the authors of global study on
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). That
ambitious and comprehensive document will provide
a sound and updated basis for the discussions
among policymakers, activists and scholars during
the seventieth anniversary of the United Nations.
Along with the recommendations of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations and those
of the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of
the Peacebuilding Architecture, we now have a solid
triad of reports to underpin our deliberations on the
review of the policies and practices of the Organization
concerning international peace and security.

Fifteen years have passed since the Security Council
first recognized that women and girls experienced armed
conflict in particularly dramatic ways, and therefore
had specific needs, concerns and perspectives. That
led to the essential acknowledgement that sustainable
peace could only be achieved if both female and male
perspectives were fully taken into account. Over the past
few years, the women and peace and security agenda
has been integrated into the political mainstream of the
United Nations. A comprehensive legal framework has
been created through eight specific Council resolutions,
including resolution 2242 (2015), adopted today, and a
number of presidential statements.

Other United Nations entities, including UN-Women,
the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination
against Women and the Commission on the Status
of Women - which I currently have the honour to
chair - have also contributed in that regard. At the
next session of the Commission, the priority theme will
be "Women's empowerment and its link to sustainable
development", whereas the review theme will be "The
elimination of all forms of violence against women
and girls". Likewise, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and
several rapporteurs of the Human Rights Council have
diligently worked to strengthen this vital agenda. The
International Criminal Court and other domestic and
international tribunals have produced a substantial body
of jurisprudence regarding violations against women
and girls. It would now be unthinkable to create a major
new peacekeeping operation without deploying gender
advisers, without including the protection of women
in the mandate and without training peacekeepers to
prevent sexual abuse.
Much has changed since the days before resolution
1325 (2000), yet much continues unchanged. Women
and girls are still subject to unacceptable violations
of their rights in war zones around the world.
Impunity for gender-based crimes remains a major
challenge. Peacekeeping, as well as peacebuilding and
reconstruction efforts, could still benefit from greater
female participation and leadership. Today's debate is
therefore a timely opportunity to take stock and think
ahead.

Brazil fully agrees with the global study's
assessment that the most effective way to avoid
violence against women in conflict is to prevent war
from erupting in the first place. This high-level review
should encourage us to renew our commitment to
diplomatic instruments for the peaceful resolution of
disputes, including good offices, mediation and the
involvement of regional organizations. It is therefore of
fundamental importance to increase the participation of
women in peace processes and post-conflict transitions,
as emphasized by the concept note prepared by the
delegation of Spain (S/2015/749, annex). Our initiatives
to prevent and resolve conflict should also tackle the
root causes and structural drivers of violence, including
social, economic and political exclusion and inequality,
which affect women and girls disproportionately.

The complex humanitarian crises arising from
conflicts in the Middle East and North Africa should
serve to highlight the plight of women and girls who
have been subject to many forms of sexual violence,
including rape, sexual slavery and forced marriage,
and who are also forced to abandon their homes and
communities, becoming refugees and internally
displaced persons. In that context, we should ensure
particular attention to women and girls who belong to
vulnerable groups, including indigenous women and
older women, those with disabilities and members of
ethnic or religious minorities, among others.

Brazil has long stated that supporting and hosting
refugees is a moral imperative and a common duty of
humankind. We have lately renewed our guidelines
aimed at facilitating visas on a humanitarian basis
for individuals affected by the conflict in Syria.
Nearly 8,000 asylum-seekers, including thousands of
vulnerable women and girls, have been issued such
visas in the past four years.

During the recent global leaders meeting on gender
equality, President Dilma Rousseff underscored that
women were not only beneficiaries of public policies
and initiatives, but also agents of their own future.
Brazil sees protection and empowerment as inseparable
aspects of the women and peace and security agenda.
Women and girls are not just entitled to safety, but also to
an active and influential voice. No decision concerning
women should be adopted without consultation and
consideration of their unique perspective.

At the international level that includes formulating
and implementing the mandates of peacekeeping
operations and special political missions, conducting
peace negotiations and addressing peacebuilding,
recovery and humanitarian activities. At the domestic
level, Governments should be ready to design and
improve their gender-sensitive policies.

Brazil has made considerable progress in the past
decade. We enacted the Maria da Penha law, which
recognizes domestic violence as a violation of human
rights, and more recently created the House ofBrazilian
Women, a multidisciplinary space aimed at facilitating
women's access to specialized services, protection
and empowerment and ensuring their economic
autonomy. Those initiatives were recently crowned by
the establishment of the Ministry for Women, Racial
Equality and Human Rights. We are confident that
our national efforts will positively influence all our
activities in the international arena.

In that vein, I am pleased to announce today that
the Government of Brazil has launched the drafting
process of a national action plan on women and peace
and security. Our plan will include measures in areas
such as fostering the participation of women in peace
missions, further enhancing the relationship between
troops and civilians, particularly women and girls
in peace operations, and providing humanitarian
assistance and technical cooperation to post-conflict
countries concerning gender issues. The initiative will
complement the provisions of our national policy plan on
women, which already embraces the recommendations
set out in resolution 1325 (2000), including strict
legislation against sexual and gender-based violence.

Seventy years ago, Mr. Bertha Lutz, a distinguished
member of the Brazilian delegation to the San
Francisco Conference, was one of the few women to
sign the Charter of the United Nations. At that time,
a significant achievement was the recognition of the
equality between men and women and the right of
women to participate in all the activities of the United
Nations.

To conclude, let me reiterate that Brazil will remain
strongly engaged in the advancement of gender equality
and women empowerment issues at all levels and areas
of work at the United Nations.

