Mrs. Lodhi (Pakistan): My delegation wishes to
thank the United Kingdom presidency for convening
today's debate, which derives added importance now,
given the current annual session of the Commission
on the Status of Women. According to the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, 79 per cent, almost
80 per cent, of the victims oftrafficking are women and
children, which is why combating that menace is both
urgent and critical.

The scourge of slavery is an abomination, for it
perpetuates the domination and degradation of human
life. Modern slavery, unlike its traditional form, does
not seek to own people. Rather, it aims to control them
by exploiting their lives or the fruits of their labour.
Sexual slavery in conflict situations, the trafficking of
women and girls, and bonded and forced labour are all
manifestations of that evil.

Transnational organized criminal gangs have
become the primary purveyors of that human misery,
which they perpetuate for financial gain. Their growing
nexus with terrorists is a cause for global concern, not
least because it has a direct bearing on international
peace and security. Conflict situations, through their
confluence of circumstance and opportunities, provide
an ideal environment for such unholy alliances.
Heinous crimes such as the enslavement of women and
children, their sexual exploitation and their recruitment
in armed groups are an outrage, not only to all norms
of international law, but also to humankind itself. We
must work together to find an end to that perversion.

Resolution 2331 (2016) of December 2016 was
significant, not only as an unequivocal affirmation by the
international community of its commitment to confront
that menace, but also as a call for immediate action
aimed at preventing, criminalizing and prosecuting
those engaged in the trafficking in persons. While the
eradication of contemporary forms of slavery is an end
in itself, the interdiction of trafficking-based financial
flows to terrorist groups must also be addressed.

The United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress
and Punish Trafficking in Persons, especially Women
and Children have served as a centrepiece of the

existing global framework aimed at combating
transnational organized crime. They, in turn, have also
inspired and informed domestic policies. As a party
to the Convention, my country, Pakistan, has taken
a number of legislative and administrative steps to
address human trafficking.

The international community is currently
witnessing human displacement on a historic and
unprecedented scale. A pervasive sense of despondency
and lack of prospects, induced by protracted conflict and
insecurity, lies at the core of that phenomenon - one
of the greatest tragedies of our times and a defining
challenge of our era. Large sections of the respective
populations, especially women and children, remain
especially vulnerable. As the international community
seeks to evolve cohesive and coordinated strategies to
manage those movements, the interest and well-being
of the most vulnerable must remain paramount in our
policy responses. We must, in particular, ensure that
the victims of such circumstance do not, in their quest
to find safety and protection beyond their borders,
become fresh prey to trafficking and abuse.

In Pakistan, we have lived this ideal by generously
hosting our Afghan brothers and sisters for almost four
decades and ensuring their safety in their temporary
home. There is an urgent imperative to evolve a
better and more coordinated global response. Close
collaboration between States must underpin the success
of that approach. Going forward, a fundamental
challenge for the international community would be to
strike the right balance between human rights and the
law-enforcement aspects of anti-trafficking policies.
Victims of trafficking must be protected, not penalized.
Concerted efforts should also be made to address the
underlying root causes. Unless we resolutely put out
the fires of wars and conflicts that breed and fuel
such phenomena, our efforts will at best be spasmodic
and insufficient.

