Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the delegation of France for convening this open
debate and we appreciate the statements made by the
briefers. We extend special greetings to the civil society
representative from our region.

Chile aligns itself with the statements delivered by
the representatives of Canada, on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security, and of Panama,
on behalf of the Human Security Network.

We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/861) and express our support for the initiatives
related to the voluntary compact to end sexual
exploitation and abuse, which Chile has signed, the
appointment of the victims' rights advocate, the Senior
Women Talent Pipeline initiative, and the strategy
for the equal participation of men and women in
the Organization.

Chile was a Latin American pioneer in developing
an action plan for the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) in 2009, under the administration of
President Bachelet, conscious of the important role
played by women as agents of change and forgers of
peace. The second national action plan is now in full
implementation, with a strong emphasis on education
and staff training.

The new plan includes the recommendations of
the Security Council and international best practices
in that area, making strides in creating indicators to
measure progress on specific objectives that facilitate
and promote women's access within peace operations at
all levels of action and decision. We have incorporated
a gender perspective in doctrine, planning and carrying
out of Chile's peace operations in all four thematic
areas and goals established by the United Nations:
prevention, participation, protection and relief, and
recovery. Chile co-sponsored resolution 2242 (2015),
promoted by Spain, and is a founding member of the
Women, Peace and Security National Focal Points
Network. The Network's last meeting in September
reaffirmed its commitment to continuing to support
and develop women's participation in decision-making
in all areas.

Equal opportunity and the empowerment of women
has been a key pillar of our Government's gender
agenda, which has made solid progress such as the
incorporation of gender equality in electoral reform,
and which requires that at least 40 per cent of candidates
running for Congress be women. At the international
level, we promote and protect women's rights in
armed conflict, especially given the need to increase
women's participation in decision-making related to
international peace and security. That is how we bolster
women's presence in peace missions both in Haiti and
in Colombia's special political mission. In the field
of prevention, we are developing academic initiatives
based on the women and peace and security agenda,
incentivizing the inclusion of a gender perspective in
sustaining peace activities.

The inclusion of women in peace operations raises
awareness about women's and children's issues on
the ground in such operations, and their presence has
helped prevent sexual exploitation and abuse. In that
context, women both in peace operations and within
communities have played a central role in sustaining
peace and protecting women's rights. We echo the
sentiments of previous speakers in affirming that one
of the greatest challenges we face is increasing the
participation of women in peace operations and, in
particular, ensuring the presence of gender advisers in
such operations.

