Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate Rwanda on its presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate on the
important issue of women and peace and security. And
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his remarks and the other invited speakers for their
valuable briefings on the subject.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Viet Nam on behalf
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.

Malaysia joins other Member States in strongly
condemning acts of sexual violence against women and
girls. We feel there is an urgent need to address the
factors and underlying reasons that such acts continue.
More energy should be put into integration efforts, with
no groups excluded from participation in disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and security-sector
reform. We also agree that policymakers and private
entities must do more to help reduce acts of sexual
violence related to the extraction of natural resources.
At the same time, Malaysia is also deeply concerned
about the emerging incidence of sexual violence
perpetrated against men and boys, as well as the plight
of children born as a result of rape and the practice of
forced marriages by armed groups.
It is a worrying trend that sexual violence in those
contexts remains universally under-reported, for which
a lack of adequate national capacity and expertise for
investigating and prosecuting acts of sexual violence
remains one of the main causes. Malaysia therefore
welcomes the ongoing work of the United Nations
and other stakeholders, as well as that of the Team of
Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict, which focuses its efforts on strengthening the
capacity of national rule-of-law andjustice institutions.
We feel that engaging with the relevant Governments
would strengthen the Team's capacity to effectively
address sexual violence against women and girls.

With regard to accountability for crimes related to
sexual violence, we feel that accountability requires not
only careful investigations and prosecutions of those
responsible, but a broader acceptance of political, legal
and moral responsibility by individuals and institutions
for past violations. Malaysia views accountability as
a duty under both domestic and international law. In
that regard, national systems should be pushed to meet
international standards for ensuring accountability and
justice so that perpetrators of such crimes will never go
unpunished.

My delegation believes that women's equal, full
and active participation is key to peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. In that regard, while we acknowledge
the existing normative frameworks as represented by
the Security Council resolutions pertaining to women
and peace and security, we hope we will see a greater
impetus towards actual realization of those resolutions,
including the landmark resolution 1325 (2000), in order
to increase women's participation in the field of peace
and security.

In that context, my delegation welcomes the various
initiatives and actions undertaken by Member States,
United Nations entities, including UN-Women, civil
society organizations and other relevant actors that are
focused on supporting and increasing the representation
of women in peace negotiations and mainstreaming
gender perspectives into peace agreements. In
recognition of that crucial element, in October 2011 the
Malaysian Ministry of Defence and the United Nations
Development Programme jointly organized a seminar
on promoting peace through mainstreaming the gender
perspective in peacekeeping operations. For Malaysia, a
country firmly committed to contributing peacekeeping
troops to United Nations missions, that seminar on
gender and peacekeeping represents our commitment
to supporting both the global agenda for gender and
peacekeeping as well as policies that support women's
development. Additionally, in September, Malaysia,
along with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
will jointly host a regional seminar on child protection
at the Malaysian Peacekeeping Training Centre in Port
Dickson. The seminar, which will include participation
by 30 Member States in the Asian region, will officially
validate the training module for civilian and military
personnel on peacekeeping missions dealing with the
protection of children involved in armed conflict.

My delegation is deeply concerned that forced
marriage, rape and sexual slavery have been documented
in several States in conflict and have occurred under
the pretext of Islamic sharia law. Malaysia wishes
to emphasize that Islam does not condone forced
marriage, rape or sexual slavery in any way. We believe
that education is key to reducing the incidence of sexual
violence. In the area of education, Malaysia has been
working through the Malaysia Australia Education
Project for Afghanistan, which aims to enable Afghan
women teachers to master English and Islamic
teachings. The trainers are playing a critical role in
developing the skills of a new generation of female
Afghan teachers, who will be role models and mentors
for girls in years to come.

In conclusion, Malaysia reaffirms its strong
commitment to efforts to address sexual violence in
conflict and post-conflict situations, and strongly
believes that the issue of women and peace and security
deserves the Security Council's sustained attention.
In that regard, we will continue to work with others
who share a similar interest in advancing that agenda
and ensuring the full mainstreaming of women into
activities aimed at achieving peace and security.

