Mr. Mercado (Philippines): I should like to
express my delegation's appreciation to you, Mr.
President, for having provided us with this opportunity
to participate in an open debate on the issue of women,
peace and security. In our view, this open debate
sustains the momentum of resolution 1325 (2000) as
we assess the work that has been done to improve the
plight of women in conflict situations, including their
role in conflict resolution, conflict prevention and
peace-building.

We wish to thank Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno for his report on the efforts that the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations is making in
implementing resolution 1325 (2000) in all
peacekeeping missions. We support his efforts to
mainstream gender in peacekeeping operations.

We likewise wish to extend our appreciation to
Ms. Amy Smythe, the Senior Gender Adviser of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), for
sharing her experiences, as well as setting out the
challenges one faces in the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) while working on the ground in
the Democratic Republic of Congo. We support her
proposal to increase the number of police women in
peacekeeping operations, since they can better relate to
the plight of women and girls.

Conflict resolution and peace processes must
essentially have a gender dimension. The increase in
weapons collection in communities during periods of
post conflict has been attributed to the role of women.

The United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) and United Nations Development Fund for
Women (UNIFEM) "Weapons in Exchange for
Development" programme in Albania has proved to
what extent women have played a vital role in the
disarming of civilians after an armed conflict, thereby
contributing to the reduction of threats to public order.

For a lasting peace to be built, negotiation
processes at all levels must necessarily include all
significant actors, including women. The inclusion of
women in the negotiating process ensures their
participation and involvement in post-conflict political,
social, civil, economic and judicial structures. Short-
and long-term actions aimed at creating democratic
institutions following an armed conflict require inputs
and commitments from both men and women in regard
to peace, security and development. Furthermore, both
formal and informal processes must be pursued through
collaboration with civil society and non-governmental
organizations that have advocated the role of women in
peace-building.

We in the Philippines continue to exert efforts to
achieve peace, democracy and development. We
recognize that women have suffered the most from
armed conflict and that they have contributed
significant efforts to put an end to it. Filipino women
are at the forefront in the resolution of conflict and
have taken lead roles in the Philippine peace process.
More than 10 years ago, the groundwork for the peace
process was laid through the National Unification
Commission, which is headed by a woman. That
Commission was strengthened by the creation of the
Office of the Presidential Adviser on the Peace
Process, also headed by a woman, one who has had
extensive experience working with non-governmental
organizations in conflict resolution.

The Office of the Presidential Adviser on the
Peace Process manages and supervises the peace
process through several programmes: first, by pursuing
socio-economic and political reforms that address the
root causes of internal armed conflict; secondly, by
building consensus and empowerment for peace,
including through the institutionalization of the
interfaith dialogue to build and sustain intercultural
understanding among Christians and Muslims in
Mindanao; thirdly, by sustaining and enhancing peace
zones through the conduct of peace negotiations with
different rebel groups; fourthly, by implementing
rehabilitation and reintegration programmes for former
rebels, their families and communities; and fifthly, by
building and nurturing a climate conducive to peace
through peace advocacy programmes.

My Government, in partnership with women
leaders from the private sector and civil society,
remains steadfast in its pursuit of an agenda for long-
lasting peace and development. We have placed special
emphasis on the training of young women leaders in
peace-building and in the provision of livelihood
training and assistance to combatants and their families
and in their reintegration into the mainstream of
civilian, economic and social life.
We look forward to the forty-eighth session of the
Commission on the Status of Women, to be held in
2004, when we will be reviewing the thematic issue of
women's equal participation in conflict prevention,
management and conflict resolution and in post-
conflict peace-building. We view it as another
opportunity to discuss the issue of gender
mainstreaming in peace and security-related issues in
the ongoing activities of the United Nations system. It
is our hope that the international community will
further strengthen its commitment to ensuring the
increased participation of women in the process of
conflict prevention at all levels of decision-making.

