Mr. Normandin (Canada) (spoke in French): On
behalf of the Government of Canada, I wish to thank
the United Kingdom presidency for having convened
this open debate on Security Council resolution 1820
(2008), on sexual violence in situations of armed
conflict. This debate is indeed timely at a time when
3
we are calling for further concerted action to combat
and prevent sexual Violence.

Canada, through the Pearson Peacekeeping
Centre, is pleased to support the presence of women
officers from the United Nations police at this open
debate. Their experiences and advice are invaluable as
we advance our collective understanding of how
interventions against sexual violence can be more
effective. Their presence also highlights the critical
importance of increasing the number of women officers
in the field. This can empower women to come forward
to report sexual violence, while at the same time
presenting women in positions of authority and power,
a key element in breaking the cycle of sexual violence.

I would like to draw attention to the round table
held yesterday with those United Nations police
officers. The round table usefully complemented
today's open debate and sparked an enriching
discussion about challenges and best practices in
investigating sexual violence in conflict. It also
highlighted the need for capacity-building for women
police officers and the importance of their role in
national police services.

Canada welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2009/362) and his commitment to ensure
increased attention to sexual violence. The report
provides important contributions towards improving
our collective understanding of the issue. We would
therefore like subsequent reports to contain more
information from the field, including the response to
the issue by the United Nations system and its
missions.

Canada would very much welcome an annual
report on the implementation of resolution 1820
(2008). We also urge the Council to request that the
next report include a proposal for a Security Council
mechanism to consider and act on information
concerning sexual violence. Monitoring and reporting
mechanisms can provide the international community
with the data it needs to effectively monitor and
strengthen the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008).

(spoke in English)

Canada would also like to encourage the Security
Council to give priority attention to the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General's
report which address the establishment and renewal of

mandates, the monitoring of resolutions and
enforcement measures and sanctions.

We would like to express our strong interest in
two additional proposals contained in the report: the
proposal to establish a commission of inquiry to
investigate and report on sexual violence and the
proposal that all data on sexual violence be reviewed
by an existing working group or groups. We would
submit, however, that the creation of a dedicated
working group may be a more effective response, and
we urge the Council to consider that option. At a
minimum, we must ensure that sexual violence
perpetrated against adults as well as children is
included in the Council's considerations. Ultimately,
we would like to see the Council adopt structural and
lasting initiatives that will make a real difference to
those targeted by sexual violence.

We would also like to raise the issue of bringing
violators to justice. An important step forward in that
direction was taken by the Special Court for Sierra
Leone. The Special Court, as members may remember,
was the first to pronounce convictions on the charge of
sexual slavery and on the crime of forced marriage as a
crime against humanity.

In that regard, Canada would like to stress the
following. Amnesty clauses within peace accords
which can be interpreted as exempting perpetrators of
sexual violence from being held accountable directly
contravene resolution 1820 (2008) as well as many
other previous international commitments. We are
deeply dismayed by the failure to implement fully this
essential element of 1820 (2008) during the year since
its adoption.

We also emphasize the importance of the
establishment by States of vetting mechanisms to
exclude perpetrators of sexual violence from armed
forces, where credible allegations supported by
evidence have been brought against those perpetrators.

In conclusion, the Secretary-General's report
contains a number of important recommendations that
would strengthen the international response to sexual
violence in conflict situations, and those
recommendations warrant serious consideration.
Security Council members may rest assured that
Canada remains committed to actively supporting the
Council in its efforts to combat sexual violence in
conflict-affected situations.

