Mr. Gertze (Namibia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important meeting and for Germany's
strong commitment to the women and peace and
security agenda. I also thank you for the leadership you
have assumed during your membership of the Security
Council as a non-permanent member. I would also
like to thank the various briefers for their detailed and
comprehensive statements.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the Permanent Representation of Canada,
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace
and Security.

In May 2000, the first deliberations of the
women and peace and security agenda took place in
Namibia, giving birth to the Windhoek Declaration.
At the time, Namibia realized that the international
community needed to properly take into account the
role of women as serious stakeholders in peacekeeping,
peacebuilding, decision-making and mediation.
The Windhoek Declaration formed the basis of the
drafting of resolution 1325 (2000). In October 2000,
Namibia was President of the Security Council and
successfully oversaw the unanimous adoption of the
historic resolution 1325 (2000) (see S/PV.4213). Our
desire at the time was, in essence, to see more women
in peacekeeping, decision-making and negotiating
positions at both the national and international levels.

National action plans are the embodiment of
resolution 1325 (2000). Those plans are vital. They
are a tool for States to implement their commitments
to the women and peace and security agenda and
detail their actions and obligations under the Security
Council women and peace and security resolutions.
As of November 2018, 79 Member States had national
action plans. While we recognize that many Member
States are implementing resolution 1325 (2000) without
national actions plans, we encourage them to set up
national action plans, which would help ensure the
structured implementation, follow-up and evaluation of
resolution 1325 (2000).

Namibia's national action plan is forward-
looking and incorporates emerging issues, trends and
threats to peace and security, such as climate change,
cybersecurity and trafficking in persons, while
also looking at how those issues impact the overall
women and peace and security agenda. The effective
implementation of and accountability for national
action plans requires a monitoring and evaluation plan
and a robust coordination mechanism. The Namibian
Government will ensure that a monitoring and
evaluation plan and regular reporting are undertaken
and documented to realize the objectives of the plan.

In the aftermath of the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), we saw a shift towards a growing awareness
and a move towards mainstreaming the involvement
of women in areas related to peace and security. The
2018 report of the Secretary-General on women and
peace and security (S/2018/900) noted the increase
in the number of women deployed as contingent
commanders, as well as the fact that several missions
have female police and military peacekeeper networks
and military and police gender advisers. Despite that,
the representation of women among military troops
and police officers remains unacceptably low, at 4
and 10 per cent, respectively. The report also issues a
stark warning that those numbers are at risk of further
decreasing in the coming years through the imminent
downsizing of several peacekeeping missions.

Namibia is playing its part in ensuring that women
play a greater role in peacekeeping operations. Namibian
police officers, correctional officers and military
officers are currently deployed in three peacekeeping
missions - in Darfur, South Sudan and Abyei - with
a number of qualified female officers included. In
December 2018, we achieved the Department of Peace
Operations' target of 15 per cent ofwomen participating
in peacekeeping missions. We encourage all troop- and
police-contributing Member States to strive to achieve
that minimum target.

Namibia is currently hosting the third meeting of
the Women, Peace and Security Focal Point Network,
which concluded just an hour ago. A communique on
that meeting will be circulated to all missions at the
conclusion of the meeting in the next day or so.

I am happy to announce that Namibia intends to
establish a women's peace centre, which will focus on
national, regional and international conflict resolution
and management activities, as well as aspects of
mediation and negotiations. The centre will further
focus on capacity-building by providing workshops
and predeployment training for peacekeepers,
while contributing to the maintenance of peace in
general. In that regard, we call upon the international
community and our development partners to support
the establishment of the centre.

To conclude, I would like to remind members that
the international community will celebrate a number
of landmarks next year, including the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the adoption of the Beijing Declaration
and Platform for Action and the twentieth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). In the lead
up to those anniversaries, I encourage Member States
to take stock of the limited progress that has been
achieved and look to the future. Those anniversaries
should be an opportunity for all of us to redouble our
efforts to ensure that women are adequately represented
in peacekeeping, decision-making and negotiation
positions at both the national and international levels,
as was our desire in 2000 when resolution 1325 (2000)
was adopted.

