Mr. Koncke (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the
General Secretariat of the Organization of American
States (OAS), I extend condolences to the Permanent
Mission of Russia following the attack that claimed
the life of Ambassador Andrey Karlov, and to the
Permanent Mission of Germany following the attack
carried out in Berlin.

I am honoured to take part in today's open debate
in the Security Council on behalf of the Secretary
General of the Organization of American States. First,
I thank the Spanish presidency of the Security Council
for its initiative to convene today's debate to address a
topic of extreme importance and pressing urgency and
that requires shared commitments, multidimensional
approaches and the highest sense of political will of
countries and other actors to combat and eradicate it.

We are fully confident that today's debate and
the adoption of resolution 2331 (2016) will contribute
decisively to the efforts of the Security Council and
Member States to establish and empower judicial
systems and other institutional mechanisms aimed at
preventing, criminalizing, combating and eradicating
this scourge, above all when it also serves as a source of
funding for criminal organizations and terrorist groups
in situations of armed conflict.

Human trafficking is one of the most despicable
expressions of human barbarism. In the more than
50 armed conflicts plaguing the world, this crime
intensifies violence and the expressions of terrorism,
prolongs the suffering of its victims and delays or
nullifies the development of communities. In addition,
it is an ongoing violation of international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. In many cases,
the underlying link between transnational organized
crime and conflict situations is undeniable.

Human trafficking in our hemisphere focuses
on sexual exploitation, mainly of women and girls or
adolescents. In our region, regional and international
routes have been identified, and in many countries, the
practices used by criminal groups to capture victims
have also been recognized, as well as victims' places
of origin and destination. Although we now enjoy
unprecedented peace in our region, thanks to the recent
signing of the peace agreement achieved in Colombia,
we cannot give up on the fight against the threat posed
by transnational organized crime, since it is a reality
that is measured in lives and victims, including those
subjected to human trafficking. Let me share some of
the efforts made by OAS to end this crime.

All countries of the hemisphere have committed to
adhering to the terms of the United Nations Convention
on Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children. In 2006, 2009, 2012
and 2014, Venezuela, Argentina, Guatemala and Brazil,
respectively, hosted high-level meetings on the subject,
the last of which adopted the Declaration of Brasilia and
the Second Work Plan against Trafficking in Persons in
the Western Hemisphere 2015-2018. These constitute
the framework for guiding efforts in the region.

The Work Plan takes into account the different
manifestations of exploitation considered as human
trafficking, and pays special attention to vulnerable,
at-risk groups and indigenous populations and other
traditional communities, as well as lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender and intersex persons groups.
The mandates and guidelines of the Second Work
Plan include the establishment of mechanisms for the
periodic monitoring of strategies, the criminalization
of trafficking according to the seriousness of the crime,
special emphasis on minors under 18 years of age,
access to protection mechanisms for victims regardless
of their immigration status and participation in illegal
activities, and capacity-building and the strengthening
of the institutional governance of countries.

Within that framework, together with the
International Organization for Migration and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, and with funding from the European Union,
since 2014 OAS has implemented the Inter-American
Programme for the Prevention of Irregular Migration in
Mesoamerica. The Programme covers eight countries
in the region and has three complementary components:
prevention, confrontation and protection.

In addition, the inter-American crime and violence
prevention programme was launched in 2015. It
includes the prevention of human trafficking. It is
being implemented as a pilot project in Brazil and will
continue in Honduras next year. Recently, the Organized
Transnational Crime Department was created within
the OAS General Secretariat. It seeks to address the
challenges faced by the western hemisphere with regard
to such crimes The efforts made by OAS in that regard
should not be viewed in isolation, but, rather, as being
linked to the four strategic pillars of the organization:
democracy, human rights, integrated development and
multidimensional security all under the slogan of
"More rights for more people".

 

A challenge in the fight against human trafficking
is the existence of networks that corrupt public
authority, built around criminal organizations and
their links with the private sector and terrorist groups
that use human trafficking as a source of financing,
as acknowledged by the fourth Global Survey of the
Implementation of Security Council resolution 1373
(2001) by Member States.

To conclude, I should like to share a few thoughts
and suggestions based on experiences in our region.

Combating human trafficking requires a
multidimensional security approach, a combination of
national efforts and bilateral and multilateral measures
and active cooperation with regional organizations.
The legal dimension, through the classification of
crimes related to human trafficking, must be a key
pillar in efforts by Member States, as well as in the
development of criminal classifications related to the
fight against money-laundering and the financing of
terrorism in order to combat human trafficking, in
particular in conflict affected areas. Strengthening
capacity-building is an essential tool for improving
border control and management, identifying falsified
documents and prosecuting trafficking networks.

I would like to conclude by expressing the full
confidence of the secretariat of the OAS that today's
open debate will be an essential contribution to the task
of preventing, combating and eradicating the trade and
trafficking in human beings, to which the organization
I represent is fully committed.

