Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to express my unequivocal
condemnation of all crimes of sexual exploitation
and abuse and to emphasize that States must take all
the measures necessary to combat and eradicate such
crimes as a deterrent to potential offenders. I would
also like to stress how important it is that every effort
be made to assist the victims of such crimes, in line with
the compliance of Egypt and every other State Member
of the United Nations with our zero-tolerance policy.
The Egyptian delegation chose not to vote against
today's resolution 2272 (2016) out of our sincere belief
in the importance of many of its provisions, which
are designed to deal with repeated cases of sexual
exploitation and abuse in peacekeeping operations.
Despite the unilateral approach to the negotiations on
the draft resolution, we have chosen not to vote against
it. Throughout the negotiations and during yesterday's
briefing on the subject (see S/PV.7642), my delegation
has consistently pointed to the need to differentiate
between, on the one hand, condemning and combating
sexual exploitation and abuse and, on the other, tarring
entire States and the troops they contribute with
the same brush. The way that peacekeeping troops
and troop-contributing countries (TCCs) have been
libelled is completely unacceptable. It has a drastic and
negative effect on the troops' morale and demonstrates
contempt for the sacrifices of tens of thousands of
peacekeeping personnel operating under extremely
difficult conditions.

The Security Council has chosen to act on an
issue outside its purview, since conduct and discipline,
including in relation to sexual exploitation and abuse,
are matters that are at the very core of the competence
of the General Assembly. All States Members of
the United Nations are represented in the General
Assembly, including the TCCs. Therefore, taking action
on this matter in the Security Council rather than in the
General Assembly illustrates ulterior motives aimed at
capitalizing on the fact the major troop-contributing
countries are absent from this organ, in order to adopt
a resolution that never would have been adopted in
the organ designated with responsibility to confront
sexual abuse and exploitation. It would have been more
appropriate if United Nations bodies had focused on
addressing the root causes of the problem by providing
sufficient predeployment training to peacekeeping
forces, ensuring the separation of United Nations
camps from the local population, avoiding prolonged
rotation and providing adequate living conditions,
among other things.

The Security Council resolution could give some
the impression that sexual exploitation and abuse are
being used to bring pressure to bear on TCCs in response
to their legitimate demands regarding improving the

conditions of troops and their efforts to contribute more
effectively to establishing peacekeeping operations and
drafting the mandates of operations in partnership with
the Security Council.

