Mrs. Ahmed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, my country's delegation would like to express
its appreciation to you, Mr. President, and your
friendly country for organizing this open debate to
discuss such a vital and important matter. We also
thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and his
Special Representative, Ms. Pramila Patten. We
appreciate her presence in the Chamber to listen to our
statement. We are also grateful to the briefers for their
valuable contributions.

We align ourselves with the statement delivered
earlier by Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations.

My country's delegation expresses its heartfelt
condolences to the Government and the people of Sri
Lanka in the aftermath of the recent horrific attacks on
civilians in their country.

I am honoured to be delivering this statement before
the Security Council as my country is undergoing
positive historic changes. In the wake of the glorious
revolution of December 2018, those developments are
consolidating the rights of our people while ushering
in a new era leading to a better future. I would like to
focus on two core issues.

The first is the positive developments in the Sudan
that are taking place as we approach the twentieth
anniversary of the Security Council's adoption of
the women and peace and security agenda through
resolution 1325 (2000), and as we mark the tenth
anniversary of the establishment of the mandate of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict. The second is the emphasis
of my country's Transitional Military Council on its
commitment to all regional and international treaties
and agreements. The Council is also committed to
cooperating with the international community to ensure
the protection of human rights for all in the Sudan,
especially women's rights, and the soon-to-be-formed
civilian Government will demonstrate that. We expect
that the current transitional phase will enable us to
make progress in the efforts to achieve peace in Darfur,
and in the two regions most affected in particular,
which will ultimately help us to eliminate all forms of
conflict-related sexual Violence.

Sudanese women have played a vital role in this
great movement. The Sudanese people took to the
streets to call for freedom, peace and justice, and
Sudanese women participated in those protests on
an equal footing while demanding their rights and
anticipating a better future. There can be no question
that during the upcoming period, Sudanese women will
be able to actively participate in the political sphere and
in leadership roles in the Sudan, thereby following in
the footsteps of the great Nubian queens, or candaces,
of the Kingdoms of Meroe and Kush.

The recent improved security situation in Darfur has
had a positive impact on the status of women and girls.
Major efforts have been made to achieve sustainable
peace, including by establishing specialized courts,
appointing public prosecutors and additional judges
and setting up legal aid offices in all of Darfur's states
to facilitate access to justice in cities and rural areas.
That is in addition to launching weapon collection
campaigns and repatriating displaced persons and
ensuring their return to their villages and reintegration
within their local communities. We have also provided
land for refugees, ensured safe travel paths for herders
and established water-distribution centres for them.

The Sudan will continue to protect and advance
women by combating discrimination and gender
inequality, implementing disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes, ensuring redress for
victims and implementing economic-empowerment
programmes for women, as well as supporting witness-
protection programmes to shield the survivors of human
rights violations, including survivors of conflict-
related sexual violence. We are also implementing
training programmes for police and military personnel
to improve the investigation of cases of sexual violence.
Furthermore, we are working on implementing training
courses for doctors and health workers to serve rape
victims, and establishing psychological support centres
and raising awareness about such matters. We are also
working to ensure society's participation in the fight
against this scourge. We hope that the international
community and our regional and international partners
will support our efforts.
In conclusion, we stress that the Sudan will
continue to cooperate and coordinate with the United
Nations and its agencies to further the women and
peace and security agenda. We reiterate that the Sudan
is fully committed to a zero-tolerance policy for crimes
of sexual violence and to the fight against impunity.
We also underscore the importance of cooperating
closely with the office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General in order to establish a joint
cooperation framework aimed at enhancing national
efforts in that regard.

