Mr. Ney (Germany): Germany welcomes this
open thematic debate on women and peace and
security: sexual Violence in situations of armed
conflict. I would like to express Germany's
appreciation to the United States, which currently
holds the presidency of the Security Council, for this
important initiative. Complementing the statement
made by the Republic of Slovenia on behalf of the
European Union, Germany would like to add the
following remarks.

We are deeply shocked by recent, and recurring,
reports indicating that brutal rapes are increasingly
becoming commonplace in conflict and post-conflict
situations. The pervasive and sometimes systematic use
of sexual violence against women and girls,
particularly rape or even gang rape and other forms of
sexual abuse, does not only belong to the most serious
violations of human rights. Sexual violence can also
constitute a threat to international peace and security,
when used or commissioned in situations of armed
conflict as a method of war in order to deliberately
target civilians or other protected persons or as part of
a widespread or systematic attack against civilian
populations.

We therefore have to recognize sexual violence as
a security problem requiring a systematic security
response, including through attention by the Security
Council and by the International Criminal Court. We
have to increase all our efforts, on all levels, to find
adequate responses and to end impunity for these
crimes.

In this context, Germany highly welcomes the
initiative entitled Stop Rape Now: United Nations
Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict, launched
last year, as well as the Secretary-General's campaign
entitled Unite to End Violence Against Women, which
he launched during the recent session of the
Commission on the Status of Women. We particularly
welcome the personal commitment that Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon attaches to this campaign.

The adoption of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000) was a milestone in creating awareness of the
urgent need to protect women and girls from sexual
abuse in armed conflicts, but also in acknowledging the
crucial role that women can and should have in all
efforts to promote peace and security.

Germany reaffirms its commitment to the full and
effective implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
We just submitted a comprehensive and detailed report
to the Secretariat on Germany's contributions to the
individual demands of resolution 1325 (2000). This
report documents a variety of measures both at national
and global level, ranging from efforts to increase
representation of women in all decision-making
mechanisms for the prevention, management and
resolution of conflict, to concrete projects aimed at
ending violence against women. Last year, the German
federal Government also presented its second action
plan to combat violence against women.

The promotion of gender equality and women's
empowerment is an essential part of the United Nations
mandate. A coherent and effective implementation of
this mandate, including resolution 1325 (2000), needs a
coherent and effective United Nations gender
architecture. Germany supports the strengthening of
the normative and operative work of the United
Nations on gender equality and the empowerment of
women.

This week's informal debate in the General
Assembly showed once again the broad commitment to
a reform of the United Nations gender architecture. We
now need concrete steps forward in order to enable the
United Nations to better deliver for women and girls all
around the world.

We look forward to further discussion on women
and peace and security within the Security Council.
The topics of gender equality and women's
empowerment, and, more specifically, of sexual
Violence, should not only be part of an annual open
debate, but should be continuously considered and
mainstreamed in the daily work of the Council and in
all discussions of conflict and post-conflict situations.
Germany therefore welcomes the fact that information
on sexual violence will now be systematically included
in the Council's country situation reports. We had also
supported proposals towards a specific mechanism in
this regard, because we believe that effective
prevention starts with systematic reporting and reliable
data. We hope that the Council will return to this issue
in its future discussions.

