Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): I have the honour
to speak today on behalf of Australia and Switzerland,
as well as on behalf of my own country.

Modern slavery and human trafficking are both
causes and symptoms of instability and conflicts and
a threat to both development and peace and security.
Trafficking in persons is a human rights violation and
can constitute a war crime, a crime against humanity
or even genocide. Modern slavery, often resulting from
trafficking, exists currently on an unprecedented scale.
It undermines the humanity of its victims. The Global
Slavery Index estimates that 45 million people live in
conditions that qualify as modern slavery, more than
ever before, and in spite of the absolute prohibition of
slavery under international law. Every single country is
affected, which is why it is our joint responsibility to
put an end to such crimes.

The 2030 Agenda on Sustainable Development
provides us with a new platform to address those
issues. Slavery and trafficking are mentioned in 3
of the 17 Sustainable Development Goals, an apt
reflection of their cross-cutting nature. Fighting human
trafficking is not just a law-enforcement challenge, it is
a prerequisite for sustainable development and human
rights protection. Work on that topic must therefore be
pursued with resolve in the General Assembly.

Modern slavery and human trafficking represent
one of the biggest human rights scandals of our time,
but are also among the most lucrative business models
of organized crime, as they help to fund armed conflict.
Forced labour and human trafficking is a $150 billion
industry; that is more than the annual gross domestic
product of 70 per cent of the States Members of the
Organization. One way of combating such crimes is
to follow the money - in other words, to disrupt the
financial flows associated with it. The involvement
of financial institutions, in particular financial
intelligence units, is key in such efforts. We welcome
the fact that resolution 2331 (2016) refers to the need
to use existing criminal laws, including anti-money-
laundering, anti-corruption and anti-bribery laws, to
investigate, disrupt and dismantle trafficking networks.
We are committed to exploring ways to follow up by
using the expertise of our national systems.

The Council can also play an important role by
addressing the protection gap in existing international
response mechanisms. The humanitarian cluster
system in particular does not address several key areas.
Anti-trafficking strategies should be included in the
planning for responses to conflict and humanitarian
crises. The Council should also encourage the relevant
United Nations system entities to carry out targeted
information campaigns to protect civilians vulnerable
to trafficking.

Modern slavery prevails with widespread
impunity. An overwhelming number of cases are never
prosecuted, even though the duty to prevent and punish
slavery is an erga omnes obligation of all States. That
large impunity gap has created the space for human
trafficking and modern slavery to thrive. There is a
clear need for better cooperation among States aimed at
prosecuting perpetrators of such crimes, which are often
transnational. The Palermo Anti-Trafficking Protocol
in particular can make an important contribution to
that end, and we hope that it will be universally ratified
soon. Where national judiciaries have failed, there is a
clear case for involving and making use of international
criminal justice - for example, the International
Criminal Court. Given the universal nature of the
phenomenon of modern slavery, the Court can play a
dual role: creating incentives for States to investigate
and prosecute, and doing so itself where the impunity
gap persists.

Although human trafficking affects a cross-section
of the population, some groups are more vulnerable to
it than others. Sexual and gender-based violence are
exacerbated in armed conflict. Trafficking in situations
of armed conflict has a particular impact on women and
girls. Reports from refugees and migrants arriving in
Europe suggest that a vast majority of women and girls
have been sexually exploited during their flight from
conflict. That is something we need to keep in mind in
our humanitarian response, as well as in our migration
and human rights policies.

We need to strengthen our own capabilities
to identify victims and exploitation in migration
movements and ensure that victims receive appropriate
assistance and remedy. We should also, individually
and collectively, assist and protect those vulnerable to,
or victimized by, human trafficking and make sure that
victims in conflict are not prosecuted or punished for
their experience. It is important to note that, without
identification and recognition as victims, their access
to reparations once transitional justice measures are
taken is seriously hampered.

We wish to highlight that men and boys should be
guaranteed the same access to reparations and services.
Recent studies on sexual violence against men and boys
suggest that they also suffer from a non-recognition
of sexual violence committed against them as sexual
violence. That wrong needs to be corrected.

The resolution adopted today is a good start. We
welcome in particular its gender-inclusive language, but
also believe that some paragraphs could have profited
from further strengthening - for example, with regard
to the important role played by the Financial Action
Task Force and regional bodies of that type. We look
forward to a consistent political commitment from the
Council and remain committed ourselves to our efforts
to eradicate this human tragedy.

