Mrs. Abylkassymova (Kazakhstan): We thank the
British presidency for highlighting the gravity of human
trafficking in conflict situations. We acknowledge with
appreciation the Secretary-General's stewardship and
moral voice to halt that scourge. We appreciate the
briefings of Executive Director Fedotov, Commissioner
Hyland and social activist Elman. My delegation offers
some remarks for the Security Council's consideration.

The synergy of expertise of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), as the lead
agency, and other relevant agencies of the United
Nations system must be strengthened. We urge greater
collaboration within the Inter-Agency Coordination
Group against Trafficking in Persons (ICAT) and the
sound management of the United Nations Voluntary
Trust Fund for Victims of Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children. We support
strengthened coordination between ICAT and Member
States, which will enhance the effectiveness of the
response to the current challenges of human trafficking.
All countries need to ratify, universalize
and reaffirm their commitment to the landmark
United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons, as well as the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
and its Protocols; and all other anti-trafficking legal
instruments. Accountability should be an important
benchmark for all Member States.

At the same time, criminal justice responses, while
essential, are not sufficient alone prevent and address
human trafficking in situations affected by conflict.
Peace and development lay the foundations of a stable
society and human well-being. It is also essential to
increase funding for poverty eradication, education,
employment, and the provision of services in countries
affected by conflict.

Terrorist groups treat slavery and human trafficking
not just as a means to generate free labour services
and profit, but also as a recruiting tool and a means to
degrade and displace civilians. Hence, we urge States to
mobilize a stronger and more vigilant global response.
We must therefore strengthen the implementation of
General Assembly resolution 70/291, on the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy Review, so
that we can break the close nexus between trafficking in
persons and terrorism. We need to cut off the sources of
income and financial flows of terrorist groups resulting
from human trafficking.

The money-laundering channels of organized crime
networks must also be blocked. Therefore, we see the
need for improved data-sharing, especially between law
enforcement and financial sectors, in order to identify,
disrupt and dismantle networks involved in human
trafficking in conflict. It should be mandatory to train all
peacekeeping and other personnel in gender sensitivity
so that they may respond effectively to trafficking in
persons. Preventing sexual exploitation and abuse,
especially when perpetrated by peacekeepers, must be
a priority.

We see a pressing need for strengthening
cooperation among the United Nations and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), the African Union, the League of Arab
States, INTERPOL and other global and regional
organizations. The Central Asian and Commonwealth
of Independent States countries should step up their
Regional Programme for 2014-2018, as well as the
OSCE Alliance against Trafficking in Persons, of which
Kazakhstan is an active member. My country has also
initiated the Almaty Process on Refugee Protection and
International Migration, which serves as a platform for
nine countries of the region to step up their response
annually and to enhance cooperation with the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the International Organization for Migration.

At the national level, we are accelerating the work
of the Interagency Commission, in close interaction
with non-governmental organizations and the relevant
international organizations as part of the fifth cycle of
its national plan.

Kazakhstan, as a member of the Group of Friends
United against Human Trafficking and a sponsor of
resolution 2331 (2016), reaffirms its strong commitment
to reaching visible results in combating trafficking in
human beings.

