Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
wishes to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting. We also thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his briefing.

Since their inception, United Nations peacekeeping
operations have played a significant role in maintaining
international peace and security. To date, hundreds
of thousands of peacekeepers, from more than 120
countries, have participated in 69 peacekeeping
missions. More than 3,000 peacekeepers made the
ultimate sacrifice in the line of duty. They deserve to
be inscribed in our memories forever.

While United Nations peacekeepers have made
an enormous contribution, a handful of them are
suspected of having commmitted sexual exploitation
and abuse in some countries. Such acts have seriously
undermined the reputation of peacekeeping operations,
runs counter to the purpose of those operations and
seriously tarnishes the overall image of the United
Nations. China supports the Secretary-General and
the Secretariat in pursuit of a zero-tolerance policy
for peacekeepers involved in sexual exploitation and
abuse. And we support the international community in
adopting counter-measures.

First, the international community should pay great
attention to the problem and combat it resolutely. The
parties concerned should attach great importance to the
issue of sexual exploitation and abuse by peacekeepers,
in the interest of safeguarding the reputation and
credibility of the United Nations and guaranteeting
the healthy development of peacekeeping operations.
The Security Council and other organs, including the
Secretariat, troop-contributing countries (TCCs) and
the States concerned, should strengthen cooperation,
fully implement the zero-tolerance policy, resolutely
combat sexual exploitation and abuse, never condone
such acts, bring perpetrators to account and deliver
justice to victims.

Secondly, the international community should
adopt an integrated policy that combines punishment
and prevention. Merely pursuing prosecution after the
fact cannot fundamentally resolve the problem. The
parties concerned should attach importance to boosting
prevention efforts and seek to eradicate the underlying
causes of sexual exploitation and abuse. It is important
to analyse the various conditions that give rise to
sexual exploitation and abuse. At every key link in the
deployment of peacekeeping operations, comprehensive
measures should be taken to prevent and respond to
such acts. There is also a need to raise awareness among
peacekeepers about the need to uphold discipline and
respect the law, as well as to strengthen administration
and management to ensure that sexual exploitation and
abuse constitutes a red line that must never be crossed.

Thirdly, there is a need to improve management
and raise standards. The Secretariat bears important
responsibility for improving and strengthening the
deployment of peacekeeping operations. It must further
deepen the reform of peacekeeping operations and, by
formulating norms and guidelines for peacekeepers,
comprehensively upgrade deployment standards and the
management of peacekeeping operations, strengthen
communication with affected countries and TCCs with
a view to ensuring that every peacekeeper deployed
in a mission area adheres to ethical standards, strictly
follows the law, maintains discipline and respects local
populations.

Fourthly, capacity-building for TCCs must be
strengthened. TCCs bear the primary responsibility
for the acts of the peacekeepers they deploy. They
must strengthen predeployment training to ensure that
peacekeepers are well disciplined and able to carry
out their mandates. The parties concerned must also
pay attention to the actual difficulties facing TCCs,
especially those from the developing world. They must
also scale up assistance in the area of peacekeeping
and comprehensively boost capacity-building in those
countries. The international community needs to
strengthen its cooperation with TCCs through bilateral,
multilateral and regional organizations and provide
them with technical assistance, such as training for
personnel, and comprehensively upgrade the quality of
their personnel at the level of management, as well as
the overall capacity of peacekeeping operations.

