Mr. Amrani (Morocco): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for your presence here today and for
organizing this important debate. Your presence among
us denotes a strong commitment to the fight against
sexual Violence in armed conflict.

I would also like to express my sincere appreciation
to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon; Ms. Zainab
Bangura, his Special Representative on Sexual Violence
in Conflict; Ms. Angelina Jolie, Special Envoy of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees; and
Ms. Jane Adong Anywar, of the non-governmental
organization Women's Initiatives for Gender Justice,
for their insightful briefings.

Sexual violence continues to destroy, scar and
traumatize the lives of millions around the world,
both victims and survivors, as well as families and
communities. Regrettably, women and girls are the
most affected by such deplorable acts.

Over the years, a number of tools and mechanisms
have been developed to ensure that action is taken against
the scourge of sexual violence in armed conflicts. The
Security Council, through its growing focus on women
and peace and security, has played an important role in
establishing a solid framework to prevent and address
conflict-related sexual violence. In that regard, civil
society has also contributed to this noble goal and shed
much-needed light on one of history's greatest silences.
Yet more needs to be done.

Today we have a legal and moral responsibility to
act collectively in order to prevent the recurrence of
such crimes, to strengthen the repressive measures
against perpetrators of these horrific acts and to ensure
that they do not remain unpunished. My delegation
would like to make the following five points.

First, the commitment of the national Governments
concerned in the fight against sexual violence in armed
conflict and their ownership of the process are crucial
to preventing and putting an end to this phenomenon.
That requires an innovative approach on our collective
part, one that builds upon the gains achieved so far,
enhances national ownership in the process and tackles
the root causes of conflicts, namely, weak institutions,
poverty, marginalization, social discrimination and
exclusion, while ensuring adequate technical assistance
and financial support to help States meet their
commitments.

In that regard, Morocco recognizes the important
role played by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and
her team in increasing the international visibility of this
important issue, and for the valuable support she brings
to concerned countries and subregional and regional
organizations.

It is crucial that the United Nations system and
the international community continue to support and
assist Member States, while fully respecting their
sovereignty, in the elaboration of relevant national
legislation, action plans and codes of conduct, as well
as in the strengthening of their institutions and the rule
of law.

Secondly, it is important to adopt a comprehensive
approach in dealing with sexual violence in armed
conflict. Success will be achieved only if the countries
concerned are also able to address the root causes of
this scourge. To that end, a coordinated approach is
needed, not only at the national level but also at that
of the United Nations, notably through strengthening
national institutions in order to prevent conflicts. In
that regard, we highly value the goals of the United
Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict and
recognize the need for its implementation.

Thirdly, the fight against impunity should be
a priority. We need to break the existing cycle of
violence and prevent the recurrence of such acts in
armed conflict by ensuring that those responsible of
committing crimes against women and children are
brought to justice.

Fourthly, particular attention and priority should
be given to the vulnerability of refugee populations,
namely, women and children, living in the proximity
of combat zones or unsecured borders or territories.
Restriction of access to vulnerable groups, including
women and girls, who often have no registration
documents, poses major risks to the efforts of the
United Nations in the fight against sexual Violence in
armed conflict. It is important that all parties ensure
that there is access to refugee camps in order to reduce
their suffering, promote their rights and ensure their
optimal protection.

Lastly, the involvement of public authorities,

national institutions for human rights, civil society
and non-governmental organizations, including local
women's associations, in raising awareness to enhance
the protection of women in conflict situations, as well
as the involvement of the donor community, should be
encouraged, as they make a positive contribution to our
common endeavour.

Finally, I cannot conclude without thanking the
delegation of the United States for introducing the
resolution on this important issue. I also commend the
constructive spirit of compromise that made it possible
for us to adopt it today.

