Ms. Velichko (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): We
thank the Bolivian presidency for the opportunity to
once again address the very relevant issue of women's
role and place in resolving the problems of our era.
The situation in the world today is characterized
by increasingly non-trivial forms of conflict and
confrontation and it requires similarly non-trivial
approaches to resolving them. Clearly the existing
international toolkit is inadequate to an effective
response to our emerging challenges. Once again, that
forces us to consider the role that women can play in
peacebuilding and sustaining peace. We believe that
women, as one of the groups that are most vulnerable to
the consequences of armed conflict and confrontations,
are uniquely aware of the full force of conflicts and the
harm they inflict on future generations and therefore
attach particular importance to preserving the values
of peace, goodwill and well-being. That is why we
should not underestimate initiatives that are aimed
at promoting gender equality in issues related to the
maintenance of international peace, ensuring the safety
and security of women and girls in armed conflict and
preventing violence and abuse.

Belarus has always advocated for advancing the
role of women in resolving a broad range of issues
on the international agenda, and for equality and
non-discrimination. We support the ideas outlined in
the relevant Council resolutions, including its landmark
resolution 1325 (2000). We have traditionally supported
the efforts of the Secretary-General, UN-Women, other
specialized entities of the United Nations and States
themselves in combating violence and protecting
women, especially in the context of the role that Belarus
plays in international initiatives to combat trafficking
in human beings. It is clear that in conflict and post-
conflict periods, owing to the collapse of political,
economic and social structures, high levels of violence
and militarism can worsen the problem of trafficking
and enslaving women and children, in regard to which
the example of Nadia Murad, United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime Goodwill Ambassador and Nobel
Peace Prize Laureate for 2018, is a shining one. In that
regard, Belarus has unprecedented practical experience
and a high level of expertise in the field of assisting in
global efforts to combat trafficking.

The gender aspect of the work of United Nations
peacekeeping missions plays a significant role in the
process of improving approaches to current challenges
and threats. Belarus is seriously involved in the
response to the Secretary-General's call for enhancing
the role of women in peacekeeping. Belarusian women
are serving successfully as military specialists in the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon. Belarus
is also a member of the Circle of Leadership in the
fight against sexual exploitation and abuse in United
Nations peacekeeping operations established on the
initiative of the Secretary-General. We believe that the
voluntary compact on countering sexual exploitation
that was signed by members of the Circle of Leadership
will continue to serve as the basis for further efforts
to combat the problem. Lastly, we should also note
the critical importance of the preventive mediating
role that women play in preventing armed conflict.
Implementing mediation practices at the early stages of
confrontations is an unquestionably effective factor in
the maintenance of international peace and security.

