Mr. Hyland: As the United Kingdom's first
appointed Independent Anti-slavery Commissioner,
my role is to spearhead the United Kingdom's efforts
to tackle modern slavery, both domestically and
internationally. We are here today in recognition of the
fact that conflict has become a major driver of modern
slavery across the globe. Terrorist organizations
openly advocate slavery as a tactic of war. Da'esh has
targeted minority groups for forced labour and sexual
exploitation. It has established slave markets where
women and children are sold with a price tag attached.

Conflict also produces an environment that enables
modern slavery to flourish. Erosion of the rule of
law enables transnational trafficking networks to act
with impunity. Conflict results in the displacement
of vulnerable people who are then targeted by the
traffickers. The wars in Syria, Afghanistan and
Somalia alone are responsible for more than half the
world's refugees. The number of displaced people has
risen to 65 million, the largest figure ever recorded.
Men, women and children fleeing conflict are
extremely vulnerable to numerous forms of modern
slavery, including sexual exploitation, forced labour
and even organ trafficking. The European Police
Office has confirmed that traffickers are increasingly
targeting refugees in the European Union. Nearly
half of all refugees are children, many of whom are
unaccompanied, and therefore especially vulnerable.

I met Sarah, a 15-year-old Eritrean girl, at a
reception camp in Lampedusa. Sarah had been
kidnapped and held for three months in Libya in a
so-called connection house, where she was sexually
exploited multiple times every day. In October last year,
the International Organization for Migration reported
that over 70 per cent of all migrants moving from
North Africa to Europe had experienced exploitation
and human trafficking, mainly in Libya. A modern-day
slave trade is now booming in Libya. Political, military
and social conditions have created an environment
where traffickers have thrived.

Militias are subjecting migrants to forced labour
and sexual exploitation in detention centres until they
pay off a ransom to allow passage to Europe. Those
centres are forced labour camps, set up to profit from the
organized exploitation of migrants. Long-established
transnational organized crime groups are also using
power vacuums caused by conflict to increase their
trafficking operations. For example, for decades,
transnational traffickers have operated in southern
Nigeria, deceiving victims with false promises ofbetter
lives in Europe. But what was a trickle has now become
a flow. Such criminals are taking advantage of conflict
and instability in the Lake Chad basin and Libya and
have massively scaled up their trafficking operations
by utilizing those now-ungoverned routes.
In 2016, just over 11,000 Nigerian women arrived
in Italy from Libya. That is as an eightfold increase
from the numbers arriving in 2014. The International
Organization for Migration believes that 80 per cent
are trafficking victims destined for brothels across
Europe. I have visited Edo state, the main region where
traffickers source their victims. This trafficking is
especially brutal in nature. Women who insist they will
not work as prostitutes are tied up in a position called
"the crocodile". Their hands are tied to their feet and
they are left for days without food or water. Some are
left to die as an example to others. The Government
of the United Kingdom recently announced at least
£5 million aimed at work in partnership with Nigeria to
help tackle this trafficking at the source.

Prime Minister Theresa May has committed the
United Kingdom to international leadership in combating
modern slavery. Unless those behind the trade in human
lives are pursued and punished, vulnerable people will
continue to be sourced, used, abused and replaced,
and be treated as mere commodities. I therefore urge
international organizations and Member States, and
in particular the law-enforcement and intelligence
agencies, to prioritize efforts to strengthen cross-
border collaboration aimed at investigating, disrupting
and dismantling human-trafficking networks that are
profiting from conflict and human suffering.

We need high-profile convictions of the organizers
of trafficking in order that that can serve as a deterrent to
others. That can be achieved through the increased use of
joint investigation teams, multilateral prosecutions and
data- and intelligence-sharing. We need to get smarter
at debriefing victims and sensitively sharing that
information with law-enforcement and victim-support
agencies so as to inform efforts aimed at disruption and
protection. All of the Nigerian survivors whom I met
wanted to tell me about the identities, tactics and routes
of the traffickers. Unfortunately, that information is not
being routinely collected, analysed or acted on. Much
more must be done to protect the vulnerable.

I strongly welcome resolution 2331 (2016), which
calls for the systematic integration of proactive responses
against slavery and trafficking into humanitarian
responses to conflicts and related emergencies. This is
urgent. On visits to reception centres I witnessed how
the current absence of integrated protection is resulting
in potential victims not being identified. Traffickers
view refugee camps as a rich source of new victims.
I have seen the positive impact that the deployment
of dedicated experts can have, including cultural
mediators. But, unfortunately, at present that is the
exception rather than the norm. I would also encourage
suitable training for all United Nations peacekeepers,
as they will often be operating across routes known to
be used by traffickers, especially in places such as Mali
and the Sudan.

We need a more strategic and holistic response.
Tackling the traffickers and protecting the vulnerable
will only be achieved by utilizing all of the levers
at the international community's disposal. That
means deploying the United Nations leverage
through development and humanitarian efforts,
criminal-justice capacity-building, political work and
peacekeeping operations.

The integration of the fight against modern slavery
into the Sustainable Development Goals - and Goal
8.7 in particular - reflects the commitment of Member
States to holistically tackle this crime. I very much
welcome the Secretary-General's leadership on this
issue, and I know he will be reporting at the end of the
year on the implementation of resolution 2331 (2016).

Until there is a more strategic international
response, there can be no doubt that this modern
slavery crisis, fuelled by global conflict, will only get
worse with each passing day. Working across borders,
traffickers are making huge profits at the expense of
human suffering. The international community must
act now.

