Mr. Shin Dong Ik (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, Mr. President, let me express my sincere
appreciation to you for convening this open debate. My
appreciation also goes to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Margot Wallstrom; Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Herve Ladsous; and
Ms. Amina Megheirbi of the NGO Working Group on
Women, Peace and Security for her insightful
presentation.

Over the past three years, the Security Council
has made significant progress in highlighting the
egregious phenomenon of conflict-related sexual
violence, including through its adoption of resolutions
1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010). A series of
mechanisms established by those resolutions has
contributed to identifying and preventing conflict-
related sexual violence. However, it is deeply
disturbing that we are still witnessing widespread and
systematic sexual violence in conflict and post-conflict
situations.

In that regard, my delegation welcomes the
Secretary-General's report (S/2012/33). It provides us
with useful information for today's debate, including
incidents of sexual violence in many conflict areas and
progress on United Nations initiatives. In particular, we
commend the tireless efforts of the Special
Representative to address the issue effectively.

Noting with appreciation the series of
recommendations in the report of the Secretary-
General, my delegation would like to highlight the
following points.

First, my delegation would like to underline the
significance of ensuring accountability by eliminating
impunity for sexual violence. That is key to fighting
conflict-related sexual violence by showing the
perpetrators that their acts are not cost-free. We
welcome the fact that the United Nations Team of
Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict, established under resolution 1888 (2009), has
been fully operational since May 2011. We would like
to encourage the Team, in close collaboration with
other United Nations entities, to further enhance its
assistance to Governments in strengthening the
capacity of their civilian and military justice systems
and institutional safeguards against impunity.

Secondly, we need to pay greater attention to
sexual violence in post-conflict settings. While many
incidents of sexual violence have been reported after
the end of conflict, it is regrettable that few ceasefire
or peace agreements include provisions for conflict-
related sexual violence. As the report of the Secretary-
General rightly points out, the inclusion of such
provisions can increase the durability of peace by
mitigating security fears, as well as addressing the
sexual violence itself. In that regard, we welcome the
publication by the Department of Political Affairs of
the United Nations Guidance for Mediators on
Addressing Conflict-Related Sexual Violence in
Ceasefire and Peace Agreement. We encourage United
Nations envoys and mediators to ensure that conflict-
related sexual violence is properly addressed in
preventive diplomacy efforts, mediation and peace
processes, based upon the Guidance.

Thirdly, more attention needs to be given to the
prevention of conflict-related sexual violence. Sexual
violence is not a corollary of conflict, but it can be
prevented. In that regard, we note with appreciation a
series of recent United Nations initiatives to that end,
including the development of scenario-based
predeployment training modules on preventing and
addressing conflict-related sexual violence in
peacekeeping operations. In addition, we welcome the
development of a framework of early warning signs
that are specific to conflict-related sexual violence. We
believe that Member States, donors and regional
organizations, for their part, need to enhance their
efforts to strengthen national and regional prevention
mechanisms, drawing upon, as appropriate, the United
Nations early-warning system and training courses.

As a member of the Group of Friends of
resolution 1325 (2000), the Republic of Korea has
actively engaged in the international cooperation for
the prevention of sexual violence against women and
girls in conflict and post-conflict situations. In the firm
belief that proper training for peacekeepers is
indispensable to preventing and responding to sexual
violence in conflict situations, the Korean Government
has been bolstering its predeployment gender training
for military and police personnel deploying to United
Nations peacekeeping operations. The Korean
Government has also strengthened its efforts to enable
those personnel to have a better understanding of
gender and cultural differences in the traditional and
historical context of the host communities by carrying
out cultural-awareness and sensitivity training.

In conclusion, the momentum generated over the
past three years by the adoption of a series of
resolutions to address conflict-related sexual violence
should not be lost. We need to ensure that the
implementation of mechanisms shows tangible results
on the ground. The Republic of Korea reaffirms its
commitment to implementing all the resolutions to
eradicate conflict-related sexual violence, in
cooperation with the international community.

