Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, we would like to thank you, Mr. Mariano
Rajoy Brey, President of the Government of Spain,
for presiding over today's open debate. I also thank
the briefers for their comprehensive statements. We
congratulate Spain on having convened this open
debate, which is of particular importance in the current
context, given the unprecedented mass migration
crisis, with refugees and internally displaced persons
becoming the main targets of traffickers.

Trafficking in persons in situations of conflict is
a global problem. It concerns not only the countries of
origin, but also the transit and destination countries of
victims, the countries in which those criminal networks
operate and those through which money passes for
those networks. And the list could continue.

Human trafficking is a means of subjugating and
using human beings for profit. It gravely violates
their human rights. Through abuses and violence,
it degrades the victims' human condition and turns
them into commodities. It removes their physical and
emotional integrity. It is a threat to all of society and
affects the well-being of communities and the security
of nations. According to the World Report on Human
Trafficking of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC), that phenomenon affects practically
all regions of the world. UNODC has identified at
least 510 flows of transnational trafficking in persons.
Most of those victims are targeted for the purposes of
sexual exploitation.

Those conflicts and humanitarian crises only
increase the risks of human trafficking. They find
fertile ground in economic desperation and in the
weakening of the rule of law and fewer social services.
As a result, people are forced to leave their homes, and

even their countries of residence. In that regard, when a
country is in a situation of conflict, the rule oflaw in its
territory can be weakened. That creates greater freedom
of action for those organizations that seek to exploit the
institutional weaknesses for their illegal activities, such
as human trafficking. Even if we deem that today one
of the main elements that creates human trafficking
situations in conflict situations is the self-described
Islamic State and its associated groups, we need to bear
in mind that those crimes are also perpetrated by other
actors that operate in the same violent manner in others
regions of the world.

Resolution 2231 (2016), which we have unanimously
adopted today, which Uruguay co-sponsored, roundly
condemns human trafficking in armed conflict-
affected areas. That is a cross-cutting and multifaceted
phenomenon. Unfortunately, it is being replicated and it
is affecting very fragile areas ofthe world where people
are living in situations of high vulnerability. Uruguay
wishes to highlight several elements in the resolution
that we believe are extremely important.

First, the resolution calls for ratifying and
implementing the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime, as well as the Protocol
to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children. Those agreements
make up the international legal framework of rules and
obligations to ensure that States develop international
instruments to combat trafficking in persons.

Secondly, the resolution highlights the need for
cooperation and exchange of information. In that regard,
Uruguay positively views the growing connection
between the work of UNODC, the Secretary-General
and the Security Council, since increasingly trafficking
in persons is linked to armed conflicts and threats to
international peace and security. We welcome the work
of UNODC as the guardian of the Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime, including the Palermo
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking
in Persons, especially Women and Children.

Thirdly, the resolution addresses sexual violence
and the strengthening of the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict. Uruguay condemns the use of
sexual violence by any party as a terrorist tactic to
further such an agenda. Those practices have led to the
development of a growing nexus between trafficking
in persons and conflict, thereby violating the rights of
thousands of women and children within the context
of war.

Another significant aspect is training. The
complexity of human trafficking means there needs to
be greater awareness, in addition to specialized training
within that scope for as many people as possible, but
especially for the officials and points of contact to
whom it is most likely victims will turn, such as police
and military officers, help centres, consulates and
embassies, among others.

Furthermore, we recognize the role of civil society
in providing assistance and support to victims. In that
regard, Uruguay has concluded drafting a comprehensive
preliminary bill to prevent and fight trafficking in and
exploitation of persons that underscores the human
rights of the victims as a top priority. It also calls
upon diplomatic missions to engage in trafficking
prevention activities, promote training for staff, make
available information easily accessible and create
support initiatives for victims. Moreover, the resolution
emphasizes the need to reintegrate victims into society
and adopt mechanisms to protect and support them.

Uruguay, as a country committed to promoting,
protecting and upholding human rights, wishes to
underpin the need to provide comprehensive assistance
to the victims of trafficking in persons. We must focus
on their recovery and reintegration into society, and
not just penalize the crime in question. The victims
must receive assistance and legal and psycho-social
protection. Furthermore, for Uruguay, it is key that the
victims ofhuman trafficking not be punished for crimes
that they may have committed, if it is determined
that they were subjected to trafficking at the time of
committing those crimes.

Uruguay also believes that activities related to
trafficking in persons not be restricted to the time
period ofa given conflict. The frameworks for action in
the wake of armed conflict are also lacking in terms of
shortcomings within the justice system and compliance
with the law, in addition to an organized civil society
that can file complaints about such situations. That is
why our country believes that the work of UNODC
and the Security Council should be carried out in
close coordination with the Peacebuilding Commission
with a view to preventing territories in post-conflict
situations from turning into fertile grounds for
criminal organizations.

By way of conclusion, we believe, in short, that
fighting trafficking in persons in conflict situations
requires efforts and cooperation from the international
community as a whole in order to address the needs
of those who are most vulnerable, such as women and
children. To that end, we must take appropriate action
both internally and internationally. We must recognize
that we are the ones that are responsible for effecting
real change, which we can do by taking a broad,
comprehensive and multifaceted approach to the issue of
trafficking in persons in conflict situations, something
that requires determination and political will. The
international community can count on Uruguay's firm
commitment in that vein.

