Ms. Durham: On behalf of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), let me first thank
you, Mr. President, for inviting the ICRC to address the
Security Council during this crucial and timely debate
on a subject that is at the heart of our humanitarian
mission. The protection of civilians in armed conflict
has been a regular item on the Council's agenda for
many years - proof that it remains a matter of concern
for the international community.

Yet I regret to say that, based on our observations
in the field, that I cannot report any significant progress
in the way armed conflicts are being waged, or any
significant alleviation of their impact on civilians
throughout the world. As in the past, civilians are
too often directly targeted by warring parties. Tens
of millions more suffer the indirect effects of armed
conflict. That is most vividly illustrated by the fact
that the number of refugees and internally displaced
persons is higher than it has ever been.

The single most important measure to improve
this situation is to make sure that State and non-State
parties to armed conflict comply with their legal
obligations under international humanitarian law and
other applicable norms. This is imperative, whatever
parallel efforts are under way, to find political solutions
to a conflict. In that regard, the Security Council
has a significant role to play to ensure that those
directly responsible for protecting civilians meet their
responsibilities in full. Every State party to the Geneva
Conventions also has an obligation in that connection:
Article 1 common to the four Geneva Conventions calls
on States parties to respect and ensure respect for the
Conventions in all circumstances.
The Council having chosen today to address the
challenges and needs facing women and girls in armed
conflict and post-conflict settings, I would like to
highlight the situation of women during armed conflict,
with a specific focus on the subject of sexual violence.
All that follows is based on the ICRC's field experience
and activities.

As a group, women are not inherently vulnerable in
armed conflict. They may be victims or perpetrators,
fighters or bystanders; or they may be actors of
influence. Armed conflict changes the circumstances
of all the people it touches. Women are made vulnerable
mainly by the conditions that are imposed on them,
not by their sex. At this point, it is critical to remind
ourselves that fighters are also afforded protection by
international humanitarian law, particularly after they
are hors de combat. That includes protection against
sexual violence. All victims of armed conflict must be
treated humanely, without adverse distinction.

During armed conflicts, displaced women and girls,
as well as female heads of households, are particularly
vulnerable and at risk of certain kinds of violence,
including sexual violence. Because their husbands
are missing, detained or taking part in the fighting,
displaced women and female heads of households often
have to shoulder the burden of being a single parent
in extremely difficult circumstances. That means
providing - by themselves - the family's income,
deciding - by themselves - about their children's
education, and guaranteeing - by themselves - the
safety of their families.

While also affecting men and boys during armed
conflict, the impact of sexual violence on women and
girls is disproportionally greater. The consequences of
such violence - for victims, their families and entire
communities - are extremely serious. Sexual violence
causes physical trauma and long-lasting mental health
problems, and can be financially ruinous. It can lead to
social stigmatization and be the cause of reprisals. And
sometimes it kills. Those are only a few consequences
of sexual violence that victims have to deal with every
day.

Sexual violence remains comparatively invisible,
and statistically underestimated. Because of cultural
constraints and the strong feelings of shame and fear
that are often engendered by sexual violence, most
victims do not dare come forward to seek help. Of
course, that only adds to the devastating effects on
them, their families and communities. Constraints and
obstacles notwithstanding, immediate and appropriate
action must be taken, on the basis of systematic and
thorough assessments, to respond to the multifaceted
needs of victims of sexual violence.

Sexual violence is a medical emergency. Victims of
sexual violence need to be assisted and given immediate,
unimpeded and free access to health services, including
medical and psychological support, ideally within
72 hours of the assault. They should be treated with
humanity and dignity at all times. Their privacy must be
respected and the strictest confidentiality maintained
while responding to their needs.

Victims need to be protected against all forms
of ostracization or re-victimization and from any
further abuse - by making their environment safer
and by providing guidance on risk awareness and
risk reduction. Those are essential components for
the response. Victims who are willing to seek justice
must also be able to report their allegations safely,
without fear of reprisals or social stigmatization or of
becoming entangled in a lengthy legal process. Victims
should have access to economic support, as well as
to administrative and other legal remedies. For those
who have been detained, detention should not be an
additional barrier for them to access remedies. Such
remedies are extremely important: they enable victims
to survive and rebuild their lives.

Victims also need to see perpetrators brought before
courts of justice that respect fair-trial guarantees. In
armed conflicts, international and non-international
alike, rape and other forms of sexual violence are
serious violations of international humanitarian law
and entail individual criminal responsibility. All States
have the obligation to criminalize these violations in
their domestic legislation. Governments must ensure
accountability for rape and other forms of sexual
violence by investigating such acts and by prosecuting
and punishing the perpetrators.

In 2013, the ICRC undertook a four-year commitment
to intensify its response to the issue of sexual violence.
It has been striving to do that ever since. In Colombia,
the Central African Republic, South Sudan, Lebanon
and various other countries, we are aiming to improve
its delivery of impartial, holistic and effective
humanitarian responses to victims of sexual violence,
while also strengthening activities aimed at preventing
such violence.

We believe that the ICRC and other humanitarian
actors have an important role to play in preventing
sexual violence and in providing a holistic response
to its victims. But we are also aware that our efforts
will be for naught if States do not bear their primary
responsibility in addressing the needs of victims and
providing suitable remedies for them and their families,
with full respect for their own obligations under
international humanitarian law.

Domestic laws, regulations, policies, reparation
schemes and processes of restorative justice should
respond to the many different needs of victims and must
fully comply with international law. Strengthening and
building institutional capacities within thejudiciary, the
police, the military and among all detaining authorities,
including those dealing with displaced persons, should
be a priority. It is equally important to bolster the ability
of Victims to heal and rebuild their lives.

Sexual violence during armed conflict is a violation
of international humanitarian law. It is not inevitable. It
must and can be stopped. What is required is a concerted
effort by everyone concerned to prevent and put an
end to it. The ICRC will continue to encourage States
to pursue action based on their pledges at the thirty-
first International Conference of the Red Cross and
Red Crescent to enhance protection for women during
armed conflict. It also stands ready to support States,
ahead of the thirty-second International Conference,
which will take place at the end of this year, in their
efforts to draft measures specifically for combating
sexual violence and responding to its consequences.

