Mr. Yaremenko (Ukraine): Ukraine associates
itself with the statement made this morning by the
delegation of the European Union.

My delegation attaches particular importance to
the issue of women and peace and security, and thanks
you, Madam President, for convening this debate, as
well as today's briefers for their useful insights into this
important topic.

Resolution 1325 (2000), adopted 15 years ago,
established the basis for the women and peace and
security agenda, called for special protection and the
full and equal participation of women in all conflict-
prevention, conflict-resolution and post-conflict-
peacebuilding efforts. The resolution has proved to be
an effective instrument for Member States to implement
their policies in this important area. Ukraine remains
fully committed to the implementation of the resolution
and actively supports international efforts aimed at
addressing the full range of human rights Violations
and abuses faced by women in armed-conflict and
post-conflict situations.

In Ukraine, a national action plan in line with
resolution 1325 (2000) is being developed by the
Government, in close consultation with the United
Nations and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe as well as civil society. We
expect that document to be adopted in 2015. My
delegation also looks forward to the global review of
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in 2015,
which will provide additional impetus to fulfilling
our common commitments on women and peace and
security.

Ukraine is alarmed at the fact that civilians still
constitute the majority of casualties in armed conflicts
worldwide. Many of them are women and girls, and
their number keeps growing dramatically. We are
deeply worried over the disproportionate impact of
armed conflict on women.

In my country, terrorist groups armed, financed and
supported by the Russian Federation continue to operate
openly in some areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk
regions. Further ignoring the calls of the international
community, the Russian Federation keeps intensifying
its interference in the internal affairs of Ukraine by
stirring up separatism, exporting terrorism, inciting
ethnic tensions and provoking Violent confrontations
in the eastern regions. Clearly, none of those actions
would have been possible without the involvement of
the Russian authorities.

Civilians, including women and children, continue
to die from Russian bullets and shells. In its recent
report, the United Nations Human Rights Monitoring
Mission in Ukraine found that, from mid-April 2014 to
15 February 2015, at least 5,665 people, including at
least 375 women and 63 children, were killed and at
least 13,961, including at least 630 women and 159
children, wounded as a result of the Russia-provoked
conflict in Donbas.

According to the latest official statistics, the
number of internally displaced persons (IDPs) in
Ukraine stands at 1,198,000. About two thirds of adult
IDPs are women. The Government fully understands
their specific needs, as most IDP families include
elderly and unaccompanied women with children. The
law of Ukraine on IDPs adopted on 20 October 2014 was
welcomed by the international community, including
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees. This law is aimed at ensuring the rights and
freedoms of IDPs, including women, and at addressing
key issues in this area, inter alia through facilitating
humanitarian assistance. On 5 March, Ukraine's
legislation on IDPs was amended in order to strengthen
their social protection, including through addressing
the issue of unemployment.

I would like to draw the Council's attention
to the fact of the abduction and illegal transfer of
Ukrainian nationals from the territory of Ukraine
into the Russian Federation for so-called criminal
prosecutions. A political prisoner - member of the
Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe
Nadiya Savchenko - is still being detained in Russia
without legal grounds and despite the fact that, under
the Minsk arrangements, all hostages and illegally
detained persons must be released. We demand that
Nadiya Savchenko be immediately released and those
involved in her abduction and illegal detention be
brought to justice.

The Government of Ukraine is undertaking a
number of targeted steps in order to address the
challenges that the ongoing foreign aggression places
on women in Ukraine. In parallel with the elaboration
of the national action plan on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), my Government will continue to
ensure the greater participation of women in political,
economic and social life.

Making full use of the knowledge, skills and
experience of Ukrainian women is Vital to reaching a
solution to the current crisis in and around Ukraine.
We encourage the United Nations, in particular UN-
Women, to actively contribute to that end.

