Mr. Aboulgheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to express my delegation's deep
appreciation to you, Sir, and to your sisterly country,
Namibia. I also wish to emphasize Egypt's full
commitment to and support for all efforts to protect and
advance women, as well as to foster their participation
in all fields of peacemaking.

Before touching on the subject under discussion, I
should like to stress Egypt's firm position, which we
have stated time and again before this Council, with
regard to the need to place the protection of women
and children in armed conflict in the broader context of
the protection of all civilians. In this connection, I also
wish to make two main points that should be taken into
account when the Council deals with humanitarian
issues. The first is the need for the Council to deal with
these subjects in an atmosphere of full respect for the
delicate balances among the main organs of the United
Nations, as specified in the Charter, particularly the
inherent role vested in the General Assembly, in
addition to other United Nations bodies and
organizations outside, whether governmental or non-
governmental, whose main task is the protection of the
civilian population.

The second point is the pivotal principle that
implementation of international humanitarian law
should not contradict the need to respect and carry out
the provisions of the Charter. We welcome and support
the Council's readiness to respond to cases where
civilians are targeted and where humanitarian
assistance is deliberately blocked. Yet this should be
Viewed only in line with Chapter VII of the Charter and
Article 39 thereof. In cases where the Council fails to
exercise its responsibilities for reasons that go beyond
the topic under discussion, we should always consider
the viability of benefiting from General Assembly
resolution 377 (V), on Uniting for Peace, in this
connection.

Last June, for the first time, the United Nations
witnessed the largest international gathering -
governmental and non-governmental - in five years. It
was designed to emphasize political commitment
towards enhancing the role of women and achieving
the goals of equality, development and peace for all
women of the world, through the General Assembly
special session held to follow up on the implementation
of the recommendations of the Fourth World
Conference on Women. We, the participants in the
special session, pledged to leave no stone unturned in
order to elevate the status of women and to preserve
their rights, stemming basically from human rights.

The international community has recognized the
need to take care of women and support gender
equality in order to achieve development, peace and
security. When we deny women the right to justice and
participation in all aspects of socio-economic, cultural
and political life, we are actually delaying desired
development and prosperity. We are also reducing
chances forjust peace throughout the world.

Egypt believes in the need for the Security
Council to perform its role in solving disputes and
conflicts that threaten international peace and security,
in a comprehensive and integrated manner, while
addressing their root causes, so that the worsening of
such conflicts would not lead to further hostilities
among the parties to the conflict or to horrendous
humanitarian conditions, such as the displacement or
eviction of populations or their fleeing to neighbouring
States. Hence the derogation of the sanctity of
civilians, particularly women and children, and the
entry into endless vicious cycles of Violence.

Violence against women constitutes a main
obstacle to achieving the goals of equality,
development and peace. Undoubtedly, the violations to
which women are subjected when caught in the heat of
armed conflict, such as murder, rape, slavery, forced
conception, torture and arbitrary detention are among
the most glaring manifestations of civilizational
backwardness and run counter to the simplest meaning
of humanity. Consequently, Egypt calls for the pursuit
of an effective policy to integrate the gender
perspective within public policies and private
programmes dealing with conflict and post-conflict
periods, in order to enhance women's status at all times
and under all conditions.

While recognizing the important role undertaken
by women in preventing and settling disputes and in
peace-building, we emphasize the need to adopt swiftly
specific, practical measures that would encourage
women's equal participation, as well as achieving equal
opportunity in terms of their contribution to all
activities relating to peace. This is particularly so in
cases of decision-making, mediation, diplomatic
negotiation and preventive negotiation.

The role of women is important in the course of
armed conflict and deterioration of societies through
their preservation of social order. Their role is equally
important in post-conflict periods, with their resolve
and efforts to foster stability, peace and development.
We cannot ignore the achievements made by women in
all walks of life. They have rightfully and deservedly
proven themselves to be an effective and productive
element, taking decisions in our societies.

Last but not least, I wish to touch upon the
deteriorating situation of Palestinian women under the
yoke of occupation. We give highest importance and
attention to this matter in my country. Women are
suffering from manifestations of violence, suppression,
despotism and injustice. They also feel bereaved on
account of the loss of their husbands, brothers,
children - wiped out, regrettably, by the bullets of the
Israeli forces, putting aside any political, international
or even ethical obligations on this score.

While we are discussing today the means for
protecting women in armed conflict, as well as
enhancing their role and participation in post-conflict
time, we cannot ignore the appeals for dignity and
succour launched by Palestinian women who live under
the most severe inhuman conditions, conditions
troubling to the world's conscience. Hence our
delegation calls upon the Security Council to discuss
the conditions of women under occupation, by
identifying the Israeli agents who Violate the simplest
rules of international law and human rights and the
protection of humankind, with a view to trying them
for acts of blatant injustice and unjustified Violence
they have perpetrated against the Palestinian people.
This will prove the Council's seriousness and will
foster its credibility when it tackles humanitarian
matters that may threaten international peace and
security. There should be no double standards in
dealing with such matters in the future.

