Mr. Quinlan (Australia): We very much welcome
and, indeed, need this open debate on sexual violence
on conflict.

I express my thanks to the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2013/149) and his personal leadership, and
to Special Representative Bangura for her forthright
commitment and achievements, the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security for its impressive
work and to Ms. Saran Keita Diakite for her own
exemplary efforts.

In so much of the Council's work, including in
Mali, the Central African Republic, the Democratic
Republic of Congo and Syria, we have heard repeatedly
over the past few weeks about the widespread use of
sexual violence in conflict. It is a brutal, unacceptable
but pervasive dimension of conflict today. We
must constantly think about how we can prevent it
from occurring, and, when it does, we must ensure
that survivors are supported and perpetrators held
relentlessly to account.

The Secretary-General's report is stark. It
highlights too much of concern: sexual slavery, forced
marriage by armed groups, increasing abuse of boys
and men, the plight of children born of rape, the nexus
between sexual violence and the illicit extraction of
natural resources, and, as we have seen in Syria, the
threat and use of sexual violence to forcibly displace
entire communities. That must catalyze even stronger
action by us.

Ending impunity is critical to driving change. As
a deterrent, it is a critical part of a prevention strategy.
We must make the best use of the tools at the Council's
disposal to target perpetrators of sexual violence in
conflict, whether individuals, armed groups or States,
and whether they commit, command or condone
violations. Under many Sanctions Committees,
persistent perpetrators fit within existing listing
criteria, and we support the more rigorous application
of those. We also support the inclusion of such criteria
where the situation demands it.

At the national and international levels, criminal
justice mechanisms must develop dedicated sexual
Violence expertise to ensure that crimes are effectively
prosecuted, survivors get the support they need, and
perpetrators are convicted. In that context, we would
like to single out and welcome the United Kingdom's
Preventing Sexual Violence in Conflict Initiative, its
efforts through the Group of Eight and the exemplary
focus and resourcing that the United Kingdom itself has
brought to the investigation and prosecution of sexual
violence.

We also agree with the Secretary-General's
recommendation that sexual violence should be
included in the definition of acts prohibited under
ceasefires agreements, and support the introduction of
a systematic procedure to monitor parties' compliance
with their commitments.

Security sector reform, and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes, are
essential to rebuilding communities. Measures against
sexual violence must be integral to them. Too often,
perpetrators of sexual violence are themselves allowed
to assume positions of power in post-conflict settings.
We must strengthen efforts to ensure appropriate levels
of preventive vetting.

We strongly support the systematic deployment
of gender expertise in all Council-mandated missions,
including women protection advisers, whose
deployment must be prioritised in mission planning
processes. We also support the deployment of the
United Nations Team of Experts on the Rule of Law
and Sexual Violence in Conflict.

Supporting women's leadership and participation
is essential to addressing, responding to, and indeed
ending sexual violence. Women are powerful agents of
change, and we must harness that capacity by promoting
their far greater participation in conflict resolution and
post-conflict transitions.

Ms. Ke'ita Diakite reminded us this morning of
the nexus between arms and conflict-related sexual
violence. In that connection we welcome the adoption
of the Arms Trade Treaty, including the requirement
that States parties consider, in making their export
assessments, the risks of arms being used to commit
or facilitate serious acts of gender-based violence. We
must now focus on the Treaty's entry into force and its
effective implementation.

It is essential that survivors' needs be addressed,
including through access to multisectoral services.
Often, the vast majority of survivors are children, and
services must be very specifically tailored to their
needs. We must take specific steps to also address
the risks faced by women's human rights defenders
operating on the front lines, so as to ensure that they
are able to carry out their work and do not themselves
become victims of sexual Violence.

Action to address sexual violence in conflict
cannot occur without adequate and predictable
resourcing. Priority should be given to ensuring that
key actors, including national institutions, United
Nations agencies and civil society groups, have the
resources and capacity needed to tackle such issues,
ranging from prevention and service provision for
survivors to longer-term measures to end impunity. My
own Government announced last year an additional
$320 million for activities in our own immediate region
to focus on those kinds of needs.

In conclusion, sexual violence touches upon the full
breadth of the Council's work. While success is very
obviously difficult to achieve, it requires of us vigilant
and consistent commitment if we are ever to end this
devastating, immoral and criminal practice.

