Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): My delegation appreciates
the briefing by Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed as well as the briefing by the Permanent
Observer of the African Union. We also look forward to
the input by the representative of Nigeria.

We welcome both the conduct of thematic regional
visits and the initiative of informing the Council
on their outcomes. Such visits and the subsequent
briefings provide us with additional insights and a
better understanding of situations on the ground, thus
better equipping the Council to properly evaluate the
problems and challenges in respective countries.

It is praiseworthy that the visit was conducted to
raise the profile of gender-related issues in Nigeria
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The role of
women in bringing about positive change after conflict
can hardly be overestimated. Women are a driving force
behind peacebuilding efforts in their communities.
The direction of social and economic development
depends on the active participation of women in public
life and entrepreneurial activities at both the local and
national levels.

The ultimate success or failure ofpeace agreements
and the effectiveness of peacebuilding efforts can quite
often be linked to the level of engagement of women in
these processes. Having a seat at the negotiating table,
shaping an agenda to ensure the inclusion of gender-
related issues and playing a role in the implementation
of negotiated arrangements - all this is a sine qua
non if sustainable peace is to be built in conflict-
affected areas. It is therefore highly commendable that
in its meetings with high-level officials from Nigeria
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the joint
delegation of the United Nations and the African Union
stressed the importance of women's participation in
peace and security processes, as well as in elections
and other political activities. Concrete and tangible
follow-up is needed in order to promote women's rights.

In many places in Africa, conflicts and crises are
accompanied by a devastating surge in violence directed
at women and girls. The persistent use of sexual violence
as a weapon of war in African conflicts has left lasting
scars on communities and societies. In that regard,
one of the stated objectives of the visit - to make
the consequences of conflict-related sexual violence
against women and girls more visible - is extremely
timely. The meetings and conversations with the Chibok
girls in Nigeria and displaced residents in North Kivu
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo must have
been very difficult, given the suffering that many of
them have endured.

Discussing sexual violence, sexual slavery, forced
marriage and physical and psychological abuse can be
devastating. But such conversations are essential if we
want to understand how we can support survivors of
conflict-related sexual violence. There can be no hiding
from the fact that these survivors are revictimized
through public shaming and stigmatization way too
often. Much more must be done if they are to achieve
proper socioeconomic reintegration. Another equally
important aspect is ensuring accountability for
committing crimes of sexual violence, not only to meet
demands for justice, but to help societies break cycles
of conflict. The perpetrators of sexual violence must be
brought to account without regard for their affiliation
and rank.

The pervasive nature of this horrible scourge makes
it imperative for us, the international community,
to double down on our efforts to end it. Designing
prevention policies, ensuring accountability for the
perpetrators and providing adequate support and
rehabilitation for their victims should be part and parcel
of any conflict resolution endeavour.

