Mr. McLay (New Zealand): I thank the Secretary-
General and Special Representative Bangura for their
statements. I will deliver an abridged version of my
statement in the interests of time; the full text will be
distributed in the Chamber.

New Zealand congratulates Rwanda, in particular
its Minister for Foreign Affairs, who was with us
today, for taking the lead on this very important
issue in the Council. Rwanda is following in a proud
tradition of several African countries that, during
their presidencies, have been willing to stand up in
the Council and highlight those problems, even though
there are some, as we know, who would prefer that the
Council spent its time on other matters.

It is important that, yet again, Rwanda is
demonstrating African leadership on an African
problem. We also join Portugal in the message that it
sent to the victims of sexual violence. We think that
that should be a message sent by the whole of the
international community.

The issue of sexual violence in conflict is a global
problem, and in recent years its gravity has been
demonstrated, in many cases, in Africa, most recently
in places not far from Rwanda. Sexual violence in
conflict is as complex as it is horrifying. Its occurrence
does not necessarily correspond with the intensity of
the related armed violence: in low-intensity conflicts
and post-conflict situations, women and children can
be at as great a risk of sexual violence as during the
height of hostilities. That complexity requires that the
Council carefully craft its responses in addressing and
focusing on sexual violence in conflict.

In that connection, we are all the more pleased
to note from the assessment in the Security Council
Report cross-cutting report entitled Women, Peace
and Security." Violence in Conflict and Sanctions that,
despite ongoing controversy at the thematic level, the
Council has, in country-specific situations, continued
to apply the substance of the principles that it had
previously developed on women and peace and security.
That is good news.

Even better news is the assessment that there seems
to be an emerging trend, when new problems emerge, as
recently they did in Mali and in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, to have explicit women peace and security
language incorporated into mandates at the outset of
a mission. We urge that that trend continue. Looking
ahead, there is still great scope for improvement in the
Council's work in particular cases, as is well illustrated
by the experience in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, where many women and children have suffered
serious sexual violence.

Sanctions can, in appropriate cases, play an
important role in combating sexual violence. The recent
actions of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004), concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, with regard to
listing entities responsible for sexual violence and
explicitly linking the listing to sexual violence, is an
important signal that carefully crafted and targeted
sanctions will be used to combat the most serious and
systematic incidents of sexual violence in conflict. The
Forces democratiques de liberation du Rwanda and the
Mouvement du 23 mars have now been listed by the
Committee, and that sends a very important signal.
However, the Council should ensure that the criteria for
listing are regularly updated and harmonized across the
various regimes.

The Council should move to implement the
Secretary-General's recommendation that similar
powers be given to the Committees responsible for
Somalia, the Sudan, Cote d'Ivoire and Al-Qaida in
Islamic Maghreb. It would be a useful step to add
Guinea-Bissau to that list as well.

The deployment of peacekeepers with an explicit
mandate to protect civilians from sexual violence has
been a very important step. But the challenge is to
ensure that such deployment delivers results effectively
in the field. Peacekeepers must be supported with
appropriate training and resources to enable them to
fulfil their protection mandate. We note, for example,
that the Intervention Brigade in the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) is specifically
mandated, in resolution 2098 (2013), to contribute to
civilian security, which necessarily includes protection
from sexual violence.

We ask that MONUSCO's intervention operations
be carefully monitored by the Council. Combat
operations are inherently risky for civilian populations,
no matter how principled the motivation, whether Blue
Helmet or not. We must remember the recent reports
in the Kivus about retreating troops committing
extensive acts of rape and sexual violence. It is clear
that, all too often in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, instability resulting from the use of force has
helped create a climate that leads to sexual violence.
Too often in the past, the Security Council has been
caught off balance by outrages against civilians. The
experience in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
shows that the Council should, and can, find better
ways to maintain appropriate engagement so as to
enable the proper management of those risks. The
host country, regional actors, regional and subregional
organizations and troop-contributing countries must all
be involved to ensure the best outcome in protecting
civilian populations and reducing the incidence of
sexual violence.

Just as many Member States have assiduously
addressed sexual violence in their domestic
environments, so, too, must the international community
be equally resolved to make good on its commitment to
protect populations from that all-too-prevalent scourge.
It can do that through the actions and decisions - and
with the support - of the Council.

