Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the outset, we thank the Secretary-General
and the briefers who have been invited to the Council for
their statements and useful information on combating
sexual violence in armed conflict.

The Security Council, over the past five years,
has repeatedly considered the topic of sexual Violence
in armed conflict. The Russian stance was fully laid
out during a similar Security Council open debate in
April this year (see S/PV6948), under the Rwandan
presidency. For that reason, today we would like to
simply touch on some key points.

The diverse nature of violence in armed conflict
requires us to pay particular attention to all of its
manifestations. We should base our consideration of the
issue of women, peace and security on a comprehensive
approach, as stipulated in resolution 1325 (2000).
Sexual violence is one such manifestation of cause,
warranting firm condemnation and harsh punishment.
Painstaking investigations of all cases and punishment
for the perpetrators are the keys to success in combating
that heinous practice.

We believe that attempts to expand the
interpretation of the relevant scope pertaining to armed
conflict and post-conflict situations that has been
agreed in intergovernmental processes and laid down in
resolutions of the Security Council are unjustified. We
consider that such an approach could have a negative
impact not only on the work of the Security Council
and the United Nations as a whole, but also and more
practically on the effectiveness of combating sexual
violence.

It is important for all structures involved in the
matter to avoid excessive bureaucracy, which replaces
the real fight against sexual violence in armed
conflict. We consider that it is not possible to combat
sexual violence in armed conflict without the active
involvement of national authorities in the process.
The work of the representatives of the United Nations
system on the ground and cooperation between United
Nations missions and country teams and non-State
armed groups should be carried out with the consent
of and in close cooperation with the Governments of
the affected States. They should also be consulted on
providing assistance or services.

It is important that the primary responsibility
in protecting civilians in their territory be borne
by Governments. Respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Member States is a fundamental
and indivisible principle of the United Nations work.
These principles will be vigorously upheld when they
can foster the development of effective international
cooperation in combating sexual violence.

