Mr. Bennouna (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
am pleased to congratulate you, Sir, on your successful
presidency of the Security Council at a very difficult
time. But it is by facing challenges that personalities
become known, and your personal reputation has
preceded you in this forum, as you have presided over
other bodies with success. I should also like to thank
the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, for the
excellent report (S/2002/1154) he submitted this year.

We have before us the subject of women, peace
and security, a critical topic. It is heartening to note
that the Security Council attaches the requisite
importance to it and that the Council is also according
increasing importance to the humanitarian dimension
of conflicts, particularly to the protection of the most
vulnerable persons: women, children and the elderly.
That importance is fully justified, given the fact that
they are also the innocent victims of and unwilling
participants in conflicts throughout the world,
particularly in Africa.
Speaking before the Council, I cannot fail to
mention the particularly tragic situation of Palestinian
women, who face daily insecurity and a lack of means
of subsistence imposed by the Israeli occupation.

Two years ago in this forum, the international
community considered in depth the problems that
women face during armed conflicts and the necessary
measures to address them. We also debated the duty of
the international community to integrate women into
all efforts to promote and maintain international peace
and security. That debate culminated, as the Council
will recall, in the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000)
within the framework of the Security Council's
mandate of maintaining international peace and
security, including prevention, the settlement of armed
conflicts and the protection of civilians. Likewise, the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) reaffirmed the
Council's firm determination to give due consideration
to the humanitarian aspects of each dispute and to
commit all the parties to a conflict to respect the
provisions of international law, most particularly those
concerning women and children.

Unfortunately, we must note that, despite all the
efforts that I have just cited, women and girls are the
principal victims of armed conflicts, where they are
faced - we hear this every day - with all forms of
violence, particularly sexual violence and exploitation.
In addition, women and girls are forced to participate
in hostilities or to serve in camps where they are the
victims of various cruelties. Sometimes, when they are
subject to refugee status - and a very important code
of conduct must be formulated on that subject -
women are separated from their daughters, who
undergo forced indoctrination. They ultimately serve as
cheap labour, far from their families and from their
homes. Moreover, the deaths and the disappearances
caused by armed conflicts give extra responsibilities to
women, so they are easily recruited into illegal
activities such as drug trafficking and prostitution for
criminal networks.

In that respect, training personnel for
peacekeeping operations is crucial in order to sensitize
them to the vulnerable situation of women and girls in
situations of armed conflict, in addition to a plan for
gender parity in all activities of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations. The proposal to create the
position of gender parity adviser within the Department
is truly welcome, and Morocco supports it.

In order to strengthen respect for the rights of
women and girls in conflicts, it is important that
peacekeeping operations integrate women into all
activities so that they can make an equal contribution
to the reconstruction of affected countries. Maintaining
a lasting peace after hostilities is possible only if
women participate fully in all negotiations and in the
resulting structures. Nevertheless, the full integration
of women into development requires as a precondition
the strengthening of the rule of law, respect for human
rights and the establishment of democratic institutions
whereby women can express their concerns and their
ambitions and can participate in decision-making.

Mindful of women's valuable contribution to the
development process and to the consolidation of
democracy, my country took the initiative to allot a
quota to female candidates for the legislative elections
held in September, which enabled us to elect 35
women - we began with two women and ended with
35, which is quite remarkable progress - of various
political viewpoints in our Parliament.

We believe that every post-conflict reconstruction
effort essentially requires the consideration of gender-
specific aspects in all programmes and activities
undertaken, particularly in social, educational,
economic and budgetary policy, and also the
strengthening of women's presence in all spheres of the
State and at all decision-making levels, which would
necessarily balance society.

The international community has at its disposal
an impressive legal arsenal - it is not that there are
too few laws, but sometimes that there are too many
laws - designed to protect the rights of women, to
promote gender equality and to help us combat all
forms of discrimination. But those laws must be
implemented. The General Assembly, by virtue of its
universal composition, has an essential role to play in
reminding the world of all of those legal advances,
which are also achievements of civilization.

The Kingdom of Morocco unequivocally
condemns all attacks on the fundamental rights of
women and girls, particularly in wartime, and we call
on all parties to conflicts to respect the relevant
provisions of international humanitarian law. Any
violation of those fundamental rights must be
continuously denounced and opposed with the greatest
vigour. We are speaking of binding rules of law that
cannot be waived by referring to specific agreements or
by any kind of legal hair-splitting.

Those who exploit women and children in
competitions for power and who sometimes use them
as hostages by objectifying them for political ends will
have to account for their crimes before the international
community. Today, we are witnessing the globalization
of certain networks that are prone to violence and
sometimes to terrorism, and it is only through the rule
of law, within the framework of the United Nations,
that we will be able to face them, in respect for the
values set out in the preamble of the Charter of San
Francisco.

