Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Madam President, China welcomes the fact that
you have travelled to New York to preside over our
meeting. China thanks Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed and Ms. Bineta Diop, African
Union Special Envoy on Women, Peace and Security,
for their briefings.

China welcomes the joint visit by the United
Nations, the African Union and the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Sweden, Ms. Margot Wallstrom, to
the two countries in the Sahel region, namely, Chad and
the Niger. The Sahel region faces multiple challenges
in the political, security, development and other
fields. The continued spread of terrorism, the growing
severity of cross-border organized crime, poverty and
underdevelopment, as well as the grave humanitarian
situation, have had a negative impact on the peace and
security of the region.

Deputy Secretary-General Mohammed has taken
charge of activities related to the Integrated Strategy
for the Sahel and has led a mission to the relevant
countries of the region. This has demonstrated the
United Nations emphasis on and commitment to peace
and development in the region.

I would like to make the following points on peace
and security in the Sahel region.

First, it is important to resolve hotspot regional issues
through political means. The international community
should, on the basis of respecting the sovereignty of the
countries concerned, actively support the peace and
reconciliation process of the countries of the region so
as to alleviate and ultimately settle hotspot issues. China
supports the relevant parties in Mali in accelerating the
implementation of the Mali Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement and in the smooth holding of general
elections. We should help the countries concerned with
their domestic reconciliation on an as-needed basis and
help the women of the region expand their participation
in political processes and peacebuilding. The relevant
political solutions should draw upon the opinions
of women and the general public, while taking into
account their interests and concerns. At the same time,
attention should be given to the spillover effect of such
external issues as the Libya crisis and to preventing
outside factors from affecting the region.

Secondly, regional counter-terrorism cooperation
should be strengthened. Terrorist attacks on civilians,
armed forces and United Nations peacekeeping
operations have occurred frequently in the Sahel region,
resulting in significant casualties. The international
community should support countries of the region in
independently dealing with the threat of terrorism and
help them strengthen security capacity-building and
counter-terror cooperation. The United Nations and the
international community, on the basis of respecting the
sovereignty and will of the countries concerned, should
provide targeted technology, training, equipment,
logistics and financial support to countries ofthe region.

Thirdly, the relevant agencies of the United Nations
system should actively implement the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and generate synergies.
The Strategy has been in place for five years. The United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel, together
with its Special Representative, Mr. Mohammed Ibn
Chambas, has done a great deal of work to implement
the Strategy. China welcomes the launch of the United
Nations Support Plan for implementing the strategy
and hopes that the United Nations will be able to
better coordinate with the countries of the Sahel region
concerned whenimplementing plans and provide
targeted assistance to these countries.

Fourthly, it is important to cooperate with regional
and subregional mechanisms. China appreciates the
positive role of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), the African Union, the Economic Community of
West African States and relevant African countries and
organizations in settling Sahel issues. The international
community should strengthen communication and
coordination with relevant regional countries and
mechanisms so that country-specific and regional
strategies and the Integrated Strategy of the Sahel can
be organically aligned.

The G-5 Sahel Joint Force is an important initiative

undertaken by the countries of the region in responding
to security challenges. Resolutions 2359 (2017) and
2391 (2017), adopted unanimously by the Council,
welcomed the deployment of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force
and mandated that the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
to provide support to the Joint Force. The international
community should fully respect the leadership of Africa
and allow it to independently solve African issues. We
should support regional countries and organizations
in their efforts to safeguard the peace and security of
the Sahel region, and in particular provide substantive
assistance to the G-5 Sahel Joint Force so as to meet its
funding needs.

Fifthly, assistance should be provided to regional
countries in their implementation of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, and positive conditions
should be created to achieve peace and stability in the
region. There will be no sustainable peace without
sustainable development. Regional countries should
therefore be given sufficient capacity to reduce poverty
for their people, increase employment, better protect
women and children, combat human trafficking and
other cross-border organized crimes, boost the level of
economic and social development and address the root
causes of conflict.

China supports the efforts of African countries and
regional and subregional organizations in maintaining
peace and security in Africa. We have been supporting
counter-terrorism projects through the China-United
Nations Peace and Development Fund and have been
helping African countries build their capacity to
maintain peace. China is also an important troop-
contributor to MINUSMA. China is willing to continue
working with Council members and the international
community and contribute to achieving peace and
stability and common development in the Sahel region.

Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia) I would like to start by
joining others in commending Sweden for organizing
today's briefing. We also appreciate Sweden's
leadership on the women and peace and security agenda
in its capacity as Chair of the Council's informal expert
group, and we are very pleased to see you, Madam
Minister, presiding over this important meeting. I want
to thank Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed
and the African Union Special Envoy on Women, Peace
and Security, Ms. Bineta Diop, for their briefings on the
joint African Union-United Nations high-level mission
to South Sudan, Chad and the Niger.

Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000,) on
women and peace and security, positive developments
have been noted over the years in advancing this
very major and meaningful agenda, particularly in
ensuring the participation and representation of women
in political processes. That is particularly true in the
context of Africa, where a number of countries on the
continent have taken concrete steps to develop their
own national action plans. In spite of all that, however,
women and girls continue to bear the brunt of the
devastating and dehumanizing impact of conflicts in
Africa and the situation in the Sahel region, particularly
in the three countries recently visited by the high-level
mission, which share more or less similar experiences.

Women continue to be victims of sexual violence
and other forms of abuse and are underrepresented in
peace processes. As indicated in the concept note for
today's briefing, the peace and security situation in the
Sahel region continues to be exacerbated by climate
change, induced conflicts and displacements. It is in that
context that we commend the very welcome leadership
by the Deputy Secretary-General in efforts aimed at
finding a comprehensive solution to these issues.

As a follow-up to the recentjoint high-level mission
to the three countries, addressing the root causes of
conflict in the Sahel region should continue to be of
the utmost importance in addressing the challenges
of protecting women. As such, fighting terrorism and
violent extremism and comprehensively addressing the
impacts of climate change in coordination with relevant
actors are both critical. Such focus would enable us to
chart a path to a strengthened framework for protecting
women in conflict situations and to the enhanced and
effective participation of women in conflict prevention,
mediation and post-conflict reconstruction at all levels.
In that regard, we welcome the new United Nations
Support Plan for the Sahel announced in Nouakchott,
which we hope will contribute to the realization
of this objective. The momentum generated by the
Nouakchott process, the creation and authorization
of the deployment of the Group of Five for the Sahel
Joint Force and the United Nations Integrated Strategy
for the Sahel should certainly be sustained to achieve
tangible progress, including in improving the lives of
the most vulnerable sectors of society, particularly
women and children.

Cooperation between the African Union and the
United Nations, as demonstrated by the joint mission,
would enable us to integrate a regional approach to the
broader discussion on women and peace and security,
which also provides a very good basis for cooperation
between the two organizations in facilitating greater
implementation and enhanced progress on the agenda
in Africa. Such collaboration could focus, inter alia,
on ensuring the active participation of women and
women's groups in peace processes, conflict prevention,
resolution and peacebuilding activities, as well as in the
promotion and protection of the human rights of women
in conflict and post-conflict situations.

The possibility of undertaking similar joint
missions to other parts of Africa affected by conflict
and which are on the Council's agenda could be further
explored. Mechanisms to utilize the good offices of the
Special Envoy of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission on the Women, Peace and Security could
also be explored with the aim of advancing the agenda
at the African level.

The African Union Peace and Security Council
recently decided to adopt a Continental Results
Framework for Monitoring and Reporting on the
implementation of the Women, Peace and Security
Agenda in Africa. We believe that that Continental
Results Framework could be one of the areas for
further cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union aimed at further advancing the women
and peace and security agenda in Africa.

Let me conclude by emphasizing the needto continue
building partnerships with various stakeholders,
including regional and subregional organizations,
concerned States, developmental agencies, civil society
organizations, women experts and groups and peace
and security partners within the women and peace and
security agenda. Ethiopia remains firmly committed to
supporting such efforts and to working with all of those
present in advancing the cause of women.

