Mrs. Nguyen (Viet Nam): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the 10 States members of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), namely, Brunei
Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao People's
Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar, the
Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Viet Nam.
ASEAN commends the Spanish presidency of the
Council for convening this high-level review of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on women
and peace and security. We thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2015/716) and the Executive Director
of UN-Women for her insightful briefing. This high-
level review provides us with an opportunity to look
back at the past 15 years, and more importantly, to map
out how the important agenda of women and peace and
security can be brought forward in a more forceful and
effective manner.

Although much progress has been made in key
aspects of the implementation of landmark resolution
1325 (2000) and subsequent relevant resolutions, gaps
in their implementation still need to be addressed, even
as we tackle new challenges. Indeed, today's security
environment differs dramatically from that of 15 years
ago. ASEAN is deeply concerned by the unprecedented
threats posed by the wars and conflicts ravaging many
States and regions, the rise of violent extremism and the
increasing number of refugees and internally displaced
persons. We are particularly alarmed by the horrendous
phenomenon of widespread sexual violence committed
against women and girls.

Those challenges, new and old, necessitate a
stronger commitment and more determined and
coordinated actions from the international community.
ASEAN believes that the women and peace and security
agenda must be placed within the broader framework of
conflict prevention and resolution. As highlighted in the
global study, as well as in the review of United Nations
peace operations, prevention is key in all contexts. The
Charter of the United Nations and international law
provide a crucial framework for conflict prevention and
resolution. Respect for the purposes and principles of
the Charter, as well as for the fundamental principles
of international law, is critical. In that context, special
emphasis must be placed on respect for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of
States, on refraining from the threat of or use of force
and on the settlement of disputes by peaceful means.

Women have an important role to play in that
regard and must be empowered to play an active role in
conflict resolution and peace processes. As reaffirmed
in the global study, the meaningful participation of
women, particularly in decision-making, will enable
early conflict prevention, sustainable peace and strong
post-conflict recovery and resilience. It is essential
to mainstream gender-sensitive approaches in efforts
to promote more inclusive and effective responses to
conflicts and emergencies.

ASEAN is gravely troubled by the violation of
the rights of women and girls in conflicts and when
they fall victim to extremist non-State actors. We
particularly deplore sexual violence against women and
girls, especially when it is deployed as a tactic of war.
Women and girls in conflicts are also being deprived
of their most basic needs, including shelter, food, water
and health care. We call on the United Nations and the
international community to take immediate action to
end all acts of conflict-related sexual violence and to
provide protection and support to women and girls in
conflicts.

Most importantly, we believe that it is vital to
address the root causes that give rise to violence and
conflict, such as poverty, inequality and injustice.
Women have an indispensable role to play in building
inclusive and peaceful societies. ASEAN therefore
calls for the full and effective implementation of the
inspiring, universal and transformative 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1), recognizing its strong interlinkages
with the women and peace and security agenda.

Regional organizations play an essential role in
implementing global obligations and commitments to
better protect women and girls from sexual Violence,
discrimination and social exclusion and to promote the
role ofwomen in conflict resolution and peace processes,
including by supporting their member States in their
efforts to do so. The ASEAN Institute for Peace and
Reconciliation held a workshop in March in Cebu City,
the Philippines, to strengthen women's participation in
peace processes and conflict resolution. The workshop
aimed at highlighting the level of women's participation
in peace processes and conflict resolution in the region
and at raising awareness of resolution 1325 (2000) and
existing national action plans on women and peace and
security.

As we move towards an ASEAN Community,
ASEAN members are determined to strengthen the
work of the ASEAN Intergovernmental Commission
on Human Rights, the ASEAN Commission on the
Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Women
and Children and the ASEAN Institute for Peace
and Reconciliation. We believe that the best way to
implement the women and peace and security agenda
is to protect and promote women's rights, empower
women and increase their involvement in all economic
development and political processes, particularly in
decision-making positions. ASEAN is also working
hard with partners to ensure that the South-East
Asia region remains one of peace, security, stability
and prosperity. ASEAN stands ready and is strongly
committed to joining efforts with other Member States,
the United Nations and other regional organizations to
safeguard the rights of women and girls and empower
women in conflict prevention and resolution.

Before I conclude, I would like to emphasize, in my
national capacity, that Viet Nam remains committed to
addressing the issue of women and peace and security.
We are pleased to have been able to introduce and
facilitate the adoption of resolution 1889 (2009) under
that agenda item. While the protection of and support
for women as Victims are essential, Viet Nam strongly
believes in the value that women can bring and the
contributions they can make to conflict prevention
and resolution and to post-conflict peacebuilding and
reconstruction.

