Ms. Bird (Australia): Australia welcomes the
Secretary-General's report on women and peace and
security (S/2015/716) and yesterday's unanimous
adoption of resolution 2242 (2015), which we were very
proud to co-sponsor. We were pleased to participate in
today's launch of the ground-breaking global study.

While there have been advances since resolution
1325 (2000) was adopted, there are areas where the
international community is still failing. Women and
children continue to suffer disproportionately in
conflict and post-conflict countries. Maternal mortality
rates are twice as high; education parity has not been
achieved; there are record numbers of people forcibly
displaced; and rates of violence, including sexual
violence, against women are escalating.

Australia is pleased to make a number of pledges
today to help address this dire situation.

First, Australia is committing an additional
4 million Australian dollars over three years to the
Global Acceleration Instrument on Women, Peace and
Security and Humanitarian Action, bringing our total
contribution to 5.5 million Australian dollars. This is
in recognition of the fact that more is needed to support
the critical role of women's organizations in preventing
and resolving conflict, building peace and ensuring
relief and recovery.

Secondly, the women and peace and security agenda
must be implemented across the military. Accordingly,
the Australian Defence Force is deploying more women
and increasing their number in senior decision-making
roles; has introduced recruitment targets for women in
non-traditional roles; and is developing a gender adviser
and female engagement team capability. The Australian
Defence Force will also provide a technical expert for
women and peace and security to UN-Women for five
years from 2016.

Our third pledge recognizes that women, girls and
women's organizations are Vital to promoting gender
equality in countering terrorism and violent extremism.
We will therefore support new research to be conducted
by Monash University in Melbourne on preventing
conflict and countering fundamentalism through
women's empowerment and civil-society mobilization.

Australia will also support women's organizations
in their participation in the regional network of civil-
society groups being established as an outcome of
the June 2015 Regional Summit to Counter Violent
Extremism, held in Sydney.

Fourthly, Australia understands that humanitarian
efforts need to do more to prevent and support survivors
of sexual and gender-based violence. That is why
Australia has dedicated specific funding to address
sexual and gender- based violence in response to the

Syria crisis: 7 million Australian dollars, as part of our
overall commitment of 59 million Australian dollars in
the last 12 months.

Finally, Australia is reviewing its national action
plan on women and peace and security, and we will
use the global study to inform future actions under our
plan.

We call on the United Nations system as a whole
to respond to the global study's recommendations.
Women and peace and security must be considered
and implemented as part of the Secretary-General's
review of peace operations and the review of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture in addition to this
high-level review.

Global leaders have now agreed to the historic
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1), recognize the links between
development, human rights and peace and security, and
are placing gender equality at the heart ofthese efforts.
We must, as a global community, do more to deliver on
these promises for women around the world.

