Ms. Bird (Australia): let me begin by joining
others in expressing Australia's deep shock and sadness
at the horrific terrorist attacks in Sri Lanka. we extend
our deepest condolences and stand with Sri Lanka as
it continues to come to terms with that senseless and
barbaric attack.

Turing to today's agenda, in order to eradicate
sexual violence in conflict, we need to address all four
pillars of the women and peace and security agenda, not
just protection. It is not simply an issue of protection
but of prevention and accountability.

Protection starts with prevention. Sexual violence
in conflict is part of a continuum of violence,
primarily against women and girls, which is rooted
in gender inequality. Research clearly shows that
gender inequality, including violence against women
in peacetime, is a direct cause of sexual violence in
conflict. Indeed, gender inequality is the strongest
indicator of a country's risk of conflict.

While this debate naturally focuses on violence
during conflict, we must not forget that the fundamental
route to prevention relies in addressing the fundamental
cause: gender inequality in all its forms. Sexual violence
is not an inevitable occurrence in the ordinary course
of conflict. It is not something we should ever accept.
Australia is outraged by the persistent and widespread
occurrence of sexual Violence in armed conflict. A
climate of impunity discourages reporting, undermines
assistance and abets further violations.

We acknowledge the central importance of sexual
and reproductive health and rights for all people in
conflict situations, but particularly survivors of rape
and sexual violence. Access to the full range of quality
reproductive and sexual health care, services and
information is critical to the recovery of survivors and
the restoration of their dignity and bodily autonomy.
Sexual and reproductive health and rights are vital
human rights. Respecting and upholding those rights,
particularly the right to services and information, can
be the difference between life and death.

In addressing sexual Violence in conflict, we need
to identify solutions and approaches that are context-
specific, inclusive and informed by experience,
especially that of survivors. Our actions must be
survivor-centred and recognize diversity of experience
and need. For example, children born of rape and their
mothers have particular needs and we must not forget
that male survivors, including boys, have their own
barriers to accessing services.

We emphasize the importance of ensuring that our
military, police and service providers develop positive
internal cultures that are gender-sensitive and do not
tolerate violence. Further, we encourage the use of
gender advisers in peacekeeping, the military and the
police and note that the representation of women is not
the same as gender expertise.

Finally, diverse women must be involved in all
aspects of our efforts to end sexual violence and in the
design and implementation of services to survivors of
sexual violence in conflict. Australia commends the
extraordinary work of survivor-advocates, civil society
organizations and human rights defenders. We call on
Member States to listen to their voices and to support
their work.

