Mrs. Bogyay (Hungary): Hungary aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the observer of the
European Union.

I wish to thank Bolivia for providing us the
opportunity to reflect on this very, very important topic.
Hungary has been working proudly and happily with
UN-Women, and I would like to thank in particular its
Executive Director, Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, for her
briefing this morning.

I am dedicating my speech today to the United
Nations Goodwill Ambassador Ms. Nadia Murad,
whom we in the United Nations know so well. She
is this year's Nobel Peace Prize laureate. I wish to
congratulate her for her commitment, courage and
perseverance in her tireless efforts to end conflict-
related sexual violence. Nadia is a shining example of
how women can become powerful agents for peace,
inspiring us all, and of how a woman can work towards
conflict prevention and the protection and participation
of women and girls in the context of conflict resolution,
recovery and peacebuilding.

Hungary is a committed member of the Women,
Peace and Security Focal Points Network and the Group
of Friends of Women, Peace and Security. We reaffirm
the importance of the protection and promotion of
gender equality and the human rights and empowerment
of all women and girls, and we strongly support
their full inclusion and their active, meaningful and
institutionalized participation at all stages and levels
of peace processes, in the implementation of peace
agreements and in wider decision-making structures.

The United Nations should be leading by example,
and here we commend the Secretary-General for
achieving gender parity in senior positions at the
United Nations.

Mainstreaming a gender perspective and protecting
the rights of women and girls in peace and security
initiatives, including the fight against terrorism and
violent extremism, is also a key aspect of the women
and peace and security agenda. Empowering women
and girls who are survivors of conflict and violence
is vital. We believe in holistic, survivor-focused
and community-led initiatives, including youth-led
processes, because they are the main contributors
to enhancing access to justice, reconciliation and
lasting peace. We support the peace initiatives of local
women and hope to see the important role of civil
society and women-led organizations in sustainable
peace recognized.

Moreover, women's increased participation in
peacekeeping missions and gender-sensitive strategies
for the protection of civilians and humanitarian
assistance are key in providing the best assistance
possible for women and girls affected by conflict.
Hungary is seeking to continually increase the number
of deployed female military experts and police officers
in United Nations peacekeeping missions.

The protection of the rights of women and girls and
their economic empowerment is a powerful means for
the prevention of, and their protection in, conflict and a

prerequisite for their participation in all aspects of life.
We should therefore step up our action to, inter alia,
ensure women and girls' right to safe, high-quality and
affordable education, adequate and affordable health
care, equal recognition before the law, and to eliminate
violence and harmful practices against women. Hungary
provided a financial contribution to the United Nations
Trust Fund to End Violence against Women and girls to
achieve those aims.

The elements of the women and peace and security
agenda are interrelated and interconnected. Therefore,
to promote its effective implementation, we must
ensure a holistic approach at the local, regional and
global levels, using all tools available within the United
Nations system, in close and comprehensive cooperation
among all relevant actors and Governments.

History has shown that women's participation is
crucial to achieving sustainable peace, and we reaffirm
our commitment and call for reinforced cooperation in
this regard.

