Ms. Zahir (Maldives): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Uruguayan presidency for convening this
important and timely open debate. I would also like to
express our appreciation to Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed and the briefers for their updates
and dedicated efforts on this issue. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his annual report
(S/2017/249) on this topic, issued last month, which
makes clear both the scale and the significance of the
challenges we must now consider.

As so vividly described in the Secretary-General's
report and by those who have addressed the Security
Council today, sexual violence has increasingly
become part of the toolbox of terror with which armed
groups seek to consolidate their influence and extend
their power at the expense of those who are exposed to
their predations. Indeed, while sexual violence is often
closely linked to gender-based violence, its victims
include men and boys as well as women and girls. It
is often the case that those who deign to use sexual
violence as a tool in conflict see neither gender nor
age as any hindrance. That is even more the case with
terrorist and violent extremist groups. Some, such as
Da'esh, even use the prospect of being able to commit
such acts as part of their recruitment strategy.

With that stark reality in mind, the Maldives
believes that the United Nations, and especially the
Security Council, should comprehensively adapt its
prevention, protection and recovery efforts to the
increasingly asymmetric threats posed by non-State,
extremist and terrorist armed groups through sexual
violence. The Maldives welcomes resolutions 2242
(2015) and 2331 (2016), which make clear the Council's
recognition of the fact that sexual violence is frequently
used as a tactic of terrorism and provide a clear starting
point for deepening the strategic alignment of efforts
against sexual violence, both across the United Nations
and among Member States. They make it clear that
the obligations to abide by the protections afforded
by international human rights law apply to State and
non-State actors alike, and that it is incumbent on all
parties to respect their provisions.

In that regard, the Maldives welcomes and fully
endorses the Secretary-General's recommendation
that the Security Council employ all means at its
disposal to ensure that all parties to a conflict comply
with international law regarding protection against
sexual violence. In turn, that should be enforced
through the systematic monitoring of compliance,
the implementation of legislative and institutional
arrangements and, when violations do occur, by
referring matters to the International Criminal Court.

While people of both genders are very much
at risk of being targeted for abuse, it goes without
saying that the burden of sexual violence in conflict
falls overwhelmingly and disproportionately on
women and girls. In that context, the Maldives would
like to recall resolution 1325 (2000), which has been
a landmark guide for efforts to ensure women's full
involvement and equal participation in all elements of
the peace and security framework, including conflict
prevention, humanitarian response and peacekeeping
efforts. Resolution 1325 (2000) also makes clear the
importance of ensuring that all parties to a conflict,
again including non-State parties, remove women and
girls from gender-based violence, particularly rape and
other forms of sexual violence. This resolution provides
a strong foundation for our efforts in that regard, and is
a natural starting point for developing ways to reinforce
existing mechanisms and explore new avenues through
which we can protect civilians against the threat of
sexual violence.

The Maldives also fully supports the Secretary-
General's zero-tolerance policy on sexual abuse and
exploitation by United Nations peacekeepers, and
encourages the Security Council to include tasks
related to women, peace and security in peacekeeping
mission mandates. In that spirit, the Government of the
Maldives has pledged a zero-tolerance policy for all
forms of gender-based violence. We have also enacted
laws prohibiting sexual harassment and abuse and on
sexual offences, domestic violence prevention and
social protection in our efforts to raise awareness and
create the fundamental provisions necessary for the
protection of all women and girls. In 2016 we enacted
a gender equality bill that contains comprehensive
provisions that further strengthen article 17 (a) of our
Constitution, which entitles rights and freedoms to
everyone without discrimination of any kind, including
with regard to race, national origin, sex, age, mental or
physical disability.

Renewed and reinvigorated action at the local,
regional and international levels alike is needed to
protect and empower the victims of sexual and gender-
based violence in conflict. Given the heinousness of
such acts, it is essential, if we are to remain credible as
an Organization, that the United Nations and its Member
States be especially vigilant and adhere to the standards
of zero tolerance and the highest probity on the matter.
The Maldives is strongly committed to deepening its
cooperation with international partners in that regard,
and wherever possible pledges to continue offering its
support so that every woman, man and child, whatever
their situation, can have the chance to determine their
own future and realize their own aspirations.

