Mr. Matussek (Germany): Germany welcomes

this year's Security Council debate on women and

peace and security, marking the eighth anniversary of

resolution 1325 (2000). Germany associates itself with

the statement made by the French presidency of the

European Union and would like to add the following
remarks.

We welcome the particular emphasis of this
year's debate on the issue of women's equal
participation and full involvement in all efforts for the
maintenance and promotion of peace and security.
Resolution 1325 (2000) has given us a very clear
mandate in that regard. Unfortunately, as today's
debate and the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2008/622) have shown, many structural and
institutional impediments remain. We call upon the
United Nations system and upon ourselves, the
Member States, to step up our efforts leading to
concrete advancement in the equal inclusion of women
in peace talks, justice processes and peacekeeping.

Let me emphasize that Germany firmly believes
that the creation of a strong and effective United
Nations gender entity has to be part of those efforts.
We hope that the Secretariat will soon provide the
membership with the requested detailed paper on
modalities, so that substantive action can be taken
before the end of the current session of the General
Assembly.

Resolution 1325 (2000) and the Secretary-
General's report rightly emphasize the essential role of
training United Nations staff, peacekeeping personnel
and civil society as a means of ensuring the equal
participation of women. Let me therefore highlight
some best practices and some examples of how
Germany actively contributes to the effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in the field
of training.

The Centre for International Peace Operations
was established by the German Federal Government in
June 2002 with the aim of enhancing Germany's
civilian capacity for crisis prevention. The Centre's
core mandate is the training, recruitment and support of
German civilian personnel for peace operations and
election observation missions, conducted in particular
by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, the European Union (EU) and the United
Nations. The Centre cooperates closely with
international and other European training centres, such

as the Kofi Annan International Peacekeeping Training
Centre in Ghana, and is a founding member of the EU
Group on Training. Gender aspects, in particular the
role of women in conflict resolution, are consistently
taken into account in the design of training modules.
Overall, since 2002, a total of 416 women from
Germany and 129 women from abroad have
participated in the Centre's training courses. In 2007,
52 per cent of participants in such training courses
were women.

The German Government also funds a pilot
project called the Mobile Peace Academy OMNIBUS
1325. That "bus line" has since toured several
countries in the northern and southern Caucasus
regions. On each of its stops, it has conducted train-
the-trainer sessions with local non-governmental
organizations, public officials, teachers and journalists
on the relevance of resolution 1325 (2000) and on the
integration of a gender perspective into their work for
peace in the region. Just last week, the bus returned to
Berlin and was greeted with a high-profile press
conference.

The adoption in June this year of resolution 1820
(2008) on women and peace and security and sexual
violence in armed conflict was a landmark
achievement. It strengthened and further developed our
commitment to the protection of women in situations
of conflict and their active participation in the
promotion of peace and security. Resolution 1820
(2008) created many new obligations for the United
Nations, for the Security Council and for Member
States. Inter alia, the Secretariat was asked to submit a
comprehensive and operational report on the
implementation of resolution 1820 (2008) by June
2009.

I am pleased to announce today that Germany has
decided to provide the necessary funds for the
recruitment of an additional policy specialist in the
Peacekeeping Best Practices Section of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, whose task it will be to
oversee coordination of that report. In addition, he or
she will be tasked with designing a global strategy for
the implementation of resolution 1820 (2008) and with
developing and elaborating key training messages and
an outreach and partnership strategy, including with
troop- and police-contributing countries.

We are confident that Germany's financial
contribution will significantly facilitate the submission
of a report that will be substantive and operational and
will allow us to further develop the vision of resolution
1820 (2008). We take that contribution as proof that
Germany, as a friend of resolution 1325 (2000), is
deeply committed to the vision of both landmark
resolutions, 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008), and will
continue to undertake concrete efforts for their
implementation.

