Mr. Itegboje (Nigeria): We thank the United
Kingdom for agreeing to resume this debate and South
Africa for having highlighting the women and peace
and security agenda.

As we approach the twentieth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), introduced by
the delegation of Namibia, we need to take stock of
the progress made in the development of policies and
strategies for the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda. It is a well-known fact that
women rarely initiate violent conflicts, yet they suffer
its worst consequences, on multiple fronts -physically,
psychologically, economically, socially and politically.
Often, women fall victim to predatory warlords who
systematically use rape and sexual violence as weapon
of wars. Their suffering is compounded by their
exclusion from key decision-making process that might
lead to peace and stability.

In this regard, it is our expectation that this debate
will reflect on the achievements and challenges in
implementing resolution 1325 (2000) and its follow-
up resolutions, as well as offer suggestions to address
the prevailing challenges and gaps in acquiring the
necessary resources to advance the role of women in
the context ofthe global peace and security architecture
and in the lead-up to the twentieth anniversary.

We acknowledge that the Security Council has
provided the necessary leadership to give impetus to
involving women in the peace and security agenda,
beginning with resolution 1325 (2000), which set up
the framework for subsequent Council resolutions. In
Africa, the African Union has been a useful platform
for the advancement of women in the peace and security
agenda by placing emphasis on the engagement of
women and youth in the continent's development. This
is clearly reflected in Agenda 2063 of the African
Union. The African Union currently has more than 14
instruments relating to women, peace and security.

At the subregional level in West Africa, the
Economic Community of West African States, in
collaboration with the United Nations Office for West
Africa, in September 2010 developed an integrated
plan of action for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). The plan of action emphasizes the importance of
the role of women in conflict prevention and resolution,
mediation and peacebuilding efforts, as well as the
rebuilding of post-conflict societies.

Building on regional and subregional efforts,
in 2013 Nigeria launched a national action plan to
fully implement the relevant provisions of resolution
1325 (2000). The plan was relaunched in 2017 to
re-emphasize the Government's commitment to
ensuring the security of women and girls during armed
conflicts and to enhancing their active and direct
participation in conflict prevention and peacebuilding.
The objectives of both plans were prevention and
disaster preparedness; protection and prosecution;
participation and representation; crisis management;
and partnerships, coordination and management.

We are already familiar with Boko Haram's activities
in north-eastern Nigeria. Within the framework of the
Multinational Joint Task Force, Nigeria, in partnership
with Cameroon, Chad and the Niger, is collaborating
to take out the remnants of the Boko Haram terrorist
group, which has been targeting women and girls. Our
experience in the Lake Chad region today is evidence
that, with determined international collaboration, much
can be achieved.

It noteworthy that 80 per cent of the internally
displaced persons in the north-east of Nigeria are
women and girls. We are taking concrete steps to
meet their humanitarian needs and establishing the
conditions necessary for the voluntary return of
many displaced persons to their places of origin in
safety and dignity. We are also catering to the needs
of the victims of Boko Haram - including victims of
rape and other sexual violence against children, the
abduction of children and other grave violations - by
putting in motion several legal and social remedies,
such as the diligent prosecution of many of the detained
Boko Haram terrorists in competent courts of law, as
well as reintegration, reorientation and rehabilitation
programmes designed to meet the needs of each victim
of sexual violence. Some of the victims are also back at
school in Nigeria and across the globe.

In conclusion, it is my delegation's belief that to
achieve the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
Member States, regional organizations, the media, civil
society, women and young people all have important
roles to play in working together to implement the
women and peace and security agenda and holding one
another accountable with regard to their commitments.
While inclusivity remains the key, there is also a need to
focus on not only processes but also on the establishment
of mechanisms for accountability and budgets for the
real implementation of national action plans. Nigeria
remains firmly committed to promoting and protecting
the rights of women and girls in conflict and post-
conflict situations. In this regard, we will continue to
work assiduously to enhance the participation of women
in peace and security initiatives.

