Mr. Biabaroh-Iboro (Congo) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, I wish to begin by expressing to you the
regrets of your brother and fellow Foreign Minister,
His Excellency Mr. Basile Ikouebe, who, because of
his schedule was unable to travel to New York. My
delegation also wishes to express its pleasure in seeing
you presiding over this annual debate of the Security
Council to review - now, seven years after its
adoption - the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), on women and peace and security.

This year's report of the Secretary-General
(S/2007/567) provides useful information on progress
made since the first follow-up on the United Nations
System-wide Action Plan for the implementation of
that historic resolution. It will be recalled that the first
report (S/2006/770) made it possible to see what
progress had been made and what shortcomings needed
to be corrected, thus allowing for the updating of the
System-wide Action Plan for 2008-2009. In that
connection, my delegation wishes to thank all of those
involved in that difficult task, including the Special
Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of
Women, experts from throughout the system, United
Nations bodies and civil society organizations. The
quality of their work deserves our appreciation.

In the light of the report of the Secretary-General,
my delegation has a number of observations to make.
Numerous obstacles impede the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), in particular serious cases of
discrimination and sexual violence against women and
girls. They are the ones who pay a particularly high
price in conflict situations. The frequency of acts of
violence against women in conflict and post-conflict
situations is increasingly widely recognized and
documented. Everybody today agrees that such
violence must be condemned, along with the climate of
impunity in which such acts continue to be perpetrated,
as those are the main obstacles to peacebuilding.

My Government understands the need to
eliminate all obstacles to the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), and we remain convinced that
success more than ever requires close cooperation
between Member States and the United Nations
system. Only then can our objectives be achieved. For
its part, Congo is working to mainstream the gender
perspective in many sectors of public life and to
involve women in all stages of the peacebuilding
process, in particular the negotiation and
implementation of peace agreements, on the basis of
the Beijing Platform for Action and resolution 1325
(2000).

At the regional level, Congolese women are
involved in the International Conference on Peace,
Security, Democracy and Development in the Great
Lakes Region and are actively participating in the work
of the thematic groups and in meetings of the
preparatory committees. In that framework, they
participated in the meeting of women from the Great
Lakes region on peace and security held last year in
Kinshasa.

With respect to the role played by women in
building the life of the nation and in the light of the
recommendations of the first report of the
Peacebuilding Commission (S/2007/458), my
Government supports any mechanism designed to
ensure the full participation of women in the post-
conflict phase. Along the same lines, the Congo is in
favour of improving the representation of women in
peacekeeping operations and appreciates the successful
efforts of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
in that area.

We believe, however, that additional efforts need
to be made at all levels in order to appoint women
officials to high-ranking posts within the United
Nations system, including as special representatives or
envoys of the Secretary-General. In that connection,
we welcome the appointment of Ms. Ellen Margrethe
Loj as Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Liberia. Her ability and her dynamism have already
convinced us that she will be equal to the task
conferred on her by the Secretary-General.

Moreover, the Congo is convinced that it is
necessary to establish a subsidiary body on women and
peace and security whose mandate would be, inter alia,
to ensure the effective implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). Indeed, such a mechanism would help not
only to strengthen the actions of the Security Council
by speeding up the implementation of that resolution
but would also help to perpetuate the positive changes
in the situation and the role of women, in particular in
the case of countries in a conflict or post-conflict
situation, as well as enhancing coherence in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) at various
levels. However, as we focus our attention on all forms
of violence against women and young girls in countries
on the agenda of the Security Council, the fact
nonetheless remains that the seriousness of these acts
in most countries in conflict cannot fail to awaken our
collective conscience.

My delegation is ready to support any action
designed to speed up the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). In that regard, we fully support the draft
presidential statement prepared by the delegation of
Ghana, which we warmly thank for this important
initiative and which we congratulate once again on the
outstanding manner in which it has presided over the
Council.

In conclusion, my delegation hopes to see this
debate contribute to enhancing the now recognized role
of women in the maintenance of peace and security,
and in peacebuilding.

