Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): Let
me begin, Mr. President, by thanking you for initiating
the discussion of this issue. I wish to thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2006/770) and to
express my appreciation to Ms. Mayanja, Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno, Ms. Heyzer and
Ms. McAskie for their statements.

This year marks the sixth anniversary of the
adoption of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000). It
is also the first anniversary of the introduction by the
Secretary-General of the United Nations System-wide
Action Plan for implementation of that resolution. The
resolution constitutes the basis for the Council's work
in the area of women and peace and security and also
orients the Council's efforts in this regard.

As described in the report of the Secretary-
General, six years of efforts and one year of practice
show that the relevant bodies and agencies of the
United Nations system have done a great deal of work
in early warning and conflict prevention, peacemaking
and peacebuilding, peacekeeping, humanitarian
assistance, post-conflict reconstruction, implementation
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programmes and the protection of women's rights and
interests in armed conflict. Through the
implementation of myriad specific projects, they
helped elevate the status and role of women and
protected and bolstered their legitimate rights and
interests.

Nonetheless, we also realize that the question of
women and peace and security covers many levels and
facets, involves many institutions and agencies and
finds expression in conflict situations with varying
characteristics. What is more, in carrying out their own
current mandates, those institutions and agencies have
encountered institutional and organizational challenges
and inadequacies. In some conflict situations, women
remain in tragic predicaments, lacking guarantees of
their personal safety and security and unable to
participate effectively in the peace process and
political life. The Chinese delegation attaches great
significance to this issue. In that regard, I wish to stress
the following points.
First and foremost, the existing outcomes in the
area of women, peace and security should be followed
up proactively and comprehensively; the Security
Council should play a critical role in its own right.
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), the 2005
World Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1), the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action
and a series of other outcomes in this area set out for
us clear long-term requirements that need to be met
jointly through collective efforts by Member States and
various United Nations bodies, agencies and
programmes. As the organ that bears primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, the Security Council should strive
to remove the root causes of conflicts and intensify
conflict prevention and peacekeeping so as to create an
enabling environment for the survival and development
of all vulnerable groups, including women, children
and civilians. For their part, countries should formulate
their own national strategies or programmes of action
in the light of their national conditions with a view to
fulfilling the aforementioned commitments.

Secondly, the status and role of women should
receive adequate attention in all phases of the peace
process. In this regard, an awareness and a culture of
paying heed to and respecting women should be
formed. Pursuing gender equality is a demand that is
enshrined in the Charter and resolution 1325 (2000),
and it is an obligation for all Member States. It is
imperative to heed women's special needs and
concerns at the various stages of conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Their potential and
their role should also be fully recognized and tapped.
Women should enjoy full decision-making power in the
peace process, as they can provide firm support and a
solid foundation for a hard-won peace. A peace process
in which women are accorded attention and respect is a
promising peace process; a social system in which
women are valued and respected is a mature and
durable social system.

The Peacebuilding Commission, on which all
parties place high hopes, has come into being and has
had a smooth start in its substantive work. In its work
in the years ahead, it should accord priority to women
in post-conflict situations and encourage them to
participate in peacebuilding-related activities of all
kinds.

Thirdly, in the process of United Nations reform,
efforts should be made to enhance the Organization's
inter-agency coordination and capacity-building in the
field of women and peace and security while
optimizing resource allocation.

The Secretary-General's United Nations System-
wide Action Plan for the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) is a meaningful experiment as it involves
dozens of United Nations bodies and encompasses
hundreds of specific actions. We hope that the Plan will
be followed through and integrated with the United
Nations reform process so that the various bodies
within the United Nations system and the Secretariat
will be better adapted, systemically and in their
practices, to implement the resolution fully. Having
deliberated over the years on the complex of issues
related to women, the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council possess vast experience
and systematic agendas of work. For that reason, the
Security Council should coordinate with them in its
work and focus on questions within its own terms of
reference in order to achieve the overall result of a
clear division of labour and an emphasis on key issues.

There will be no lasting peace and social stability
without the effective participation of women. The
Beijing Declaration announced that

"Local, national, regional and global peace is
attainable and is inextricably linked with the
advancement of women, who are a fundamental
force for leadership, conflict resolution and the
promotion of lasting peace at all levels."
(A/CONF177/20, annex 1, para. 18)

More than 10 years later, that Declaration still
provides guidance and is of profound significance. The
Chinese Government always attaches importance to the
protection of women's rights and interests and to the
advancement of women, having taken an active part in
all United Nations processes in the field of women. We
are ready to work in concert with the international
community in a continued effort to achieve all the
goals in the area of women and peace and security.

Finally, China supports the Council's issuance of
the draft presidential statement on this item, which now
commands consensus.

