Mr. Fernandez De Soto Valderrama (Colombia)
(Spoke in Spanish): I thank the President of the Security
Council for convening this open debate as we approach
the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000).
I welcome the briefings by the Executive Director of
UN-Women and the other briefers.

Colombia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Canada today on behalf of 56
Member States.

Today's meeting is undoubtedly a good opportunity
to share best practices in the implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda and to
take effective actions to ensure the participation
and leadership of women in the various aspects
of peacebuilding.

Colombia has set an example in the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), recognizing that, in order
to achieve a peaceful and inclusive society based
on the principles of legality, entrepreneurship and
equity, political and economic empowerment and the
promotion of women's leadership are indispensable.
My Government is convinced that the participation of
women in peacebuilding is a matter ofpriority that will
contribute to achieving the transformations that our
"Peace with legality" policy proposes to offer women, in
particular those in rural areas: better living conditions
that will translate into their economic autonomy, as
well as the creation of working environments with
decent conditions that break the cycles of violence that
violate women's rights.

Accordingly, a high-level gender-equality unit was
set up by the Vice-President of Colombia, Ms. Martha
Lucia Ramirez Blanco, in January, in order to advance
the implementation of the 51 gender indicators included
in the framework plan for the implementation of the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace. Furthermore, the relevant
entities have submitted their work plans, reporting a
progress rate of 96 per cent in the 51 gender indicators.
These plans are vehicles for the promotion of gender
equality and will ensure more and better opportunities
are created for women, especially those who have been
victims of violence.

Another step forward is the National
Reincorporation Council's technical round tables on
gender, composed of women Government officials and
ex-combatants of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo, which are held weekly
to ensure that the gender component is included in each
productive project approved in the framework of the
reincorporation process.

President Duque is committed to advancing the
participation of women in the leadership of the various
political spheres. The Government has the first-ever
cabinet with parity between men and women in the
history of Colombia, and our national development
plan includes a chapter dedicated to the promotion
of women's equity, known as the Pact for Equity for
Women, whose objectives include the establishment
of a national women's network that will bring together
policies, strategies and instruments adopted to ensure
that women's rights form part of the agenda of all
branches of public authority.

The recent local elections saw the largest number
of women candidates to date, which is an example that
our efforts to ensure the participation of women in
decision-making positions are bearing fruit. We will
continue advancing along this path, recognizing that
women and girls play a fundamental role in Colombia's
peacebuilding journey.
Before concluding my statement, and in my
capacity as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission,
I wish to inform members of the Council that the
Commission has compiled and submitted a document in
written form that we think will be important for today's
debate, in line with our mandate as an advisory body to
the Security Council, and which we know will be very
useful for the Council.
