Mrs. Miturumbwe (spoke in French): I would
like to say how pleased I am to be here today to tell the
Security Council and the international community in
general about the concerns and expectations of the
women of Burundi in the context of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

I would also like to express my gratitude to the
United Nations system as a whole for its efforts to help
Burundian women throughout the reconciliation
process.

Burundi has just emerged from a war that lasted
more than 10 years and caused a great deal of harm in
both human and material terms. Very recently, in
September, the Government and the Forces nationales
de liberation-Parti pour la liberation du peuple hutu
(FNL-PALIPEHUTU) signed a ceasefire agreement.
Burundian men and women have welcomed that step
but remain convinced that sustained efforts must
2
continue with a view to overcoming the many
challenges of the peacebuilding period.

Burundian women, who have committed
themselves to the quest for peace since independence
in 1961, continue to work to mobilize and to heighten
awareness of the need for better representation
throughout the decision-making process so as to ensure
that their rights are an integral part of negotiations. The
right of succession, which would guarantee women the
right to land and thus provide for their economic
security, was among the important issues considered
during the Arusha process. Despite progress at the
national level, we have to admit that our Constitution
and the Electoral Code say nothing about the proper
level of representation at the grassroots level. In fact,
the national gender policy lacks resources to
implement the principles of equality at the national
level. Burundian women have been active since the
peace talks, and the details of those activities can be
found in the documents distributed to you. There have
been consultations among women at the national level
in the context of implementing resolution 1325 (2000),
and the recommendations of those consultations can be
summed up as follows.

Concerning good governance and democracy, it is
important to ensure constant dialogue between the
Government, the political parties and the media. In this
dialogue, general interest should take precedence over
individual interest. For good, transparent and inclusive
governance, it is important not only to ensure
cooperation and dialogue at all levels, down to the
local level, but also to include all social groups,
especially women. In this connection, it should be
noted that the principle of a 30-per-cent quota is
applied only for a limited portion of the population and
is not reflected at the grassroots level. Furthermore,
this quota should be 50 per cent.

We recommend that the international community
continue to lend its support to Burundi, so that the
capacity-building programme for good governance,
which includes transparency, proper management of
public affairs, democracy and respect for human rights,
might remain a priority. A joint committee made up of
members of organizations from civil society and
Government should be set up to ensure follow-up in
the management of all national resources, including
resources granted by international organizations. The
current quota of 30 per cent should, in fact, be raised to
50 per cent and be applied at the local level. Civil
06-58804
society should be considered an active partner in all
programmes and processes.

Concerning demobilization, disarmament,
reintegration and reinsertion (DDRR), we should note
that this process is slowly moving forward. Among the
important challenges facing Burundi, we should give
special attention to the following: circulation of
weapons among the population, which is a source of
insecurity and constant tension, particularly for
women; victims, namely, ex-combatants and persons
who have been repatriated or displaced, primarily
women, have not yet received restitution and resort to
community conflict and violence; the recently
established National Commission for Land and Other
Property, which was welcomed by women.
Unfortunately, its functioning and the implementation
of its recommendations require not only mobilization
of substantial resources but also know-how and
experience in that field. We firmly hope that the new
Peacebuilding Commission, established as part of
United Nations reform, will make support for the
National Commission Land and Other Property one of
its priorities. The lack of programmes to help so-called
political prisoners who have been released adds to the
problem of insecurity.

Failure of the DDRR programme would
compromise achievements we have made towards
peace and democracy. We recommend that the
international community continue to give its political,
technical and financial support to the Government of
Burundi, so that disarmament, reintegration and
reinsertion might become a reality on the ground. The
international community should support civil society in
Burundi in its efforts to mobilize and promote
awareness among the population about the dangers of
possession and circulation of weapons in the
community and to promote voluntary disarmament. A
similar programme could be carried out at the
subregional level.

Since the end of hostilities, poverty has continued
to increase in Burundi and is affecting, above all,
women, who cannot inherit land from their parents and
cannot gain title to their husband's land and property.
In addition to dependence, corruption and fraud are
exacerbating the status of women. Women have always
asked that this be given priority in negotiations.

We recommend that the United Nations not hold
women hostage to the political situation in Burundi and
06-58804

that women be enabled to have direct access to
financing that allows them to undertake and
consolidate the work that they have been doing at the
grassroots level. Funds allocated by the Peacebuilding
Commission should be used for that work. The
Commission should ensure follow-up to the
implementation of a corruption and fraud focal point
that would ensure equitable distribution of public
property. The focal point should also respect gender
parity.

As for human rights, it should be emphasized that
these challenges refer to basic aspects of human rights,
for which we would like to make several
recommendations in order to promote respect for those
rights. Legislation for gender equality and equity
should be adopted and applied. There should be an
independent national focal point for women's rights to
ensure implementation of commitments made by the
Government under national legislation and
international treaties ratified by Burundi. There should
be an end to impunity through the establishment of
machinery for transitional justice to deal with rape and
murder. That would require the reform and
modernization of the police and legal services, which
must be professional in spirit and directly accountable
to the people. A trust fund should be established to
which Member States would contribute for at least five
years to enable women who are victims of sexual
violence and other abuses to have recourse to justice.
There should be support for organizations helping
women, in particular United Nations Development
Fund for Women, with material, financial and human
resources adequate to reach additional beneficiaries.

