Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): Thank you, Sir, for
convening today's important debate on women and
peace and security. My delegation commends your
leadership of this Council for the month of October. I
would also like to express my appreciation for the
Secretary-General's comprehensive report (S/2008/622) on
the progress made in implementing resolution 1325
(2000).

The Government of Afghanistan is dedicated to
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
However, in post-conflict countries such as
Afghanistan, forces of insecurity are the greatest threat
to the advancement of the three pillars of the
resolution: the protection of women in war and peace,
the promotion of women's rights and the participation
of women in peace processes.

As the Secretary-General's report indicates,
insecurity is the basic concern that must be addressed
before true progress towards ensuring women's rights
can be made. Instability affects the most vulnerable
parts of the population, and women and children
continue to account for the majority of casualties in
hostilities.

In Afghanistan, the atrocities of the Taliban
threaten the progress of women. During its rule in
Afghanistan, the agenda of the Taliban included a
tyrannical denial of all women's basic rights - the
rights to free movement, to education and to work.
Today, that goal of the Taliban appears unchanged;
where they advance in Afghanistan, women's rights
retreat. In areas of increased Taliban activity, there are
pronounced restrictions on women's mobility, attacks
on girls' schools and a decrease in services for women
provided by our Government and aid agencies.

Despite the growing threat of insecurity,
Afghanistan, with the support of the international
community, has made several improvements in the
participation of women in peace and security. The
Government of Afghanistan has ensured that women's
rights are enshrined in the Afghanistan Constitution, as
well as all major international agreements such as the
Afghanistan Compact and the recent Paris Declaration.

In addition, women have participated in the
historical process from the Bonn Conference to the
elections of 2004-2005 and beyond. Women have been
appointed to high positions in national and local
Governments, including cabinet-level posts. Today,
women account for 27 per cent of the National
Assembly and almost 26 per cent of civil servants.
Habiba Sarabi, the successful female Governor of
Bamiyan, is one notable example.

Afghanistan has also strengthened its
governmental institutions to promote women's rights.
The Ministry of Women's Affairs has achieved much
through its dedicated advocacy for women. The
National Justice Plan of Afghanistan seeks to improve
women's involvement in the justice sector, and the
National Action Plan for Women in Afghanistan aims
at increasing women's participation in all areas of
social, economic and political life.

Finally, the Government of Afghanistan, with
international organizations and domestic groups, has
worked tirelessly to promote women's rights in
Afghanistan by improving access to health care,
education and basic services. Today, 40 per cent of
children in school are girls, and 81 per cent of the
population now receives health care through the Basic
Package of Health Services. Forty thousand more
women now live through childbirth every year.

Despite those advances, Afghanistan needs to
continue to do much more to meet the objectives of
resolution 1325 (2000). Most immediately, the security
situation continues to directly affect women's security
and their access to health care, education and social
protection. Continued terrorist activity by the Taliban
and Al-Qaida is affecting the implementation and
monitoring of all programmes and projects, especially
in some southern and eastern parts of the country. In
addition, poverty, the lack of education and unbalanced
allocation of resources must also be addressed. More
work is needed to ensure the participation of women in
all parts of the stabilization process.

To continue to advance women's participation in
peace and security, our country has a few observations
to offer. First, international involvement is crucial.
International support for national initiatives provides
important gender-sensitivity training for national
institutions, such as the national army and police force.
Secondly, international training for women in the civil
service and international support for female students in
the form of schools and increased educational
opportunities are also crucial. Lastly, coordinating
roles, such as the role of United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, are immensely helpful in
coordinating activities and sharing knowledge among
organizations that are working to advance women's
rights.
However, international partners must recognize
certain factors. First, improvement should be internally
driven. While international support is important for all
of the aforementioned reasons, the international
community should be cautioned that true reform for
women's participation in peace and security should be
generated within the context of the particular country.
International involvement should be motivated by the
needs of the women within the particular country.
There should be no external imposition of standards.
There should be no external political agendas.

Secondly, international troops should assist
national efforts to protect women. In order to ensure
better protection of women's participation in peace and
security, gender sensitivity training should be
mandatory for troops from all countries. In addition,
their assistance is important in facilitating women's
mobility in order to access water, health care and
markets, and in creating the conditions for women's
safe participation in the public and political life of the
country. For example, in Afghanistan, international
forces continue to protect roads on which women and
families frequently travel to access Government
services.

Thirdly, regional collaboration is important. The
Secretary-General's advocacy of regional action plans
and regional organizations to support national
commitment is fully supported by our Government. As
infringements on women's rights are often cross-
boundary issues, such as the spillover of women
refugees from one country to another during conflict
situations, solutions should also be cross-boundary.

Fourthly is the importance of a cohesive
approach. A successful approach to advancing women's
participation in peace and security must address
women's role in all major sectors of society. In
Afghanistan, women's advancement must be addressed
by quelling terrorism, eradicating poverty and
addressing ignorance through education.

Fifthly, women must be involved in reconciliation
processes. Talks to consolidate peace in post-conflict
settings should involve women at every stage. Such
talks cannot compromise women's rights in any way
and must strongly adhere to the principles of true
democracy and women's political participation.
Sixthly, there is a need for action, not words.
Steps forward must move women's rights beyond
slogans and good intentions. The gender adviser to the

Afghan Ministry of the Interior has found that
organizational inertia is perhaps the main cause of
problems associated with gender inequity in the
Government ministries. We need the political will and
the genuine commitment to transform words into
action. And, as the Paris Conference recently reminded
us, international donors must deliver their pledged aid
so that efforts to improve the standing of women can
be sustained.

In conclusion, in order to advance the protection
of women in war and peace, the promotion of women's
rights and the participation of women in peace
processes, Afghanistan would like to emphasize the
importance of addressing the threat of insecurity.
Security is the first concern of post-conflict countries
that hope to make progress in the area of women's
rights. After security is addressed, it is essential to
recognize the importance of international involvement,
regional collaboration, the inclusion of women in
reconciliation processes and the need to move beyond
words to action.

