Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia): I would like to thank the
German presidency for convening today's open debate
on a topic of the utmost importance.

Estonia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union. In
addition, I would like to make the following few remarks.

Peacekeeping operations and uniformed personnel
are the most visible representatives of the United
Nations, directly working with communities every day.
For that reason, it is imperative to increase the number
of female peacekeepers and promote their full, effective
and meaningful participation in United Nations peace
operations. Estonia therefore strongly supports the
recently adopted uniformed gender-parity strategy for
the period 2018-2028 and related efforts of the Action
for Peacekeeping initiative.

Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
on women and peace and security, and its follow-
up resolutions, remarkable achievements have been
made at the normative level. Women and peace and
security issues are now interlinked with the United
Nations peacekeeping agenda. However, challenges lie
at the level of implementation, and we must continue
promoting the role of women in peace and security at
the national, regional and international levels.

On the national level, Estonia has significantly
increased its level of ambition regarding female
conscripts in the military service, having tripled the
number of women that can be called to serve. That has
had a direct and positive impact on Estonia's ability
as a troop-contributing country to accelerate gender
parity among United Nations peacekeeping troops
by encouraging female military and police personnel

to apply.
In addition to striving to increase the number of
female peacekeepers, we consider it paramount to
sensitize all peacekeepers on gender aspects in peace
operations. Thorough predeployment training on
human rights and gender-related issues, including on the
prevention of, and response to, conflict-related sexual
violence and the eradication of sexual exploitation and
abuse, is a must. Therefore, gender advisers should be
an integral part of all United Nations missions, and
their activities must be further reinforced in settings
where conflict-related sexual violence is widespread.

Last, but not least, we would like to thank Canada
for launching the Elsie Initiative for Women in Peace
Operations to identify, address and remove the existing
barriers to women's meaningful participation in United
Nations peace operations in different troop-contributing
countries and military and police organizations. That
kind of practical evidence-based approach could be the
way to help us to achieve the ambitious objectives that
we have set on women's participation and impact on
United Nations peacekeeping.

I thank you, Mr. President, for including women
and peace and security as one of the main topics of
your presidency. We all recognize the importance of
involving women in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts, peace negotiations, peacebuilding
and in post-conflict reconstruction, and should act
accordingly. For its part, Estonia would like to continue
focusing on the issue of women and peace and security
as a non-permanent member of the Security Council
during 2020-2021 period.

