Mr. Cabactulan (Philippines): I would like to
start to by expressing my heartfelt congratulations to
Madam Michelle Bachelet for her appointment as
Under-Secretary-General and Director of UN Women.
We are confident that, under her leadership, the newly
established UN Women will be able to perform its
mandate expeditiously and effectively.

As we celebrate the tenth anniversary of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000), it is incumbent upon
us to take stock of the progress made since its adoption
a decade ago and identify concrete actions to reinforce
the integration of gender equality perspectives in the
framework of peace and security.

The Philippines attaches great importance to the
integration of gender equality perspectives in peace
and security issues. This is demonstrated by the fact
that five years before the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), the Philippines had already established the
Philippine Plan for Gender Responsive Development,
1995-2025, a 30-year plan that gives due recognition to
the important role of women in peacebuilding efforts
and initiatives.

We are also pleased to note the Secretary-
General's observation in his report on women and
peace and security (S/2010/498) that the development
of national action plans to guide the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) represents a particularly
important contribution by Member States and that a
total of 19 such plans, some in post-conflict nations,
have already been adopted.

Implementation of national action plans is a key
strategy for the achievement of commitments in the
area of women, peace and security, and we hope to see
the adoption of more national plans by other Member
States to ensure the systematic monitoring and
evaluation of activities with respect to policy goals.

I am pleased to say that this year, on 25 March
2010, the Philippines became the first Asian country to
adopt a national action plan on women and peace and
security, implementing Security Council resolutions
1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008). Our plan envisions
enhancing and strengthening women's role in
peacebuilding processes.

Our plan has four major goals: first, to ensure the
protection and prevention of violence of women's
human rights in armed conflict and post-conflict
situations; secondly, to empower women and ensure
their active and meaningful participation in areas of
peacebuilding, peacekeeping and conflict prevention,
conflict resolution and post-conflict reconstruction;
thirdly, to promote and mainstream a gender
perspective in all aspect of conflict prevention, conflict
resolution and peacebuilding; and fourthly, to
institutionalize a monitoring and reporting system to
monitor, evaluate and report to enhance accountability
for the successful implementation of the Philippine
National Action Plan and the achievement of its goals.

The National Action Plan now serves as a
reference point in assessing the Philippine
Government's commitment to the implementation of
resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and
1898 (2009) and other resolutions on women and peace
and security.

Significant steps have been taken by my country
to enhance the participation of women in peacekeeping
operations, and we are determined to pursue policies
and programmes that would help ensure full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in the
international arena.

In fact, in 19 United Nations peacekeeping
missions where the Philippines actively participate and
in the United Nations Missions in Haiti, Darfur, Golan
Heights, Liberia, Sudan and Timor-Leste, 68 Filipino
women are now serving with dedication and
effectiveness.

Notwithstanding the advances made in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), challenges
and obstacles remain. We take note of the Secretary-
General's conclusion in his report that a major
constraint to the implementation of the resolution has
been the absence of a single coherent and coordinated
approach guided by a clear framework, with concrete
and specific goals and targets and supported by a
meaningful set of indicators to track progress.

We agree that there is a need to set up a
comprehensive framework to establish strategic
system-wide priorities and coherence. We support the
endorsement of the indicators contained in the annex to
the Secretary-General's report as guidelines for the
overall monitoring of global and national
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We
recognize that there will always be gaps and
divergences in that implementation, but we remain
optimistic that those inadequacies will be addressed in
order to accelerate progress in the achievement of
women's full and equal participation as active agents in
peace and security.

Finally, I should like to manifest my country's
support for the Security Council's continued leadership
in all issues encompassed under resolution 1325 (2000)
and other, related resolutions to ensure that those issues
are fully and consistently reflected and integrated in
the Council's agenda.

