Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): May I
begin by congratulating Viet Nam on its assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council and wish them
every success for the month of October. I would like to
thank, of course, the American delegation for having
exercised the presidency last month.

We welcome the initiative taken by Viet Nam in
organizing this public debate on women and peace and
security, which is dedicated to responding to the needs
of women in post-conflict situations. Much has been
done, particularly by the United Nations, to implement
resolution 1325 (2000), but these efforts must be
continued.

First and foremost, the Council has endeavoured
to systematically introduce the approach recommended
by resolution 1325 (2000) into the mandates of
peacekeeping operations and to persuade the parties to
conflicts to themselves incorporate this approach in the
peace process.

Subsequently, the Secretariat and the agencies,
funds and programmes have stepped up activities to
protect women, including in post-conflict situations. I
would in this connection like to warmly congratulate
Ms. Rachel Mayanja, Special Adviser on Gender Issues
and Advancement of Women, Mr. Alain Le Roy,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
and Ms. Ine's Alberdi, Executive Director of the United
Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM). I
also thank Ms. Asha Hagi Elmi Amin for her testimony
to us.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2009/465)
reflects the proliferation of initiatives aimed at training
peacekeeping operations personnel, assist women who
are the victims of violence and combat impunity. These
initiatives include the one carried out by France, in
partnership with UNICEF, aimed at reintegrating child
soldiers into civil society.

But the United Nations is not alone in acting. The
European Union has also demonstrated the importance
it attaches to the protection of women by adopting
guidelines on violence against women. It has also, at
France's instigation, adopted a comprehensive policy
regarding the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and an updated operational document on the
European policy for security and defence in this regard.

The majority of this task, however, remains to be
carried out. A long list remains of dramatic situations
that the international community must tackle, including
abuses committed in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Nepal, Burma, the Central African Republic
and Burundi. These examples serve as reminders to us.

Less than a week after the important adoption of
resolution 1888 (2009), aimed at bolstering the efforts
of the international community to combat sexual
violence in armed conflict, the new resolution that the
Council has just adopted incorporates major advances
to improve implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
The definition of indicators by the Secretariat over the
coming months to allow all interested parties to follow
more closely the progress that has been made in
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) is a first step
that is both practical and useful.

I also welcome the fact that the Council has taken
to heart the observation made before it on 30
September by the French Minister of State for
Cooperation and la Francophonie, who stated that
transparency, cooperation and coordination of efforts
between the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict and a new
special representative of the Secretary-General for
sexual violence and armed conflict will be essential. In
addition, the Council has for the first time adopted
forceful language regarding the medical needs of
women who have been the victims of rape or other
sexual violence, particularly sexual and reproductive
health.

France believes that certain organizational steps
to be taken by the Secretariat, particularly within the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Political Affairs, will make it possible to
better take into account the role of women in crisis
planning and in preparation for emerging from crisis,
thus ensuring a better implementation of resolution
1325 (2000).

The path to follow is therefore clear, and it is up
to us to embark on that path. In order take stock of the
progress that has been made and will be made in this
regard, France supports the recommendation of the
Secretary-General to organize a ministerial meeting at
United Nations Headquarters on the tenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) in October
2010.

