Mr. Shava (Zimbabwe): Let me begin by
thanking you, Madam President, for convening this
open debate on such an important matter. On behalf
of the 15 member States of the Southern African
Development Community (SADC), I wish to express
appreciation to you, Madam, for providing us with
an insightful concept note (S/2014/731, annex) to
guide today's discussion. I also would like to thank
the Executive Director of UN-Women, Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka, and the Assistant Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Edmond Mulet, for
their comprehensive and informative briefings.

In recent years, the world has witnessed a
multiplicity of conflicts leading to an unprecedented
increase in the scale of refugees and displaced persons.
The increase in violence, mass displacement and
humanitarian catastrophes has had a disproportionate
impact on women and children. There is growing
recognition that newly emerging unconventional threats
to peace and security associated with the proliferation
ofmilitias, armed groups,jihadists and terrorists linked
to violent extremism affect women and girls more than
their male counterparts.

It is estimated that three quarters of the refugee
and internally displaced persons (IDP) population are
women and children. Displacement and statelessness
exacerbate existing gender inequalities, amplifying
the discrimination and hardships borne by both
women and girls. In that regard, women refugees and
IDPs constitute one of the most vulnerable groups in
armed conflict, as well as post-conflict situations.
Displacement causes women's heightened risk of
poverty, human trafficking, sexual exploitation and
child, early and forced marriages and the lack of
access to basic resources, such as education and health
services. The majority of the world's refugees originate
from Africa, with new displacements from intensifying
conflicts in the Central African Republic, South Sudan,
Mali and Somalia.

In the year 2000, the Security Council laid the
foundation for the women and peace and security
agenda in the landmark resolution 1325 (2000)
and subsequent resolutions calling for the special
protection and full participation of women in conflict
prevention and resolution, as well as in post-conflict
and peacebuilding processes. In the 14 years since
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), significant
steps have been taken to address the plight of women
and girls and to improve international, regional
and national responses to the protection of women
and girls. The Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women and
international human rights, refugee and humanitarian
law, complemented by regional instruments, have gone
a long way in addressing the challenges both prior
and during the process of displacement. Today the
narrative on conflict prevention and resolution reflects
our collective commitment to prevent sexual violence
in conflict and address its disastrous and far-reaching
consequences.

As we continue intensifying our engagement on
the matter, SADC believes that States have the primary
responsibility to protect their women and girls from
all forms of gender-based discrimination and abuse,
including in conflict situations where those are often
aggravated. While international cooperation and
assistance are important, they should not replace the
central role of the State in the protection of women
and girls. We also believe that women's economic
empowerment and full participation are essential to any
prevention and protection response.

The SADC Protocol on Gender and Development,
signed in August 2008, seeks to harmonize the various
commitments made by SADC member States in regional,
global and continental instruments to achieving gender
equality. Articles 20 to 25 of the Protocol provide for
the implementation of a variety of strategies, including
enacting, reviewing, reforming and enforcing laws
aimed at eliminating all forms of gender-based violence
and trafficking. Article 28 provides for women's equal
representation and participation in key decision-making
positions in conflict resolution and peacebuilding
processes, as well as for the integration of a gender
perspective into the resolution of conflicts in the region,
in accordance with resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security. Constitutional and legal rights,
education, health, productive resources and economic
empowerment are some of the other areas the Protocol
covers. And it promotes women's empowerment
through the development and implementation of
gender-responsive legislation, policies, programmes
and projects.

SADC fully subscribes to continental-level
programmes such as the five-year Gender, Peace
and Security Programme of the African Union (AU),
launched on 2 June in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, and
designed to serve as a framework for developing
effective strategies and mechanisms for increasing

women's participation in promoting peace and security.

It is also designed to enhance the protection ofwomen in

conflict and post-conflict situations in Africa. The AU

Commission Chairperson's appointment on 30 January

of Ms. Bineta Diop as its Special Envoy for Women,

Peace and Security attests to Africa's commitment to

firmly addressing issues affecting women and children
in conflict.

While considerable progress has been made since
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), gaps still remain
in our efforts to achieve sustained change and overall
peace and security. There is a growing consensus that
a peace process that does not include women is flawed.
It is our firm belief that women's economic, cultural,
political and social rights underpin democracy, stability
and lasting peace.

It is unacceptable that in spite of the existence of
legal and normative frameworks, displaced women
and girls continue to suffer. SADC is concerned about
the continuing gross abuses, sexual exploitation and
abduction of women in areas of conflict. Other gaps
exist in, for example, the exclusion of female refugees
and IDPs from decision-making at all levels, and their
restricted access to basic services. Women and girls
who are the heads of households, young mothers, and
girls with disabilities are the most likely to encounter
major barriers to accessing services and participating
in community life and decision-making.

SADC urges the entire international community to
unite in responding effectively to the problems women
IDPs and refugees face, taking a holistic approach that
combines proactive strategies, responses and solutions.
That entails addressing the root causes of conflict and
strengthening national infrastructures for peace and
reconciliation. We need to do more work on deterring
new crimes by holding perpetrators accountable. More
attention should be given to women's role as leaders
and their participation in decision-making, which
must be meaningful if we are to realize opportunities
for positive change. Women should be viewed not
merely as victims and survivors but also as a great
resource for their communities and countries, capable
of contributing significantly to peace and security.
We know that women's participation is essential to
building sustainable peace, and it is therefore important
to ensure that the agenda on women and peace and
security is duly reflected in all engagements relating to
international peace and security.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm SADC's
continued strong support for the agenda on women and
peace and security.

