The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Armenia, Austria, Belarus, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, the
Czech Republic, Denmark, Egypt, El Salvador,
Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Malaysia, the
Marshall Islands, Mexico, Montenegro, Namibia, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Turkey, Uruguay and Viet
Nam to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of UN Women, to
participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Navanethem
Pillay, United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, to participate in this meeting. On behalf of the
Council, I welcome Ms. Pillay, who is joining today's
meeting via video-teleconference from Geneva.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Brigitte
Balipou, of the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace
and Security, to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Mari Skare,
Special Representative for Women, Peace and Security
of the Secretary General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization, to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Miroslava
Beham, Senior Gender Adviser on Gender Issues of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Tete Antenio, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations, to participate in this
meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2013/6l4, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Costa Rica,
Croatia, the Czech Republic, Denmark, El Salvador,
Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Montenegro, Namibia, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal,
the Republic of Korea, Romania, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Turkey, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
the United States of America, Uruguay and Viet Nam.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2013/525, which contains the report of the
Secretary General on women and peace and security.

I also wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2013/587, which contains a letter dated
3 October 2013 from the Permanent Representative
of Azerbaijan to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. I
shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
Argentina, Australia, Azerbaijan, China, France,
Guatemala, Luxembourg, Morocco, Pakistan,
Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Togo, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and United States of America

The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 2122 (2013).

The principal objectives of the debate are to review
progress and address gaps in and challenges to the
implementation of commitments on women, peace and
security, as well as to discuss the specific measures that
need to be adopted in order to foster transitional justice
and rule of law actions.

I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon. I now give him the
floor.


