Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): We are seeing
unprecedented numbers ofdisplaced persons; 55 million
were reportedly displaced by the end of 2013, including
33 million due to violence in conflicts. Violent outbreaks
in Gaza and Iraq have exacerbated the situation even
further. Displacement is a peace-and-security issue that
needs adequate attention by the Council, in addition to
action by the other main organs. Liechtenstein therefore
welcomes this debate and its very timely focus on
internally displaced and refugee women. My delegation
hosted a workshop and a policy forum on the topic in
collaboration with the International Peace Institute a
few weeks ago in preparation for today's discussions.

Women and children account for 80 per cent
of displaced persons. Nevertheless, the way they
experience displacement rarely shapes interventions
and programmes. Displacement has been shown to
exacerbate existing gender inequality. Internally
displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees often lack
identification documents. They are deprived of their
livelihoods and struggle with poverty, which puts them
in a particularly vulnerable position. As a consequence,
women face a drastic increase in violence, particularly
violence inside their homes and from intimate partners.
They are more vulnerable to sexual harassment and
exploitation as well as to child, early and forced
marriages.

We cannot limit our action to assist IDPs and
refugees to what is required for bare survival. IDPs
account for 63 per cent ofthe aforementioned 33 million
people displaced due to violence and conflicts. Internal
displacement is a long-term experience, lasting an
average of 17 years. The assistance required must
be complemented therefore by protection, which is
currently lacking. Much more is necessary to ensure
protection from further harm and trauma, in particular
to women and children. States also need to invest in
prevention, to work on preparedness and to have
policies in place to deal with displacement before it
even occurs.

Displacement is not a short-term problem, and we
therefore have to stop treating it as if it were. It is not
solely a humanitarian issue, but also a development
issue. Early investment in development will help lDPs
and refugees rebuild their livelihoods. Rapid provision
of identity documents, fair and equal access to asylum
as well as access to education are key. Education in
particular is a crucial element for empowering women,
making them less vulnerable and allowing them to
make active contributions to recovery. Indeed, women
have to be part of the solution, with full and equal
participation.

In that regard, I would like to highlight the World
Food Programme's excellent initiative in the Sudan,
entitled Safe Access to Firewood and Alternative
Energy in Humanitarian Settings (SAFE). It provides
fuel-efficient stoves that reduce firewood consumption
and the clearing of community forests. The stoves have
reduced expenses for cooking fuel, allowing women
to buy other food items and improve the nutrition and
diet diversity of their families. In addition, women no
longer have to venture far from their homes to collect
firewood. Such trips - as is well known - expose them
to grave risks, including physical and sexual violence.
In less than three years, beneficiaries are reporting that
SAFE has not only changed their lives for the better,
but that many also no longer need food assistance from
the World Food Programme.

It is simply unacceptable that the majority of
humanitarian action still fails to take into account the
vulnerabilities and special needs of women and girls or
their potential to make active contributions. That is not
due to a lack of guidance, since we have the relevant
instruments at our disposal. It is up to us Member
States, the United Nations system and all relevant actors
in the field to ensure the implementation of the guiding
documents. It is now time to hold ourselves accountable
to our own standards.

In tackling displacement, we need a holistic,
inclusive approach based on close collaboration
with civil society and women's groups and aimed at
prevention, protection, participation and development.
We believe that this is the only way that will allow us
to build long-lasting peace and achieve full recovery.

