Ms. Tincopa (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation congratulates you, Sir, on convening this
open debate on resolution 1325 (2000) on women,
peace and security, five years after its adoption. We
believe that it will highlight the need to continue
deepening the debate on a document that reflects a
change in our way of thinking about the impact of
armed conflict on women and girls and about women's
participation in preventing conflicts, promoting peace
and assistance to post-conflict reconstruction.

The world is acquiring a paradoxical reality in the
twenty-first century. It is globally integrated in the
productive processes, trade, financial flows and the
communications revolution, yet it is fragmented by the
proliferation of conflicts, internal wars, transnational
terrorism and ethnic and cultural violence. Since the
cold war, more than 33 civil conflicts have erupted or
been revived in the developing world, causing more
than 5 million deaths and creating almost 17 million
refugees and displaced persons, among whom women
and girls have been particularly affected because of
their status in society and their gender.

Five years after the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), and despite the efforts made to implement it ,
we are far from achieving the goals that we committed
ourselves to therein. In that regard, we feel that the
international community must continue using all
available international instruments to end human rights
violations against women and girls, as well as the
impunity of those responsible for genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes, including acts of
violence against women. We are aware that the
international courts have an important role to play in
that regard, but we believe that it is equally important
that States first assume their responsibility for enacting
justice and punishing the perpetrators.

As to my country, the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission was established in June 2002 to determine
accountability for the violence and terrorism that
occurred in Peru between 1980 and 2000, including
gross violations of human rights. In August 2003, after
two years of investigation, the Commission presented
its final report, containing a comprehensive reparations
plan that the Peruvian Government has begun to carry
out through a collective peace and development
programme. I cite that example in order to
acknowledge the work and leadership of the women's
organizations that, with the support of the United
Nations Development Fund for Women, participated in
the post-conflict process and contributed to the
recognition that persons who were sexually violated
during the conflict and the children born as a result of
such violations are entitled to compensation. With that
recognition of their suffering and material support,
women are now better placed to resume their role in
society.

We believe that the time has come to close the
gap between words and reality. In that regard, we
welcome the system-wide action plan that the
Secretary-General has annexed to his report, focusing
on strategies and activities that seek to improve the
contribution of the United Nations system to the
empowerment of women in conflict areas, and
highlighting as a main goal the urgent need to
strengthen coordination and accountability. We believe
that the action plan must be updated as necessary and
that we must continue to seek and develop effective
monitoring mechanisms that will ensure its ongoing
implementation. We also feel it important that the first
review of the plan take place in October 2006.

I wish to reiterate that States must take the
requisite firm steps to remove the obstacles that
prevent women from being effectively involved in
decision-making processes and from having access to
the highest levels of the hierarchies of power. In that
regard, we reaffirm the commitments we entered into
in the outcome document of the 2005 world summit
(General Assembly resolution 60/1), in which we
reaffirmed our responsibility to fully and effectively
implement resolution 1325 (2000).

The inclusion of a gender perspective in
developing and carrying out the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission is of crucial importance,
given that the Commission's main goal will be to bring
together all relevant actors to marshal resources and
promote comprehensive peacebuilding and post-
conflict recovery strategies. The future Human Rights
Council too will be of relevance to promoting and
protecting the rights of women.

In conclusion, I would like to thank
Mr. Guehenno, Ms. Mayanja, Ms. Heyzer and the other
participants for their work on behalf of women. The
task is still to be completed. It should be carried out
jointly by States, the United Nations system and civil
society, especially women's organizations and groups.

