Mrs. Malenga (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): At the outset, Sir, I would
like to begin by commending your country, the Russian
Federation, on its accession to the presidency of the
Security Council for this month, and to commend you
on the great acumen with which you are conducting the
Council's work in October. I would also like to pay well-
deserved tribute to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, to
whom my country is very grateful for his outstanding
ongoing efforts to ensure that peace returns to my
country, the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I also
take this opportunity to thank Ms. Zainab Bangura,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, for her noteworthy
commitments in fighting sexual violence in my country.
I would also like to express gratitude to Ms. Mlambo-
Ngcuka, Executive Director of UN-Women, for her
support to the women of my country. I also thank
Ms. Rita Lopidia Executive Director and Co-founder
of EVE Organization for Women Development, for her
enlightening briefing.

My country endorses the statement delivered by the
observer of the African Union.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo, which has
been affected by many years of armed conflict with
very adverse consequences, in particular on women and
children, is firmly committed to the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security. Adopted on 31 October 2000 - the first
Council resolution to emphasize the fight against the
impact of war - resolution 1325 (2000) called for
promoting women's contributions to conflict resolution
and to negotiations with a view to the maintenance of
peace and security.

It was in 1966, 50 years ago now, that for the first
time a woman was elevated to the rank of minister in
my country. That was the beginning of a process of
liberating Congolese women from the traditional yoke
in order that they could participate in decision-making
positions. That process culminated with the
promulgation of the 2006 Constitution by the President
of the Republic and Head of State, His Excellency
Mr. Joseph Kabila Kabange.

This open debate gives us an opportunity to
take stock of the progress made since our country
endorsed resolution 1325 (2000). By way of example,
I would mention the following achievements: the
participation of women in all peace negotiations at
national and international levels; the integration of
the gender dimension in all areas of national life
via the promulgation of a law on promoting and and
upholding women's right to equal representation and on
guaranteeing a gender balance in our institutions; and
reforms of the police and the armed forces, including
the setting up of specialized units responsible for
fighting sexual violence.

We have also reviewed our family code, which in the

past had discriminated against women and young girls,
in favour of giving rights to both. Our President recently
promulgated the code. We are currently reviewing our
national strategy against gender-based sexual violence,
with the involvement of all the relevant stakeholders.
We drafted and published a national action plan,
adopted by the Government in October 2010, which we
are reviewing at this time. Every year on 31 October,
we evaluate the activities undertaken to implement
the action plan - a day set aside to commemorate the
resolution, with the collaboration of civil society and
development partners. Finally, we have put in place
a number of structural mechanisms - for example,
setting up national, provincial and local steering
committees and a permanent national secretariat i to
facilitate the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
in all 26 provinces of our country.

Notwithstanding that progress, the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) still faces major challenges,
such as illiteracy, early marriage and inadequate
human, material and financial resources. Aware of
those difficulties, my Government, through its Ministry
on Women, Family and Children, has made a strong
commitment, with the support of technical and financial
development partners, to bolster synergy among all
stakeholders to effectively implement resolutions 1325
(2000) and 2242 (2015), which aim to increase women's
prominence in the peace processes of our respective
countries. The challenge is to promote the rights of
women and young girls and to encourage all initiatives
that will help to achieve the expected results set forth in
resolution 1325 (2000).

