Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka: It is an honour to address
the Security Council and to present the Secretary-
General's report (S/2016/822) on women and peace and
security on his behalf. I thank the presidency of the
Russian Federation for presiding over today's debate
and for proposing to review the implementation of
the commitments made last year by Member States,
regional organizations and the United Nations.

Last year's open debate (see S/PV.7533) had the
highest number of participating speakers in the entire
history ofthe Security Council. More than 180 political,
financial and institutional commitments were made
in the course of the high-level review of resolution
1325 (2000), and the new resolution 2242 (2015) was
adopted. Such commitments are important and can
make a difference. They must therefore not simply be
plans on paper; we must turn them into action. Last
year's global study on women and peace and security
was also welcomed as a guide that can keep our work
in moving ahead. Today, therefore, we urge Member
States, regional organizations and the United Nations
to do more to take the study's recommendations
forward and turn the commitments that were made
into concrete action. The Council is well positioned to
ensure we have greater accountability to one another
for our commitments.

UN-Women is already responding to many of the
findings and recommendations of the global study and
the appeal issued in resolution 2242 (2015). We are
serving as the secretariat for key new mechanisms, such
as the Council's new Informal Expert Group on Women
and Peace and Security and the Global Acceleration
Instrument for Women and Peace and Security and
Humanitarian Action. We are pleased to announce that
we will also perform a secretariat function in support
of the new network of national focal points.

And we are responding to last year's call for
greater visibility and leadership in this area. We are
therefore mobilizing high-level champions who can
amplify our voice, message and presence everywhere,
and ensure that the agenda on women and peace and
security has the broadest possible support all over
the world. We are contributing to the implementation
of the peace operations review, in collaboration with
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Political Affairs. We are collaborating
closely with the Peacebuilding Support Office and
other partners in order to ensure that gender is fully
reflected in the agendas on sustaining peace and
on youth and peace and security. I congratulate the
Peacebuilding Commission on adopting a gender
strategy, a first among our intergovernmental bodies.
We are also working hard to ensure that the United
Nations approach to preventing and countering violent
extremism engages women's leadership, and that it
respects and promotes women's rights.

While there is still much more to do, this year's
annual report includes several markers of progress. For
the first time, the Peacebuilding Fund exceeded the
15 per cent target for funds intended directly for gender
equality and women's empowerment. The percentage
of female beneficiaries of temporary employment
programmes has doubled since 2013, reaching 46 per
cent in 2015. The percentage of peace agreements that
include provisions on gender equality has increased
from 22 to 72 per cent in the past five years. In the
past few months we have seen several gender justice
milestones in both national and international courts. In
Guatemala, a national court prosecuted and convicted
people on charges of sexual slavery during armed
conflict, a first for a domestic court anywhere. In the
past year, the International Criminal Court secured its
first conviction for sexual and gender-based crimes.
And in Senegal, the trial of Hissene Habre saw the first
conviction of a former Head of State for personally
committing rape as an international crime.

But we have many challenges remaining. The
report also notes that there are many areas of concern
and stagnation. The percentage of women beneficiaries
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes has declined markedly, decreasing to 12 per
cent. In countries in conflict and post-conflict that have
no quotas, women occupied a mere 11 per cent of seats
in parliament, and their political participation has not
improved significantly over the past five years. In the 12
months since resolution 2242 (2015) urged that women
in civil society be asked to present briefings during the
Security Council's country-specific deliberations, that
commitment has not materialized.

Countries in conflict and post-conflict situations
perform significantly worse in the areas of maternal
mortality and education for girls. The Security Council
is very aware of the atrocities committed against
women and girls in war-ravaged countries. We are still
counting the days since the Chibok girls were abducted.
We remain concerned about the many who have not
been found, in Nigeria or elsewhere. Although we
welcome the fact that 21 of them have returned, we will
continue to count the days until all are released. There
have also been extensive reports of abuses committed
against Iraqi and Syrian women and girls trapped
between Da'esh and the military operations against it,
including in the current situation in Mosul. Elsewhere,
South Sudanese women and girls are being raped by
armed actors with total impunity, as we will no doubt
hear this morning from Ms. Lopidia.

In addition to such examples of extreme violence
against women, we have countless examples of
women's extreme political marginalization in public
life and decision-making, which must also be of
concern to the Council, in view of its considerable
power. In the first year of the Informal Expert Group,
members of the Security Council discussed four
country situations - Mali, Iraq, the Central African
Republic and Afghanistan. In Mali, of the 62 Malian
members of the committees in charge of monitoring
and implementing the peace agreement, only one
was a woman. The representation of women among
the committees' international mediation members
is also dismal. In Iraq, there was not a single woman
in the four command cells for administering people's
return to liberated areas, chaired by the Government
and members of the security forces, tribal sheikhs,
imams and notable community members. Since the
transition ended in the Central African Republic,
women's representation in national institutions has
again dropped, to 8 per cent of members of parliament.
In Afghanistan, the international community's huge
investment in the security sector could offer women
much more. Women make up less than 1 per cent of the
country's armed forces and less than 2 per cent of its
national police.

In many of those contexts the United Nations itself
shows a similarly poor representation of women. In the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan,
women account for only 13 per cent of staff overall and
11 per cent of leadership positions. Such stark deficits
in our own gender balance cannot continue. We need
an intervention that can turn the tide. We pay a daily
price for this issue in our reputation and effectiveness
in the areas where we provide services. It is a challenge
that the incoming Secretary-General will have to face
in order to build on what has been started. We welcome
his commitment to taking concrete measures to achieve
gender parity within the United Nations. That would
be a breakthrough that could result in a much more
formidable United Nations by building on achievements
so far.
Finally, I would like to end by recognizing our
current Secretary-General's contribution to women
and peace and security. The United Nations system
has made important progress on that agenda under his
leadership. We know that the issues are close to his
heart and that he will continue to champion them in his
future roles and whatever his new capacity will be, with
the support of UN-Women. UN-Women thanks him for
his commitment to women and peace and security, and
we thank you, Mr. President, for the invitation to brief
the Council today.

