Ms. Kamara (Liberia): It is an honour for me to
participate in this debate during your presidency,
Madam, which itself reflects the level of participation
that we hope will become increasingly accessible to
larger numbers of women. It pleases me even more,
given the important contribution that your country,
Nigeria, and other Member States have made towards
the creation and maintenance of an environment of
peace in Liberia. It is that enabling environment,
coupled with visionary leadership and strong
partnerships, which has allowed the Liberian
Government to pursue policies that provide
opportunities for the advancement and empowerment
of Liberian women.

Already one year has passed since we
commemorated the tenth anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000) with many activities, including a similar
debate in this very Council (S/PV.6411); a plethora of
commitments by Member States to translate the major
tenets of that resolution into smart national action
plans; the adoption of initial indicators to measure
progress; and a request that the Secretary-General
develop a strategic framework to guide the United
Nations implementation of the resolution. It remains
our challenge to meet the expectations that have been
raised by those activities.

We commend the Secretary-General on his report
on women and peace and security (S/201l/598*),
which reflects a laudable effort to use the indicators
currently available in assessing progress. The report
provides some insights into good practices and
progress made by Member States, regional and
international organizations, as well as constraints in the
global effort to fully engage women in all national
processes, whether they concern peace and security or
political or socio-economic development. We broadly
support those recommendations.

Liberia continues to make progress in its efforts
to involve women at decision-making levels in all
areas of national governance. At critical junctures in
Liberia's history, its women have demonstrated the
ability to lead. Liberia holds the distinct honour of
being the birthplace and home of the first woman and
the first African to be appointed President of the
General Assembly at its twenty-fourth session in 1970.

In recent history, during a lull in the protracted
conflict, Liberia had a female interim President, in the
person of Mrs. Ruth Perry, who steered the work of a
transitional Government from 1996 to 1997. Then there
were the unsung heroes - the countless number of
women who bravely shouldered the responsibility of
caring for their families, even as they participated in
discussions on peace and security, while living in the
internally displaced persons and refugee camps across
West Africa and further afield.

The year 2003 marked another milestone, when a
group of Liberian women, led by Leymah Gbowee,
appeared, uninvited, at the door of a negotiation room
in Accra and vowed not to move or be moved until a
peace accord was signed. Their resolve and
determination were expressed in a simple song with a
persistent refrain: "We want peace, no more war". A
small group of mobilized and determined women
morphed into a national movement that in turn
translated into a groundswell of support for a female
presidential candidate and culminated in the election of
Mrs. Ellen Johnson Sirleaf as President, in 2005.

Today, women's community peace huts in
counties around the country are venues for conflict
mediation and resolution. They also serve as safe
havens for women escaping domestic violence and as
counselling centres for survivors of sexual and gender-
based violence. In the peace huts, women address child
support issues and work with local police to identify
suspects who have committed crimes against women,
so as to ensure their arrest and interrogation. Women
also monitor the early warning signs of conflict and
lead peaceful demonstrations on issues that affect their
well-being.

Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
discussions have revealed many examples of women's
effective contribution to conflict prevention, peace
processes and peacebuilding in the various regions of
the world. Women bear the consequences of conflict
and are thus well placed to contribute to solutions.
Having reached this realization, our common challenge
is to find creative means to institutionalize this role at
the national and international levels. Women must be
capacitated and strategically positioned to play their
rightful role.

Liberia is moving deliberately and purposefully
towards the fulfilment of its commitments to women's
advancement. There has been a gradual increase in
women's presence in leadership and decision-making
positions at the central and local Government levels.
Gender-responsive policies, strategies and
programmes, some of which are mentioned in the
Secretary-General's report, are being integrated into all
sectors of national action. In 2009, Liberia became one
of the first countries to have completed its national
action plans for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). This progress has been made possible through
the consistent and much-appreciated support of
development partners. All the same, inadequate
resources remain a challenge and hindrance to robust
implementation.

We are encouraged by the recognition that has
been accorded internationally to the modest
achievements made by Liberia in its efforts to
meaningfully involve women in national governance
and to build and utilize their productive capacities,
including for the consolidation of peace. Mindful that
food security has a conflict preventive dimension, I
cannot fail to mention that the Hunger Project's
prestigious 2011 Africa Prize for Leadership was
awarded a few days ago to the Liberian Minister of
Agriculture, Ms. Florence Chenoweth, for her
dedication to improving the livelihoods and food
security of women farmers in Liberia.

Of course, all recognitions have been crowned by
the joint award of the Nobel Peace Prize to three
women, two of them Liberians - President Ellen
Johnson-Sirleaf and Leymah Gbowee - each for her
contribution to securing peace in Liberia, strengthening
the position and enhancing the influence of women in
Liberia. As Liberians, this recognition fills us with
pride, even if we realize that it is intended to have
impact far beyond Liberia. The message to the global
community, in the words of the Nobel Committee, is to
"realize the great potential for democracy and peace
that women can represent".

We are proud and inspired by these accolades, but
we realize that there is still a long way to go. The
incidence of rape of girls and women is still
unacceptable high, and women constitute only 14 per
cent of the Liberian legislature. We are humbled when
we consider the vastness of the challenges that still lie
ahead; the gender inequities that still exist; and the
high walls that we still have to scale before female
mediators and peace negotiators become normal
features of the international peace architecture. We
believe that the systematic use of quotas at the national
and international levels could help to accelerate
progress towards this objective. Affirmative action
programmes are also required to give the necessary
impetus to our effort to place women centrally in
conflict prevention, mediation and peace processes.

Liberia pledges to make more concerted efforts to
comply with reporting requirements so as to contribute
meaningfully to future reports of the Secretary-General
on women and peace and security. The presence of
UN-Women in Liberia provides the needed support to
national efforts to implement resolution 1325 (2000)
and reduce gender inequities. We therefore look
forward to continued partnership with UN-Women
towards the enhancement of women's empowerment,
peacebuilding and sustainable development. It is our
hope that, in the not too distant future, the capacities of
women will be so fully integrated into the global peace
architecture that the focus of debates on conflict
prevention and mediation will not be on women's role
and participation but simply on the subject matter.
