Ms. Gerashchenko (Ukraine) (spoke in French):
Allow me to thank the Secretary-General; Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of UN-Women;
and the other briefers for their remarks. We very
much appreciate the recent report of the Secretary-
General on the issue of women and peace and security
(S/2016/822), issued in September. We approve of the
activities of new structures of the United Nations,
including the Informal Expert Group set up under
resolution 2242 (2015) on the problems of women and
peace and security, and the national coordinators in
Member States dealing with questions of women and
peace and security. The protection of women during
armed conflicts is an international issue.

Allow me now to speak in Russian to inform the
Council of the situation of Ukrainian women since the
war was launched against Ukraine.

(spoke in Russian)

I want to appeal to citizens of the Russian
Federation, that they should be able to know the real
truth of the war in Donbas and of the suffering of
Ukrainian women and children. Unfortunately, we have
first-hand experience of the horrible effects of conflicts
on women and children. The victims of Russian military
aggressions since the spring of 2014 have been millions
of Ukrainian women, and the Russian Federation is
fully responsible for violating human rights, both in
occupied Crimea and Donbas. This was recognized by
two recent resolutions of the Parliamentary Assembly
of the Council of Europe.

Women and children are the most vulnerable during
these conflicts. Allow me to provide a few harrowing
figures. According to recent data, in Ukraine today
there are 1.7 million internally displaced persons. Of
those, about 900,000 are women and more than 236,000
are children. Over the past two years in Donbas, 495
women have died in the civilian population.

In this Chamber I would like to recall Yelena
Lafazan, a Russian-speaking woman from Mariupol.
She protected her 9-year-old daughter with her own
body during the attacks in Mariupol two years ago.
When she died, she had not even turned 40, and her
child lost one of her limbs. In another instance, Klim
Klimenko, a 3-year-old child, was protected by her
mother during a shooting in Kramatorsk in February
2015. The heroism of her mother, who was not even
30 years old, saved her life. During the armed conflict
launched by the Russian Federation against Ukraine, 68
children died and 152 children were seriously injured.
It is quite possible, though, that the figure we have is
incorrect because neither Ukrainian authorities nor
international humanitarian organizations yet have
access to the occupied territories. We therefore cannot
know the exact number of the women and children who
have died. That is with regard to the civilian population.

With regard to the military, since the Russian
military aggression against Ukraine in Donbas began,
2,130 soldiers of the Ukrainian armed forces have
died, including the two women. Those soldiers were
protecting their motherland from the aggressors. As a
result of the war, 1,937 children have become orphans,
1,213 women have become widows, 1,975 Ukrainian
mothers have lost children and 142 Ukrainian women
are awaiting the return of their family members from
prisons in the occupied Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts.
And as a member of the Minsk Group on humanitarian
questions, I wish to inform the Council that,
unfortunately, the process of releasing the detained
persons has been blocked, and that is being used to
blackmail the Ukrainian authorities.

In this particularly difficult situation regarding
violations of the rights of women and children in the
occupied territories, the Russian occupying army has
taken Ukrainian women as hostages. According to the
Security Service of Ukraine, there are 238 Ukrainian
women in prison at the moment. At the moment, 233
women have been found they either have been released,
or their bodies have been identified, although five were
left in prison. The most well-known Kremlin prisoner,
Nadiya Savchenko, spent almost 2 years in a Russian
prison. Another Ukrainian woman - a journalist,
Maria Varfolomeyeva - was imprisoned for more than
a year in Luhansk. She was freed in March of this year.

Who was exchanged for those two Ukrainian
women? Russian militarymen Aleksandrov and
Yerofeev were released to free Savchenko, and one Ivan
Gorbunov to free Ms. Varfolomeyeva. This is a symbol
of the Russian Federation's war in Donbas. Russian
military personnel are fighting by killing and taking as
prisoners Ukrainian women and children. Conflicts are
always accompanied by violence against women and
girls. We are aware of cases of trafficking in persons
on temporarily occupied territories, sexual violence
and exploitation, and the use of minors in military
activities, which are incompatible with human rights
law and unacceptable in our contemporary world and
goes against the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
which was ratified by the Russian Federation. .

Allow me now to offer a few examples. Last month
we discovered a shocking fact regarding the gender
element of the violence in the temporary occupied
territories of Donetsk oblast. Such violence was
perpetrated by members of armed gangs and terrorist
groups, including fighters of the so-called Pyatnashka
International Brigade of the so-called Donetsk People's
Republic. That involved the setting up of establishments
where minors were forced to provide sexual services.
Human trafficking also took place. Foreign nationals
established studios to produce child pornography, and
the materials were then distributed outside of Ukraine.
Furthermore, children were recruited and received
military training to participate in the fighting. That is
yet another example ofwhat we are also trying to resolve
in the Minsk Working Group on Humanitarian Issues.

In the prisons of the so-called Donetsk People's
Republic, a group of teenagers is being detained
under a charge of sabotage. We have videos of their
interrogations, in which tearful and frightened 14-year-
old children are being threatened to the point that they
allegedly confess to various offenses. The militias
posted the videos on the Internet. Meanwhile, those
children are still in prison, their fate is unknown
and international human rights organizations do
not have access to them. According to human rights
organizations, one in four persons imprisoned by
the militants has been subjected to violence or has
witnessed such violence. Human rights activists point
out that sexual violence is being used as part of the
torture regime in order to sow panic and fear.

Those facts give an idea of the real situation with
regard to human rights, or, more accurately, the lack
of such rights, in the temporarily occupied territories
of Ukraine. More detailed information on the human
rights situation in the occupied territories is very
scarce. The Ukrainian authorities do not have accurate
statistics, including on gender-based violence, because
of the absence of Ukrainian human rights organizations
in the territories controlled by the rebels. And they do
not allow international human rights organizations to go
there, neither the Red Cross, Medecins sans frontieres
nor United Nations organizations. We have been unable
to gather a complete set of evidence on the incidents,
including the cases of sexual violence.

In that regard, I want to take this opportunity to
reiterate once again, on behalf of Ukraine, our appeal
to the United Nations to include in the mandates
of the appropriate bodies of the Organization the
need to combat sexual violence during the provoked
armed conflict in Ukraine and the Crimea. It is very
important for us to have not only rhetorical support
from the United Nations, but also specific actions
by the Organization, so that we can genuinely assess
the situation on the ground, and to have the results
reflected in the Secretary-General's reports and in
further recommendations.

As to specific actions by our country in the context
of the problems relating to women and peace and
security in the current conditions of foreign aggression
against Ukraine and the occupation of part of Ukraine's
territory, I would like to say the following. Ukrainian
women have rallied to deal with the current situation.
Female politicians, social activists, volunteers
and human rights activists are working actively to
re-establish peace, and their role in dealing with women
and peace and security issues is extremely important
and ever-growing.

I should also point out that today women make up
12 per cent of the members of the Government and the
Parliament of Ukraine. They play a very active role,
first and foremost in the peacemaking processes. In
February 2016, the Ukrainian Government adopted
a national plan of action for implementing resolution
1325 (2000). The implementation of the plan will allow
us to ensure even greater participation by women in
peacekeeping and decision-making in the field of
national security and defence, and in further combating
gender-based violence.

The aggression against Ukraine has led to greater
involvement by women in the peacemaking processes,
and the President of Ukraine has appointed a woman to
a position in charge of the peace process in the Donbas
region. We also have women in at least two Minsk
working groups dealing with humanitarian and political
issues, and they are doing everything possible to ensure
a peaceful solution to the situation in the Donbas.

But the war has also meant greater involvement
by women in the armed forces. Many Ukrainian
women voluntarily signed enlistment contracts in
order to protect their country against the aggression.
We now have 19,892 women in the armed forces of
Ukraine, of whom 2,458 are officers and 17,000 are
non-commissioned officers or soldiers. Of that group,
266 women were mobilized directly into the ranks of
the armed forces. Women also play an important role
in providing medical help at the front, and very often
they have been active in saving both civilians and our
soldiers during the conflict. This year we took a number
of special steps to include the gender component in the
area of security-sector reform. Although those measures
are just at their initial stage - to speak frankly - they
have already brought initial results: they have brought
about a transformation in the military structures and
the military culture.

This past summer we expanded the list of
specialities in which women can serve in the armed
forces, including in military functions. We need to
bring gender advisers into the military. We hope that
will be done soon and that the Ukrainian Government
will adopt such a measure. We plan to enact broader
legal changes so as to eliminate barriers, ensure the
equal representation of women in the military and
enhance parliamentary oversight of national security
and defence.

In order to respond appropriately to violence
against women, one of the upcoming steps to be taken
by the Parliament is to ratify the Council of Europe's
Convention on Preventing and Combating Violence
against Women and Domestic Violence. I believe that
the Parliament in Ukraine will ratify the Istanbul
Convention during the current session. The relevant
bills have already been introduced in the Parliament,
and I hope that Parliament will ratify them this autumn.

In conclusion, I would like to stress that Ukraine
wants to further promote the rights of women and
ensure their participation in peace negotiations and
post-conflict reconstruction, as well as to protect
women against all forms of violence.

