The Secretary-General: I commend Nigeria's
choice of theme for today's debate, and I thank the
President and Council members for agreeing to start
earlier than usual to allow me to participate in this very
important meeting.

The Security Council has emphasized repeatedly
that involving women in conflict prevention and
mediation is essential to building peace and reinforcing
the foundations of democracy. This understanding was
further acknowledged by the award of this year's
Nobel Peace Prize to three extraordinary women
peacemakers: President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf and
Leymah Gbowee of Liberia; and Tawakkul Karman of
Yemen. Their examples should inspire us to intensify
our efforts to ensure women's full participation in all
conflict prevention and resolution processes.

The Executive Director of UN-Women, Michelle
Bachelet, will present my report on women, peace and
security (S/2011/598*). As it indicates, women's
participation remains low both in official and observer
roles. This has to change, and I am determined that the
United Nations system should lead by example.

In the past year, the number of women leading
United Nations peacekeeping, political and
peacebuilding missions has risen from six to 33
missions. My Special Representatives for Children and
Armed Conflict and on Sexual Violence in Conflict are
female, too. The Department of Political Affairs has
increased the proportion of women candidates in its
roster of senior mediators, team members and thematic
experts to 35 per cent. A gender and inclusion expert is
now serving in the United Nations Standby Team of
Mediation Experts, and guidance will soon be issued
for UN mediators addressing conflict-related sexual
Violence in ceasefire and peace agreements.
11-56959
In the field, our teams are supporting women so
they can engage in peacebuilding and conflict
prevention, management and reconciliation in West
Africa, Central Asia, the Balkans and South-East Asia.
In Afghanistan, our Mission continues to engage with
women's networks struggling against the abuse of
women. We have also worked for the inclusion of
women in the High Peace Council and in provincial
peace councils. In Darfur, our Mission worked to
ensure that more than 30 per cent of civil society
representatives at the Doha peace negotiations were
women. The United Nations Mission in the Republic of
South Sudan is working with women parliamentarians
in that country to enhance the role of women in
conflict resolution, mitigation and peacebuilding.

In turn, I encourage Member States to increase
the number of women in senior positions in
international and regional conflict prevention. This
means more women in senior governance roles, at the
top of security institutions, and serving as diplomats.
The next few months will see international meetings to
support recovery in South Sudan, Somalia, Afghanistan
and Libya. Let us use these opportunities to ensure that
women's voices are heard.

As members of the Council know, I have
presented a strategic framework to accelerate the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). It has
targets and indicators for 2014 and 2020, and a
baseline is being assembled to track progress and
ensure accountability. I will welcome further
improvements in the flow of information to the Council
on progress in the situation of women in armed
conflict. I also urge Member States to do more -
including through additional funding - to implement
the strategic framework's priorities and protect the
rights of women and girls.

While there has undoubtedly been progress, I am
deeply concerned about the persistence of serious
abuses of women's rights. Last year at this time, I
lamented the mass rapes that had occurred in Walikale,
in the east of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
My alarm has not diminished. We must respond swiftly
and effectively to such crimes wherever and whenever
they occur. We must hold those responsible to account.
Let us make women's dignity, safety and needs a
priority.

1 am committed to working with the Council to
ensure the full implementation of resolution 1325
11-56959
(2000) and its related resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888
(2009), 1889 (2009) and 1960 (2010). I look forward to
hearing members' proposals for bringing women from
the margins of conflict prevention and mediation into
the centre, where they belong.

