Mr. Nkoloi (Botswana): We congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of June, as well
as for convening this thematic debate. We also thank
the Secretary-General and his Special Representative,
Ms. Zainab Bangura, and the other speakers for their
briefings this morning.

We begin by reaffirming the importance that
Botswana attaches to the protection and promotion
of the rights of women and children, as well as our
commitment to address all forms of violence against
women, including sexual violence.

Sexual violence in armed conflict represents one of
the most heinous violations or abuses of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
The prevention of sexual violence in armed conflict is
therefore a matter both of upholding universal human
rights and of maintaining international security, in
keeping with relevant Security Council resolutions. In
that regard, Botswana welcomes the continued focus
by the Council on this thematic debate and wishes to
reiterate the importance of increased and more systemic
attention to the women and peace and security agenda
in the Council's own work.

We remain deeply concerned that, despite repeated
condemnations by the international community
of sexual violence in conflict situations, such acts
continue to occur, and in some situations have even
become systematic and widespread, with women and
children constituting the majority of those adversely
affected by armed conflict. We call on all perpetrators
of such heinous acts to find it in their hearts to stop such
crimes. Sexual Violence in the name of armed conflict
contravenes human rights. It goes against human nature
and against humankind.

In that regard, I wish to state categorically that
impunity for sexual violence, including by armed
groups, is unacceptable and can never be tolerated.
To that end, my delegation wishes to underscore the
importance of ending impunity for such acts as part ofa
comprehensive approach to seeking sustainable peace,
justice and security. Regrettably, a lack of accountability
tends to reinforce the social normalization of, and
tolerance for, sexual violence. We therefore recognize
the need for enhanced political will and commitment to
prevent these crimes by promoting and protecting the
rights of women and children.

While we remain convinced that more needs be
done to address such ongoing atrocities, my delegation
also wishes to emphasise the responsibility of States to
comply with their relevant obligations to end impunity,
and to effectively use all available means to enforce
accountability by prosecuting all perpetrators of such
crimes. Botswana recognises the important role of
the United Nations system in addressing violence
against women and children at the global, regional and
national levels, and in assisting States in their efforts
to eliminate and prevent all forms of violence against
women and children.

To that end, I wish to express the support of my
delegation for the work of UN-Women, as well as
the mandates of the Secretary-General's Special
Representatives on Sexual Violence in Conflict and on
Children and Armed Conflict. While also recognizing
the existing normative framework established under
various Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 1261 (1999), 1325 (2000) and other subsequent
resolutions on women and peace and security and on
children and armed conflict, Botswana shares the
belief that efforts to address sexual violence in conflict
should be consistent with, and complementary to, wider
United Nations efforts. In that regard, we also wish to
underline that greater coordination and collaboration
with all the relevant stakeholders is essential to
strengthening global efforts to address sexual violence.

Botswana believes that efforts to end sexual
Violence must also promote women's active and equal
participation in conflict prevention, conflict resolution,
transitionaljustice and security sector reform processes.
In that regard, we strongly support the involvement
of women in peace negotiations, peacebuilding and
conflict prevention.

With regard to women's access to justice, we call
on States to take practical steps to address obstacles
in women's access to justice, including by creating an
enabling environment where women can easily report
incidents of violence without fear or intimidation.
Furthermore, we urge all States to strengthen the
capacity of national criminal justice systems to serve
victims with dignity.

With regard to the engagement of all segments of
society to combat sexual violence, our beliefis that men
and boys must be socialized and engaged as partners
to create a culture of peace, tolerance and respect for
women. That includes ending the stigmatization of
victims and instilling a change of attitude and behaviour
in men and boys.

Botswana therefore pledges to work with the
international community as it seeks to find ways to stop
violence against women and children in the context
of conflict. We welcome the Council's unanimous
adoption this morning of a new resolution on women and
peace and security (resolution 2106 (2013)), We remain
optimistic that, given our collective will, especially in
the Security Council, we will end such shameful crimes
against humanity.

