Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Equatorial Guinea would first like to express
its condemnation of the recent deplorable terrorist
attacks on civil society and the defence and security
forces of the Sahel and on the international forces in
Mali, including the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and
Operation Barkhane. Our prayers go out to the victims
of these attacks and to their families and communities,
to whom we offer our deepest condolences. We also
wish a swift recovery for all those who were injured.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea congratulates
the Swedish presidency for its leadership and its choice
of topics for debate this month. Yesterday, under the
presidency of His Excellency the Prime Minister of
Sweden, Mr. Stefan Lofven, we held an open debate on
the very important issue of children and armed conflict,
which led to the unanimous adoption of resolution
2427 (2018) by the Security Council. Today, under the
presidency of Her Excellency the Swedish Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Ms. Margot Wallstrom, we are
participating in a meeting on an equally important
topic, women and peace and security in the Sahel
and the Lake Chad basin region. We are very grateful
for the briefings we have heard from the Deputy
Secretary-General, Ms. Amina Mohammed, and from
the African Union Special Envoy on Women, Peace and
Security, Ms. Bineta Diop, who provided us with a very
comprehensive and enlightening overview of this issue.

The Boko Haram insurgency continues to be
active in its ninth year and is currently affecting the
entire Diffa region, in the Niger, and the Lake Chad
region. The people of these regions continue to suffer
the devastating impact of terrorist attacks, which
have driven millions from their homes and left them
dependent on humanitarian aid. More than 2 million
people in the region remain displaced today. Some
live in overcrowded facilities, without access to basic
services such as shelter, water and food, and others have
settled in hosting communities, in extreme precarity.

The effect of this crisis is being particularly felt by
women and girls. Women and girls are used as suicide
bombers; they are subject to forced marriage; and, if
they are released or have escaped from the clutches
of Boko Haram terrorists, they face stigmatization. A
study carried out by the Combating Terrorism Center
at West Point in 2017, together with Yale University,
in the United States, found that of the 434 suicide
attacks carried by Boko Haram between 2011 and 2017,
56 per cent were carried out by young women and girls,
including two thirds of the suicide attacks in 2017 alone.

Given this worrisome situation, the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea continues to condemn terrorism
in the strongest possible terms and calls on the
international community to support the Governments
of the region in making the necessary investments and
strengthening the mechanisms required in order to
promote reconciliation, guarantee accountability and
intensify the combat against terrorism. Also required
will be initiatives aimed at preventing violent extremism
that include the human rights and gender dimensions.

Concerning the Sahel region, where terrorist attacks
are also having a very harmful impact on women and
girls, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea would like to
congratulate the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel, which organized a high-level conference
on women, violence and terrorism in West Africa and
the Sahel, in partnership with the Economic Community
of West African States, the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel), the Mano River Union, the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism, UN-Women and the
Working Group on Women, Youth, Peace and Security
in West Africa and the Sahel.

We trust that the outcomes of that high-level
conference will contribute to boosting the level of
participation of women in all social, political and
economic initiatives aimed at fighting and preventing
violent extremism and fighting terrorism. With respect
to the efforts made to address the situation, Equatorial
Guinea also hails the recent recruitment of a gender
adviser to the G-5 Sahel joint force.

We also welcome the joint efforts made by the
African Union and the United Nations, as exemplified
by the recent high-level visit to South Sudan, the Niger
and Chad, in which the briefers we have heard from
today participated, accompanied by Phumzile Mlambo-
Ngcuka, Executive Director ofUN-Women; Ms. Bience
Philomena Gawanas, the Secretary-General's Special
Adviser on Africa; and Ms. Natalia Kanem, Executive
Director of the United Nations Population Fund. We
would call for more visits of this kind owing to their
importance and impact they could have on the ground.

We also welcome the recent efforts made by the
United Nations and the European Union to better
implement the United Nations Integrated Strategy for
the Sahel, including the recent drafting of a support
plan for the Strategy, intended to promote investments
in the region. We very much hope that these efforts will
contribute not just to empowering women and young
people, but will also have a positive impact on cross-
border cooperation, conflict prevention, sustainable
peace, inclusive economic growth, climate action and
renewable energy.

We congratulate the Deputy Secretary-General
and urge her to continue in the same enthusiastic vein
in which she has been leading the efforts made in the
context of the United Nations Strategy.

Finally, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea would
like to underscore the positive work being done by the
African Union and the Lake Chad Basin Commission in
support of counterterrorism operations and of stability
in the region. We reiterate our resolute support to the
Governments affected as they tackle the insurgency,
congratulate them on the progress they have made and
encourage them to continue and intensify these efforts
until stability has been achieved in the region.

