The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Jordan.

At the outset, I wish to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura,
and her team for their outstanding efforts in drafting
the report before us today (S/2015/203), and for her
comprehensive briefing. I also thank Mr. Hamsatu
Allamin of the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace
and Security for her enlightening briefing.

Tangible progress has been made in terms of
developing standards and legal frameworks to protect
against sexual Violence in conflict. The approach
adopted by the international community to prevent this
barbaric phenomenon has been instrumental. In spite
of that progress, however, we continue to see the most
abject of crimes being perpetrated during and after
conflict, including rape, forced prostitution, sexual
slavery and forced sterilization.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/203)
paints a very gloomy picture with respect to the
unprecedented increase in the types of violence and
the number of victims, in particular in the Middle East
and Africa. In fact, some States and State-affiliated
groups, as well as non-State armed groups, have
adopted innovative measures to systematically
use sexual Violence as a weapon of war against
civilians - to terrorize them and force them into exile
or displacement, to humiliate them and undermine the
moral authority and standing of the adversary, and to
get victims to join their ranks. In that regard, the acts
perpetrated by Daesh - including mass kidnappings of
women and minors in areas under its control, rape, the
sale and presentation of women as gifts, and systematic
sexual servitude - require that we give this problem
the priority attention it deserves.

Daesh is also using such violence and collective
punishment as a way of attracting and winning over
young delinquents to their ranks. The same goes for
Boko Haram, which carries out mass kidnappings of
girls in Nigeria, exploiting them in the worst way by
using girls under the age of 10 for suicide attacks. In
that regard, we note that there is no specific registry
of the number of victims of those crimes perpetrated
in conflicts. As members are aware, that is because
victims do not submit complaints in order to avoid
being stigmatized or held responsible. They also fear
reprisals against their local communities. Hence the
importance of awareness-raising in communities to
change those mistaken perceptions, which are prevalent
in some conflict areas. We need to empower victims
and ensure the necessary protection. We need to create
an environment conducive to their return to normal
lives.

Among the major challenges currently facing the
international community, there is the need to ensure
accountability with respect to the perpetrators of these
crimes. We need to ensure that there is no impunity. In
that regard, we reiterate the need for States to cooperate
by observing the obligation to extradite or prosecute
perpetrators. Legal mechanisms to combat these crimes
exist under international treaties and conventions.
However, legal gaps remain that we must work to fill,
as they impede the prosecution of perpetrators. In that
regard, we also need to help countries and empower
their legal institutions in order to address these
issues. We also call on the Security Council to work
with the International Criminal Court in prosecuting
perpetrators by pressuring States that are unable or
unwilling to act to prosecute or extradite perpetrators
to third parties for prosecution. We reiterate the
importance for the Security Council to also encourage
documentation and follow-up on these crimes.

We need to encourage States engulfed in violence
or armed conflict to develop plans of action to combat
sexual violence, as well as to grant the relevant United
Nations agencies access to conflict zones in order to
provide the necessary support to victims. We pay
tribute to the efforts ofthe Organization in launching an
initiative to improve the performance of United Nations
missions with regard to issues of sexual violence.

Within our modest means, we in Jordan are working
actively to ensure the greatest possible protection and
care for victims of these types of crimes with respect
to Syrian refugees. It goes without saying that we
condemn all attempts by individuals to exploit refugees,
especially women and girls, by exposing them to the
dangers of such crimes owing to the circumstances
they are living in. Jordan is raising awareness among
individual refugees upon their entry into Jordan,
providing them with pamphlets on their human rights
and ensuring that they are not exploited. We have also
set aside spaces for refugees in public and private
schools, based on our belief in education as the front
line of defence against this type of crime.

Some of the steps taken by Jordan to reduce the
incidence of this phenomenon in armed conflict include
the holding of training sessions on investigating sexual
violence in conflict, as well as sessions on legal aspects
and for police officers and military commanders. We are
also keen to promote the role of women in the military
in order to heighten the effectiveness of humanitarian
missions and peacekeeping operations. We are also
increasing the role of women in the Kingdom's medical
services by ensuring that they are present in clinics and
field hospitals. Jordanian women have had a key role to
play in caring for and protecting Syrian refugees. This
will contribute to their involvement in peacekeeping
operations.

We call for speeding up the appointment ofa special
adviser on the protection of women. We also call for a
gender-specific approach in United Nations missions.

In conclusion, we have a long road ahead in the
efforts pursued by Member States and United Nations
bodies in order to ensure the necessary protection
against sexual Violence in conflict and ultimately
eradicate it. In that regard, I want to recall that victims
are possibly among the people we know. As such, we
should continue to support any and every effort in order
to prevent and eradicate this heinous phenomenon and
bring about a better future for coming generations.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Alexander
De Croo, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Development Cooperation, Digital Agenda, Telecom
and Postal Services of Belgium.

