The Secretary-General: I welcome the
opportunity to address this commemorative open
debate. I thank the President and members of the
Council for allowing me to participate by video. As
they know, I am in South-East Asia, en route to Viet
Nam to attend the third United Nations-Association of
Southeast Asian Nations summit. I have asked the
Deputy Secretary-General to represent me today.

The landmark adoption 10 years ago of resolution
1325 (2000) acknowledged the role of women in peace
and security, not simply as victims but as agents of
change. It opened the way for incorporating gender
perspectives into all our work to restore, keep and
build peace.

The Council has also shown its commitment by
following up with three subsequent resolutions and by
demanding country-specific reporting on how
resolution 1325 (2000) is being implemented. Just two
weeks ago, the Council received my report on women's
participation in peacebuilding (S/2010/466), which
details a clear seven-point agenda for action. Member
States, the United Nations system and civil society
have all contributed to implementing resolution 1325
(2000). Twenty countries have adopted national action
plans, and women are an increasing influence in
national parliaments, including in countries emerging
from armed conflict. The proportion of female
legislators in Burundi and Rwanda is truly inspiring.

Yet the past decade has also been marred by
repeated instances of abuse. Many of my reports to the
Security Council on the progress of peacekeeping
missions have noted widespread rape, physical abuse,
extortion and other violations of the rights and physical
security of women and children during and after
conflict. The recent horrifying mass rapes in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo were just the latest
reminder of the challenges we face and of the vital
importance of fully implementing resolution 1325
(2000).

As my current report (S/2010/498) indicates,
progress is difficult to quantify. We lack adequate
methods for monitoring our impact. That is why I call
on the Council to endorse the comprehensive set of
indicators first presented in April (see S/2010/173) and
refined since then. The indicators will enable us to
identify progress and provide the Council with
systematic comparable information for effective
monitoring and accountability. As Member States and
civil society representatives have repeatedly stated, this
comprehensive set of indicators is among the most
constructive additions to the 1325 (2000) toolkit. But
of course, it is also just a beginning.

Resolution 1325 (2000) will never be
implemented successfully until we end sexual violence
in conflict. We must hold those responsible to account,
whether the crimes are committed by State or non-State
parties. I call on the Council to take appropriate steps
to end impunity. We must intensify efforts to prevent
brutality against women and girls. Let us recognize the
important role of women in the justice and security
sector and support their participation. And let us
eliminate stereotypes and ensure women's meaningful
participation in all stages of peace processes and
decision-making.

The creation of UN Women will enable us to
better assist Member States in addressing all issues of
gender equality and the empowerment of women,
including those related to women and peace and
security. To head this effort, we are fortunate to have
the dynamism and political skill of Ms. Michelle
Bachelet, who will present my report to Council
members today.

I am determined that the United Nations system
should lead by example. That is why I have appointed
11 women Special Representatives or Deputy Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General to
peacekeeping operations and special political missions.
It is why our heads of mission - women and men
alike - held 27 open day meetings this year to consult
with women's organizations and receive their insights.
And it is why I will continue to push for full
accountability in how our own peacekeepers conduct
themselves in the field. On this, I trust that I can count
on the Council's full support.

I look forward to our continued collaboration in
the coming decade. I am committed to working with
the Council to ensure the full implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and its related resolutions 1820
(2008), 1888 (2009) and 1889 (2009). Only by acting
on our promises can we hope to create change.

