Ms. Skare (Norway): I will keep my statement to
less than five minutes.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the five
Nordic countries - Denmark, Finland, Iceland,
Sweden and my own country, Norway.

I would like to commend the Secretary-General for
his focus on gender equality and gender parity. Strong
leadership is fundamental to combating ingrained
prejudice and other obstacles to the full participation
of women in peace operations and peace processes.
We need to identify the barriers that exist in our home
countries and within the United Nations system, and
we need to identify whether they are having an adverse
impact on women's participation in peacekeeping. We
would like to comment on five issues raised in the
presidency's concept note (S/2019/293, annex).

First, Security Council mandates should be explicit
about the need to deploy more women and ensure that
women are represented in all categories ofpersonnel and
about the importance of mainstreaming gender issues
throughout the work of missions. Mandates should also
be explicit about the importance of ensuring the full
participation of women in political processes in host
communities. That is vital to the successful resolution
of conflicts and enabling a successful transition from a
peacekeeping presence to other forms of support.

Secondly, as troop- and police-contributing
countries, we all have a responsibility to deploy more
women and address barriers to women's deployment,
including through national action plans for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security.

Thirdly, training is key, both for increasing women's
participation and for enhancing all peacekeepers'
understanding of the gender perspective.

Fourthly, Member States should actively promote
women to leadership positions. That is important both to
tap into the valuable resources that women represent and
to provide role models who can encourage more women
to participate. We are speaking from experience. The
Nordic countries are proud to provide women leaders to
United Nations peacekeeping operations. One example
is Major General Kristin Lund - the first woman to
be appointed Force Commander of a United Nations
mission and the first woman to head the United Nations
Truce Supervision Organization in the Middle East.

Fifthly, there is often strength in numbers. The
establishment of different forms of women's networks
is a highly effective way of ensuring active outreach
and enabling women peacekeepers to exchange
experiences. The Women Military Network, which was
initiated by Norway and Sweden in New York last year,
is one example. I would encourage all women from
fellow Member States who have a military background
or who work in peacekeeping to join that network.

In conclusion, the Nordic countries stand committed
to continuing to work to increase the number of women
serving in United Nations peacekeeping operations at
all levels and in all categories of personnel.

