Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): We welcome your
initiative, Mr. President, in convening this debate on
an issue that has gained strong public and political
acknowledgement. I also thank the Secretary-General
and the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab
Bangura, as well as the Special Envoy of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the representative of the Women's Initiatives for
Gender Justice.

We continue to witness a disturbing increase
in the trend to use sexual violence as a political and
military tool, the effects of which are grave and long-
lasting, often alienating entire groups, communities
and peoples. It is unfortunate that, despite the existence
of international legal instruments and normative
mechanisms, there is an alarming escalation in the levels
of sexual violence during and after armed conflicts,
which has devastating consequences on women and
girls. Their protection deserves our utmost attention
as a primary responsibility of all of us, because it is a
serious humanitarian concern and significant security
issue. It also requires a multidimensional approach.

Over the past decade, particular attention has
been paid to addressing some of the specific crimes
experienced by women and girls during armed conflict,
namely, rape, trafficking, forced prostitution and
enslavement. Today it is critical to ensure accountability
for past and present crimes and not to grant immunity
to perpetrators or amnesty for future crimes.
It is commendable that the Council continues to
focus on how best to achieve effective justice for crimes
of sexual violence in conflict in order to end impunity,
formally investigate and prosecute persons responsible
for such crimes and grave violations, prevent their
recurrence and seek justice and peace.

In that context, Armenia also attaches the utmost
importance to the promotion of justice and the rule
of law, as those values are indispensable for the
maintenance of international and regional security
and the protection of human rights. A consensus has
emerged that the rule of law should be promoted at both
the national and the international levels and should
be based on the Charter of the United Nations, the
norms of international law and the principle of good
governance. We therefore share the views expressed by
Council members and other speakers calling for more
systematic attention to impunity and justice. We also
agree that increased efforts to fight impunity at the
national and international levels are essential.

I would also like to emphasize that special attention
must be paid to children who are victims of rape and
other forms of sexual violence, especially girls, who
usually make up the largest group of victims in armed
conflict. In addition to the physical damage it causes,
sexual violence often leaves other forms of lasting
harm and stigma.

However, we cannot address sexual violence simply
by naming and punishing offenders. More fundamental
changes are needed at the institutional and societal
levels. In that context, sexual violence against women
will never be adequately addressed without focusing on
the empowerment of women and their participation in
the political, social and economic spheres.

Armenia takes note of some positive trends in
that field. Over the past decade, the Security Council
has put in place a normative framework for women's
participation in peace processes, the protection
and promotion of women's human rights and the
mainstreaming of gender equality and perspectives
in the contexts of armed conflict, peacebuilding and
reconstruction.

Peacebuilding needs the involvement of women.
The role played by women in peacebuilding in many
countries over the past decade has highlighted the
importance of their full participation. Women need
to be present at the table to discuss issues such as
genocide, impunity and security, if a just and enduring
peace is to be built.
However, despite the progress made, a great deal
remains to be addressed and accomplished, as female
voices are not always heard. Women remain largely
excluded, especially from efforts to find workable
solutions to conflicts. We should further promote their
participation.

It will come as news to no one that the costs of
conflict are borne disproportionately by women and
girls. And since women pay the highest price when
peace is absent, they are important stakeholders in
peacebuilding. The inclusion of women in all stages of
peace processes would help guarantee more lasting and
representative settlements.

Armenia recognizes the key role and critical efforts
of the Security Council in preventing sexual violence
and combating impunity in conflict and post-conflict
situations. We have encouraged continued action by
the Council, including the development of effective
measures to put an end to sexual violence in conflict.
We welcome the adoption of today's resolution by the
Council (resolution 2106 (2013)), which will serve
as a practical tool in the consideration of policies,
programmes and actions that can successfully further
the implementation of commitments in combating
sexual violence.

Armenia expresses its readiness to work closely
with the Council, other United Nations bodies,
interested institutions and concerned non-governmental
organizations to expand and implement the women and
peace and security agenda and better the situation of
women around the world, including those affected by
armed conflict.

