Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
congratulate you, Madam President, and the delegation
of the United Kingdom, on assuming the leadership of
the work of the Council for the month of November.
We wish you and your delegation every success in
your work.

We also commend the leadership of the South
African delegation towards achieving our objectives
during the month of October.

We appreciate the valuable information that has
been delivered by the briefers. We also commend in
particular the vision that the Deputy Secretary-General,
Ms. Amina Mohammed, has shown in her efforts to
engage closely with and understand the situation on the
ground of women in the East Africa subregion, together
with Ms. Bineta Diop, the African Union Special
Envoy on Women, Peace and Security, and other senior
officials of both organizations. That partnership has
endowed her with a comprehensive perspective and
contributed to strengthening cooperation and synergies
in that area.

Peru firmly believes in the importance of the
leadership and active participation of women as agents
of peace in all phases of conflict, the impact of which
has proved not only positive but also crucial. In that
regard, while the rapprochement with governmental
and non-governmental actors in various countries of
the subregion has led to important advances, it has also
revealed elements that still need to be strengthened with
regard to the women and peace and security agenda in
those States. For example, Somali women are being
urged to play a leading role in the economic development
of their country and in the fight against terrorism and
violent extremism. In that connection, this past Friday
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism held a meeting
aimed precisely at integrating a gender perspective into
those objectives. We welcome the contribution made by
women and young people in peace and security efforts
in that country, which should also include their effective
participation in the 2020-2021 federal elections and in
the promulgation of a new constitution. We would like
to learn more about the role and leadership of women's
organizations in those processes.

We also highlight the role that women have played
in the Sudan as a key component in the developments
that led to the auspicious beginning of a civilian
Government. Community leader Ms. Alaa Salah, who
helped to mobilize people to achieve that end, briefed
the Council last week (see S/PV.8649) and lamented
the fact that women had been sidelined in the political
process in the months following the revolution. We also
appreciate the information that the Deputy Secretary-
General shared with us today about the current situation
about recent meetings with the leaders of that State.

From that perspective, we consider it essential
to promote the participation of Sudanese women in
the country's political and economic participation
processes and mechanisms, including their greater
involvement in decision-making through the creation of
employment opportunities and access to Government
posts. The same applies to women in Djibouti, Eritrea
and the other countries of the subregion. To that end,
the Council should maintain and strengthen the gender
perspective and the women and peace and security
agenda, especially in the drafting of mandates and in
the subsequent follow-up to the recommendations that
have been made in that regard.

In conclusion, I reiterate Peru's commitment to
continuing its implementation of concrete measures
in favour of women's participation in these processes,
which, as we have said, tend to make them all the more
successful and inclusive.

