Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank
the delegation of Argentina, Madam President,
for organizing this thematic debate marking the
fourteenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) and gives us an opportunity to assess our
commitment to the post-2015 agenda. I would like to
thank Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of
UN-Women; Mr. Edmond Mulet, Assistant Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations; and Mr. Chaloka
Beyani, Special Rapporteur on human hights and
internally displaced persons, for their briefings. I would
also like to welcome and thank Ms. Suaad Allami for
her commitment and courage. Finally, I would like
to thank the United Kingdom delegation for having
successfully conducted negotiations on the presidential
statement (S/PRST/2014/21) we have just adopted.

When peace and security are threatened, one of
the first indicators is the movement of people. At the
beginning of the millennium, numerous natural disasters
and various armed conflicts, terrorism or simply
economic constraints are visible through a significant
rise in the number or refugees and asylum seekers and
internally displaced persons (IDPs). According to the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR), at the end of 2013 the world had
a record 51.2 million displaced persons, three quarters
of those people were women and children, among them
women and girls represented half. Africa is the primary
theatre of the movement of refugees and displaced
persons. The war in Mali, re-occurring conflicts in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central African
Republic and South Sudan are just a few examples that
have forced hundreds of thousands of people to flee
their homes our countries. Currently in Africa, there
are more than 2.8 million refugees. The principal host
countries are Kenya, Ethiopia, Chad and Uganda. There
are also 7 million IDPs in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, 2.2 million in the Sudan and roughly
3 million in other countries.

Allow me to now focus on the experience in my
country, Chad, which hosts a significant number
of refugees coming from three neighbouring
countries - the Sudan, the Central African Republic
and Nigeria.

The conflict in the Central African Republic,
terrorist violence in Nigeria and intercommunal
violence in the Sudan have stretched the capacities of
my country to host refugees. Respecting the principle
of not turning anybody back, between 1 January and
14 September 2014 we have hosted more than 19,000
refugees from the Central African Republic, 1,000 from
Nigeria and more than 30,000 from Darfur. According
to UNHCR, there are a total of roughly 50,000 refugees
hosted by my country coming from those respective
three countries. More than half of them were women
and children. Among those from the Central African
Republic, about 1,000 children were unaccompanied
minors.

As the Council is aware, the impact of armed
conflicts adversely impacts men and women, boys and
girls very differently. There are also various sexist
traditions against women and girls, which bars their
access to resources, education, employment, sexual and
reproductive health and excludes their decision-making.
For that reason, in times of conflict and in post-conflict
situations, women and girls confront major challenges
that make them more vulnerable. In the majority of
cases, these women, separated or having lost their
spouses during war, are alone with their children and
find themselves as heads of their families. Without the
protection of their families or communities, displaced
and refugee women and girls continue to be victims
of sexual and gender-based violence, rape, domestic
violence, forced prostituion and human trafficking. All
of those are daily realities.

In Chad from January to June, there were 668
incidents of sexual and gender-based violence against
refugees and displaced persons, according to data from
UNHCR and its partners. The response and protection
were immediate, and that allowed 100 per cent of
known victims to benefit from medical assistance.
Psychological support was provided for 95 per cent of
the survivors, while another 26 per cent of the victims
were in need of follow up and security services. Of the
recorded cases, only 8.1 per cent of them were brought
before tribunals. In spite of that low rate, this was an
increase over 2013, when only 4 per cent of the cases
were the subect ofjudicial proceedings.

Beyond the various challenges of managing
refugee and IDP flows, the protection of women and
children has its own difficulties, such as identification.
More than 80 per cent of refugee and IDP populations,
in particular women and children, have no identity
documents. More than 75 per cent of the Victims of
sexual violence are under 18 years old. We also face the
stigmatization linked to rape and the culture of silence
regarding sexual violence, which hamper the filing of
complaints. There are also various issues pertaining to
security in camps, as well as a lack of capacity on the
police and the army to conduct investigations regarding
sexual violence. Lastly, there is lack of judiciary
capacity to prosecute perpetrators.

Chadian officials, through a national commission
on the hosting, reintegration and repatriation of
refugees, along with the relevant ministries, working
in close cooperation with United Nations agencies and
other national and international partners, promptly
responded to those challenges by implementing a
guiding mechanism with a multisectoral approach
to prevent incidents of sexual violence and gender-
based violence. That allowed survivors to receive care,
psychological support, legal assistance and security
protection.

In a more general way, Chad has announced its
strategy for refugees so as to ensure independence
and reduce refugee dependence on humanitarian aid in
the long term. That strategy targets a majority of the
Sudanese refugee population in the 12 eastern camps,
as well as the Central African Republic refugees in
five southern camps. Moreover, Chad is working
to strengthen national laws, and efforts are being
aimed at the ratification of international instruments
regarding international human rights, IDP and refugee
laws as well as international humanitarian law, such
as the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women, and the African
Union Kampala Convention on the Protection and the
Assistance of Displaced Persons in Africa, among
others.

In conclusion, Chad reiterates its commitment to
developing effective mechanisms to protect women
and girls who are refugees or displaced. That also
goes for institutions to guarantee their protection and
participation in peace processes. Chad endorses the
principles of resolution 1325 (2000), and in particular
the principles set out in resolution 1822 (2008) and
resolution 1889 (2009), covering the challenges facing
women and children who are refugees or displaced.
In the 14 years since the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), we are all aware that international peace and
security can be possible only with the participation of
women.

Finally, we welcome the global study on the
implementation ofresolution 1325 (2000) to be launched
in 2015.

