Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): In conflict as in peacetime, sexual violence is
a detestable crime that requires condemnation and
strict sanctioning. We are especially concerned about
situations in which that phenomenon is widespread and
systematic. It is also unacceptable for violence and
sexual exploitation to be committed by the personnel
of peacekeeping operations, that is, by the very people
called upon to protect civilians.

We must also consider this issue in a
comprehensive manner and in the context of all the
other complex problems that arise in the process of
conflict resolution and post-conflict reconstruction.

We should not forget that women and children
continue to be the victims of deliberate attacks,
including terrorist acts, indiscriminate and excessive
violence and violations of international humanitarian
law. Given the various types of violence involved, we
must pay attention to all the categories. The issue of
women and peace and security should not be reduced
to that of sexual violence alone. That balanced
approach is at the heart of resolution 1325 (2000),
which is an important point of reference in terms of
protecting women and ensuring their rights in conflict
situations.

The issues of violence and of women in conflict
situations must be discussed in the Security Council as
well as in the General Assembly, the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Human Rights Council and many
other bodies. It is a priority for the United Nations to
respond to widespread and systematic violence against
women and children. Those goals are all part of the
gender component in the reports of the Secretary-
General to the Security Council on the subject of
today's meeting, and also of the annual thematic
reports on women and peace and security, the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, children and
armed conflict, and others.

The situation is hardly optimal when we ask the
Secretary-General for a report on sexual violence only
to find that the same request has been made by a body
other than the Security Council. In particular, we have
asked him for a report on women and peace and
security. We must recall that the General Assembly
adopted resolution 62/134 - on eliminating rape and

other forms of sexual violence in all their
manifestations, including in conflict and related
situations - which also required an appropriate report
of the Secretary-General on the issue of sexual
violence.

Women's full participation in peace negotiations
an post-conflict recovery efforts is an important
precondition for the elimination of violence against
women. In those processes, we must consistently
implement the provisions of the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
women, the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination and similar instruments in the area of
human rights. Ensuring the social and economic
development of States is a main factor in preventing
conflict and violence.

In conclusion, I should like to emphasize that the
delegation of the Russian Federation shares the
understanding on today's topical issue of sexual
violence in conflict and post-conflict situations. We
therefore support the draft resolution to be adopted
today by the Security Council.

