Mr. Hau Do Suan (Myanmar): First of all, let me
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this important
open debate. My delegation extends its best wishes for
the success of the United Kingdom presidency of the
Security Council.

Trafficking in persons has become a dire threat
to millions of vulnerable and fragile people across the
world. The problem of trafficking is woven into many
other challenges: conflict, terrorism, organized crime,
extreme poverty, sexual violence against women and
young girls and migrant smuggling. In view of the
seriousness of the problem, the international community
has committed itself to ending human trafficking
through the implementation of Goals 5,8 and 16 of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.

As part of national efforts to combat trafficking
in persons, Myanmar is a State party to various
international legal instruments including the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime; the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children,
supplementing the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime; the Protocol against
the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air,
supplementing the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime; and the Treaty on
Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters among
Like-Minded ASEAN Member Countries.

Myanmar enacted a law against trafficking in
persons in September 2005. We are now reviewing the
law to bring it in line with the changing circumstances.
Myanmar thanks the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime for being a strong partner in the fight
against transnational crimes in close collaboration with
INTERPOL. Myanmar has been tackling this issue
through a comprehensive framework that includes
domestic legislation - a five-year national plan of
action. We have recently launched the third five-year
national plan of action to combat trafficking in persons.
Yearly work programmes are developed to implement
the plan in the five key areas - namely, policy and
cooperation, prevention, prosecution, protection and
capacity-building.

Myanmar is also actively taking part in regional
efforts to combat human trafficking. We have been
working closely with our regional partners on issues
through regional mechanisms such as the Coordinated
Mekong Ministerial Initiative against Trafficking and
the Bali Process on People Smuggling, Trafficking in
Persons and Related Transnational Crime.

The cessation of conflict and peacebuilding are
some of the most effective ways to solve the problem
of human trafficking. The democratic Government of
Myanmar has made national reconciliation and peace
one of the country's most important priorities and is
fully committed to achieving that objective. It has
advanced the peace process by establishing a regular
timetable for negotiation through the Union Peace
Conference and opening the dialogue to all ethnic armed
groups. The first session of the Peace Conference,
also known as the 2lst-Century Panglong Conference,
was held from 31 August to 3 September 2016. The
second session is expected to convene soon, upon the
conclusion of political discussions at the national level.
Recent clashes in Northern Shan and Kachin States
have highlighted the importance of achieving peace
and have even strengthened our firm resolve to move
ahead with the peace process to end the conflict.

We have also taken appropriate measures to
prevent potential human trafficking, slavery and labour
exploitation in conflict areas. As part ofthose measures,
information sharing campaigns, workshops, and
awareness-raising seminars about people smuggling
and trafficking in persons are being held. Awareness-
raising pamphlets, published in local languages, have
been distributed. All of those activities were carried out
in collaboration with Government and United Nations
agencies, non-governmental organizations (NGOs),
international NGOs and religious groups.

With the rapid inflow of foreign investments into
Myanmar, we have been taking measures to avoid
labour exploitation and abusive labour practices.
In order to better promote and protect the labour
rights of our workers, the Government introduced
legislation, policies and regulations, in conformity
with the provisions of relevant International Labour
Organization conventions.

Myanmar will continue to make every effort
to combat the menace of human trafficking in a
comprehensive and coordinated manner, combining
law enforcement, human rights and social development
perspectives, as reaffirmed by the United Nations
Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in
Persons. Let us all continue our collaborative efforts
and cooperative action to address the issue of human
trafficking in order to make our world a safer and more
secure place for all.

