Mr. Zackheos (Cyprus): Although my delegation
aligns itself with the statement made on behalf of the
European Union, I would like to make a few additional
remarks. I would like at the outset to express my
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for convening this
open meeting of the Security Council on this most
important and relevant subject. This initiative of the
Namibian presidency confirms the principled and
important role that Namibia, and you personally, Sir,
play with respect to international issues and, in
particular, in the promotion of human rights. We
welcome this initiative as yet another step forward in
the efforts of the international community, as expressed
through open discussion in the Security Council, on
matters pertaining to conflict prevention, peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peace-building.

The most tragic aspect of armed conflict has been
the heavy toll that civilians usually bear when caught
between opposing armies. The proliferation of conflict
in many areas of our planet and the gross violations of
the most basic human rights of civilians have been a
major concern of the international community, as
testified to by the open debates that have taken place in
this very Chamber concerning the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, the protection of children
and the protection of humanitarian assistance to
refugees and others in conflict situations.

The most negative aspect of armed conflict, with
both short- and long-term effects, is the plight of the
most vulnerable groups of civilians, namely women
and children. During armed conflict, the effect on
families and traditional ways of life can be devastating.
Great numbers of women are not only under the
constant threat of sexual violence and death; but often
have to endure the loss of parents, children or husbands
and are forced to assume the role of main breadwinner
and carry the heavy economic burden of the survival of
their families.

It is imperative for the international community,
and constitutes a special duty of the Security Council,
to assist and protect these women and children. The
Security Council, in responding to such crises, should
always take into consideration their situation and
suffering, and pursue solutions that are based on its
resolutions. We hope that this open debate of the
Security Council will lead to practical measures on the
role of women in peace-building and on humanitarian
issues and the protection of women during
peacekeeping and post-conflict support operations.

One way to achieve this would be through the
establishment of an independent panel of experts with
the participation of the Secretariat, relevant agencies
and civil society.

One of the areas on which my delegation places
utmost importance is the plight of refugees and
internally displaced persons. The painful experience of
the displacement of almost one third of the population
of my country in 1974 demonstrated to the Government
and the people of Cyprus the central role of women in
post-conflict and peace-building situations. Their role
in facing the adverse consequences of the invasion,
occupation and displacement and in rebuilding our
economy, despite their suffering, has been immense.
That is why we fully support the position that women's
rights during and following armed conflict must be
safeguarded, and their participation in efforts to rebuild
war-torn societies supported by every means possible.

In this respect, we fully subscribe to the
recommendations proposed by the United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) and in the
significant report entitled "Impact of armed conflict on
children", prepared by Ms. Graga Machel, to whom I
take this opportunity to express our deep appreciation.

Another issue which I would like to stress, with
regard to the positive developments that have taken
place in the last few years on the accountability of
human rights violators, is the question of impunity.
Cyprus warmly welcomes the efforts undertaken by the
community of nations to finally put an end to impunity,
as demonstrated in the inclusion, in the international
criminal tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and for
Rwanda, of the obligation to prosecute those
responsible for the crimes of rape and sexual Violence
in civil war as perpetrators of grave breaches of
international humanitarian law. The inclusion, as a war
crime, of all forms of sexual violence against women in
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
has been a major achievement in our common pursuit
to end impunity for these abhorrent crimes.

The Representative of the Secretary-General on
Internally Displaced Persons estimates that 40 million
people live today as refugees or internally displaced
persons. Close to 80 per cent of these people are
women and children. Their tragic situation and their
vulnerability do not usually stop with the end of armed
conflict. The vast majority of them continue to face the
threat of Violations of their human rights long after the
conflict has ended.

The phenomena of sexual exploitation and
trafficking and child labour, including the use of
children as soldiers, are realities that we cannot ignore.
That is why it is of extreme importance that the rights
of women in post-conflict situations be secured through
constitutional means, so that the injustices and
suffering inflicted on them not be allowed to continue.
Their contribution to rebuilding their societies is
important and must be guaranteed.

One final point I would like to make concerns the
incorporation of the gender dimension in the approach
of the United Nations, its specialized agencies and
other actors involved in peacekeeping, peace-building
and reconciliation efforts associated with situations of
armed conflict. My delegation strongly supports the
inclusion of a gender perspective in the provision of
humanitarian aid and in the reconciliation efforts
following ceasefire agreements. We would also like to
pay tribute to the crucial role played by non-
governmental organizations in highlighting the issue
and in providing practical assistance on the ground.

Before concluding, I should also like to thank Ms.
Angela King and, through her, the Division for the
Advancement of Women, and Mrs. Noeleen Heyzer
and UNIFEM. for their devotion and considerable
efforts in promoting the rights of women.

