Mr. De Klerk (Netherlands): Our thanks go to
you, Mr. President, and to Secretary Rice for having
organized this important debate and for providing an
opportunity for the Netherlands to make some remarks
in addition to Slovenia's intervention on behalf of the
European Union.

In 2000, resolution 1325 (2000) on women and
peace and security was adopted unanimously by the
Council; in 2002, the Rome Statute entered into force;
in 2005, the Peacebuilding Commission was
established; and, most recently, the Secretary-General
launched the Campaign to End Violence against
Women by 2015. Despite all these developments, little
has changed on the ground. Sexual Violence against
women in conflict continues unabated and is at
unacceptable levels. The incidence of rape is on the
increase.

For the Netherlands Government, women's
empowerment is a top priority. Women's rights are
everyone's concern. The Netherlands is therefore
taking a firm stand against the horrific violations of
women's rights and human dignity that are taking place
in countries such as the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Sudan. That is why the Netherlands
supports the United Nations Trust Fund to End
Violence against Women. Also, last December, the
Netherlands Ministries of Foreign Affairs, Defence and
the Interior and 15 civil society organizations agreed
on a national action plan on resolution 1325 (2000). An
increasing number of Member States are elaborating
similar action plans. We now need to focus on
implementation. We need to join forces. What should
we do?

First, we need to target men. Gender equality and
women's empowerment cannot be achieved without the
involvement of men. Men need to talk to men, and they
have to speak openly to militia leaders, gang leaders
and sometimes the generals to be better role models. If
we want sexual violence to end, we need to raise
awareness among men about the consequences of their
actions. In situations of conflict, boys and men are
constantly confronted with models of violent
masculinity. Discussions should also take place
between men and women, with boys and girls, within
communities, to start the healing process and break the
cycle of sexual violence.

Secondly, acts of sexual violence should not go
unpunished. We owe this first and foremost to the
numerous victims. But everyone also should know that
if they commit such a crime, they will not and cannot
escape justice. Justice is imperative to ending
impunity. Governments need to take vigorous action.
National judicial systems should be strengthened in
order to ensure that such criminals are caught, tried and
effectively punished. If national systems fail to bring
perpetrators to justice, the International Criminal Court
comes into play. The Rome Statute clearly defines rape
and other forms of sexual violence, when committed as
part of a widespread or systematic attack against
civilians, as crimes against humanity. Fighting
impunity is also one of the key elements of the
resolution on all forms of violence against women that
the Netherlands and France present in the General
Assembly.

Thirdly, acts of violence against women are often
committed by soldiers - the very people who are
supposed to provide protection. The Netherlands
Ministry of Defence invests in promoting gender
equality in the armed forces. Gender training is
mandatory and is included in the curriculum of the
School for Peace Operations. We believe that all
peacekeeping troops and police contingents should be
given comprehensive gender training before
deployment. Moreover, gender awareness training
should be mandatory for all persons in leadership
positions in conflict and peace building situations,
including civil, military and diplomatic representatives.
Additionally, the United Nations should make an extra
effort to appoint more women to senior leadership
positions in peacekeeping missions. The United
Nations should also vigorously implement its zero-
tolerance policy. Commanders should shoulder on their
responsibility and arrest perpetrators. In this respect, I
would like to highlight the recent report of Save the
Children United Kingdom about widespread sexual
abuse of children and women by aid workers, and
above all, by United Nations peacekeepers. It is
intolerable that persons who should be providing
assistance or protection on behalf of the international
community take advantage of the situation to sexually
abuse women and children.

Finally, women are not just victims. It cannot be
repeated often enough that women and women's
organizations have to be included in peace and
reconciliation processes. They also need to be involved
in formulating justice and reparation programmes,
including post-rape care.

The Netherlands very much welcomes this open
debate and commends the presidency of the United
States for its effort to put this heinous crime so
prominently on the agenda of the Council. Sexual
violence is linked to peace and security. The adoption
of a draft resolution co-sponsored by the Netherlands
will be an important step in recognizing that link. We
look forward to a report of the Secretary-General
which initiates a process to ensure follow-up by the
Security Council and to improve coordination of
United Nations activities on the ground. Finally, we
hope that this process will also include the monitoring
of actions taken by parties to implement their
responsibilities.

We cannot tolerate what is happening to mothers,
daughters, wives and grandmothers. Sexual violence in
armed conflict has to stop. It is my responsibility, it is
your responsibility; it is the responsibility of us all.

