Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): First of all, I would like to thank the United
Kingdom for organizing this open debate.

Human trafficking is, unfortunately, an increasingly
common feature of modern conflict. In that regard, I
wish to reply to two of the main questions asked in the
concept note drafted for the debate (S/2017/198, annex).
First, how can the United Nations and its Member
States better address vulnerable women and girls,
children, and displaced persons? Second, how can we
ensure justice for victims of slavery, human trafficking
or forced labor during conflicts?

With regard to the first question, the Belgian
national action plan against human trafficking utilizes
different strategies to address vulnerable populations.
For instance, it takes gender into account. It also teaches
a "train the trainers" course for defence personnel
who combat human trafficking. Relevant training is
also provided to the personnel of the federal agency
that welcomes asylum seekers. Additionally, a manual
has been prepared to educate asylum seekers on the
conditions and rights of workers in Belgium so as to
reduce the risk of abuse and exploitation.

On the second issue, the fight against impunity is a
core component of our national action plan on women,
peace, and security. One of the priorities of the plan
is the protection of women and girls from all forms
of violence, including sexual violence. This is a topic
that we also address in our commission on the status
of women. Since human trafficking during conflicts
is often for sexual exploitation, a section of the action
plan details several concrete actions for those cases,
including support for and cooperation with bilateral
partners in order to embed attention for and expertise
on the matter in national police andjustice apparatuses,
and the promotion of practical international legal
cooperation tools.

With regard to international cooperation on
criminal matters, I note the initiative mentioned by
Argentina, Belgium, the Netherlands and Slovenia
during the previous open debate on human trafficking
(see S/PV.7847) - to promote the negotiation of a
multilateral treaty for mutual legal assistance among
States and extradition for domestic prosecution of
the crime of genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes. Such a treaty would be a useful tool
for facilitating better cooperation among States
investigating and prosecuting those crimes, and
would enable signatories to both comply with their
international obligations and strengthen their national
legal system.

Of course, the primary responsibility to prosecute
such crimes lies with each State but, because of their
transnational nature, this proves to be a challenging task.
Indeed, the suspects, witnesses, evidence or materials
attesting to acts of human trafficking must often be
gathered from several States. As such, effective mutual
legal assistance among States is essential for States
that wish to investigate and prosecute those crimes to
ensure justice for the victims.

