Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank you,
Sir, for organizing this debate. I also thank all those
who have spoken. I believe that the statements made by
my colleagues have proven, 13 years after the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), what has become obvious
to everyone, namely, that no conflict can be resolved
and no transition sustained without the inclusion and
participation of half of humankind.

First, that is obvious to the Council, which in
two-thirds of its resolutions makes references to the
women, peace and security agenda. It also obvious to
the United Nations, where the presence of women in
mediation teams and field missions increases year after
year, although efforts still need to be made regarding
management positions. In that regard, I welcome the
work of UN Women and its activities to strengthen the
coherence of and coordinate efforts to promote women
within the United Nations. We also welcome the zero-
tolerance policy for United Nations personnel that is
being implemented by the Secretary-General, and
which has proven to be useful and should continue.

Such improvements have had normative
consequences. The adoption of the Arms Trade Treaty
revealed the link between the spread of small arms
and light weapons and sexual violence. We have given
strong support to this part of the Treaty, which France
will soon ratify.

However, we all know that we only are half-way
there. Much remains to be done. While women now
have a place in most peace negotiations, their situation
remains ignored in the ensuing agreements, which too
often do not include specific provisions on women,
peace and security. Women should be consulted as fully
invested stakeholders. The United Nations must be
exemplary in that regard. The special representatives
and special envoys of the Secretary-General must
consult with civil society and women's organizations as
soon as they arrive on the ground, and must continue to
do so throughout their mandate.

In New York, the issue of the participation of
women should be included more frequently in briefings
made to the Council by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Political Affairs,
whose recommendations for better including women
in conflict-resolution processes always prove to be
valuable. Informal meetings of the Council with
women working in the field should be continued and
encouraged.

In that regard, we can refer to the example of Mary
Robinson, who brought together women's organizations
from the Great Lakes region in July in Bujumbura.
We believe that hers is a model of inclusive and early
consultation that can be useful to everyone. We saw to it
that this good practice was continued during the recent
visit of Security Council members to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo when they met, in the eastern
part of that country, with women's organizations
working to defend and promote the rights of women.

That and other crises demonstrate the urgent need
to act. This morning, we heard an eye-witness account
on the Central African Republic. We have heard that
the situation is tragic, encompassing sexual violence,
forced disappearances, recruitment of child soldiers
and, increasingly, religiously motivated violence. The
precarious situation ofwomen is shocking. The Council
should remain apprised of the issue. Not only must we
take the situation of women into account; beyond that,
to the extent that the tragic situation of women in the
Central African Republic is only part of the broader
tragedy of the entire country, we must re-establish
security, peace and the rule of law there. France voted in
favour of resolution 2118 (2013) in that regard and will
stay the course, including, if necessary, by proposing a
peacekeeping operation in that country.

In Syria, women were the leading actors of the
peaceful revolution against the regime of Bashar
Al-Assad. Their vulnerability is today increasing
everywhere, placing them at the forefront of the victims.
They are the targets of both the fierce repression of the
regime against its own people and, now, of extremist
groups. In the refugee camps, their children are often
born stateless as a result of unequal citizenship laws.
We must listen to these Syrian women, who remain
committed to building the future of Syria, and involve
them in the peace negotiations.
In that regard, I call the Council's attention to
the letter by the representative of the Syrian National
Coalition, which provides a very good description of
the sufferings that the Al-Assad regime is inflicting on
Syrian women. Those violent acts, I remind members,
were reported by the Human Rights Council's
Commission of Inquiry.

Justice remains the cornerstone of stabilization
in post-conflict situations. National Governments
of course have the primary responsibility for
prosecuting and punishing those resposible for sexual
violence. However, when States fail to live up to their
responsibilities, the International Criminal Court
should be able to play its full role. The Court is already
at work in the Central African Republic, in Mali and
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. France
believes that the Court should be seized of the matter
in Syria - as has now been amply justified. I should
like to underscore here that all those responsible for
violence against the Syrian people must one day be
accountable before justice.

To make the fight against impunity tangible, access
for women to the justice system is essential. Since
2011, in cooperation with UN Women, France has
had in place a programme for strengthening women's
access to justice in Afghanistan. In the framework ofits
plan of action, France has committed to a cooperation
programme in Africa and in the Arab world, working
in partnership with UN Women. We have recently
specifically allocated support for programmes in
Mali being implemented by local non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), with a view to supporting the
participation of women in political processes. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, we have similarly
allocated more than €2 million to support Congolese
NGOs to fight against sexual violence, strengthen the
participation of women in decision-making processes
and help women integrate on the socioeconomic level.
In that spirit, next December France will organize in
Paris a summit on peace and security in Africa, which
will provide an opportunity for all to express and
reaffirm their commitment to bringing about support
for resolutions on women and peace and security.

