Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the initiative of Chile in holding today's
public debate. I would like to thank Assitant Secretary-
General Kyung-wha Kang for her briefing. China
also listened attentively to the briefings made by the
representatives of the International Committee of the
Red Cross and the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security.

At present, the traditional security threats faced
by the international community intertwine and
interact with non-traditional security threats. Regional
conflicts, violence and terrorist attacks flare up
frequently. Trans-national organized crime has become
more problematic. Many women and girls suffer the
most and have become the most vulnerable groups to
attacks and harm. The international community should
attach great importance to strengthening the protection
of their rights and interests and work together to
strengthen synergy and coordination in this area. I
would like to emphasize the following points.

First, we must address the root causes while also
addressing the symptoms. It is essential to promote
peace and development, which are fundamental to
the protection of women and girls and their rights and
interests. The international community should take
practical and effective measures to promote the political
process of achieving national reconciliation in order to
create a favourable environment that prevents women
and girls from suffering the scourge of wars. At the
same time, the parties concerned should join efforts to
comprehensively promote national economic and social
development and gender equality and the empowerment
of women, effectively paving the way for the protection
of women and girls and their rights and interests.

Secondly, it is essential to respect the principle
of national leadership of the countries concerned and
their capacity-building. The countries concerned bear
the primary responsibility for protecting women and
girls in conflicts. The international community must
respect the leading role of the countries concerned
and coordinate with them in their efforts to protect
women and children and ensure their rights and
interests. In accordance with the needs of the countries
concerned, the international community should provide
constructive assistance and play a greater constructive
role in promoting the efforts of the countries concerned
to protect women's rights and security. Most important,
it is essential to address the real difficulties faced by
the countries concerned in terms of financial, technical
and human resources, and comprehensively strengthen
their capacity-building in the relevant areas.

Thirdly, it is essential to facilitate women's
full participation in decision-making and their full
development. In certain countries and conflict regions,
women have an important role to play in peace and
development, and their role should be brought into
full play in the prevention and resolution of conflicts.
Moreover, they should play an active role in good
offices, mediation and negotiation. In seeking solutions
to conflict, it is important to fully consider the special
needs of women. At the same time, it is necessary to
provide women with the means that allow them to
fully participate in political, economic and social
development, and to enjoy equal rights regarding
education, health and employment in order to ensure
their full development.

Fourthly, coordination, cooperation and synergy
in protecting the rights and interests of women and
girls is a cross-cutting issue. The relevant agencies
of the United Nations. The relevant agencies should
strengthen their coordination and form synergies.
As the main body responsible for the maintenance
of international peace and security, the Security
Council should effectively fulfil its responsibilities in
the context of conflict prevention, peacekeeping and
post-conflict reconstruction. The General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council, the Human Rights
Council, UN-Women and UNICEF should leverage
their comparative advantages and closely cooperate
with the Council to generat synergy. At the same time,
regional and subregional organizations should increase
their cooperation with the United Nations in order to
promote the rights and interests of women and girls.

This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the
adoption by the Fourth World Conference on Women
of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action,
as well as the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security. That provides important opportunities for the
international community to protect women and girls'
security and their rights and interests, and fully realize
gender equality and women's empowerment. We hope
that the United Nations will build on past important
experiences, pay greater attention to empowering
women, seek more effective ways to strengthen the
protection of the rights and interests of women and
girls and address the full implementaion of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action. China is prepared
to work together with the international community to
achieve those goals.

