Mr. Kemayah (Liberia):I thank the Security
Council for convening this open debate on women and
peace and security, with a keen focus on the sustenance
of peace through women's political and economic
empowerment. We consider this to be a matter of great
importance. Accordingly, I am greatly honoured to
deliver a statement on that premise and, in the same
vein, express our appreciation to the Under-Secretary-
General and Executive Director of UN-Women,
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, for her insightful
briefing and to Ms. Randa Siniora Atallah for speaking
on behalf of civil society.

Studies have shown that including women in
conflict prevention and resolution generally leads to
a more secure peace, and it has become increasingly
evident that no society has successfully transitioned
out of conflict except when women were a part of the
mainstream of that society. Furthermore, it has been
eight years since we celebrated the tenth anniversary
of the landmark resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security, with many activities, including
a similar open debate in this very Chamber (see S/PV.6453), and other open debates in subsequent
years. Yet women's participation in peace and security
processes remains beset by obstacles, including, but not
limited to, commitments that lack sufficient financial
and political support. Despite the gains made in
gender equality in the women's empowerment agenda,
challenges involving inequities still abound.

To that end, it is the resolve of His Excellency
Mr. George Manneh Weah, President of the Republic
of Liberia, its Government and its people that we must
collectively endeavour to invest in the meaningful
contributions that women make in the prevention and
resolution of conflict in order to realize a more peaceful
and secure environment around the world. Let us all pay
heed to the call of the Secretary-General for Member
States to initiate national and regional review processes
in the lead-up to the twentieth anniversary, in 2020,
of resolution 1325 (2000). Before Liberia adopted its
national action plan on that resolution in 2009, Liberian
women had already been involved in peacebuilding.
Therefore, the resolution gave only added impetus
to the efforts that were already being exerted by the
women of Liberia. Liberia remains unwavering in its
unflinching practical commitment to achieving gender
parity and upholding women's rights. What is even more
captivating is that the commitments to implementing
resolution 1325 (2000) have received a renewed boost
from the dynamic leadership of President Weah. Those
commitments are given priority in their respective
institutional frameworks, including, but not limited
to, the Government of Liberia's pro-poor agenda for
prosperity and development, which will be launched on
Saturday, 27 October in Ganta, Nimba county, Liberia
by President Weah, including its revised national
agenda policy and its peacebuilding plan.

The pro-poor agenda sets ambitious targets to
enhance the inclusion of women and girls to reduce
political, social and economic inequalities. President
Weah is Liberia's feminist-in-chief, a HeForShe
champion who has emphasized his advocacy for
advancing women in political leadership through his
appointment and support of women to occupy political
positions. President Weah selected the honorable
Vice-President of Liberia, Jewel Howard Taylor, as
his running mate on the ticket of the Coalition for
Democratic Change. He appointed the first woman
in our history to occupy the position of Deputy Chief
of Staff of the Armed Forces of Liberia, Colonel
Geraldine Janet George. And he appointed a woman
as Deputy Inspector General of the Liberian National
Police, Colonel Sadatu Teage Reeves, just to mention
a few. While we endeavor as a country to address the
challenges besetting women's participation in peace
and security processes, we want to commend nations
that are leading by example, including those that have
formulated strategies to increase women's participation
in peace and security processes and improve their
protection from violence.

In conclusion, on behalf President Weah, the
Government and the people of Liberia, we commend
the United Nations country team, in particular UN-
Women in its leadership role, the Peacebuilding Fund,
our international partners and all other stakeholders for
their consistent support to the efforts of the Government
and the people of Liberia to lift and empower women
in all sectors of society. As a country, Liberia looks
forward to strengthening support and encouragement
through its alignment as a member of the Group of
Friends of the African Women Leaders Network, the
Women, Peace and Security Focal Point Network and
the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security
here at the United Nations.

