Ms. Bahemuka (Kenya): My delegation is
greatly honoured by the opportunity to participate in
today's debate on women and peace and security.

Stories have been told in many forums of
ordinary women whose love for peace drove them to
spontaneously reach across battle lines to assist victims
of war, and of women who disregarded ethnic barriers
in civil wars and jointly demanded their right to peace.
Stories have been told of women who overcame
formidable political, cultural and economic obstacles to
assert their place in peace processes. Some of us may
vividly recall images of a group of women peace
activists who, in recent peace negotiations on the
continent of Africa, threatened to lock negotiators in
the negotiating room and sit on the keys until peace
was agreed upon. Those gestures, and many other
initiatives by women all over the world, demonstrate
the desire of women to attain peace. There is no doubt
in my mind that women hold the key to peace in the
world.

Resolution 1325 (2000), adopted by the Security
Council on 31 October 2000, reaffirmed the role of
women in the search for peace. It recognized women's
special vulnerability during times of armed conflict and
stressed the need for their equal participation and full
involvement in efforts for the maintenance and
promotion of peace and security. Most important, it
underscored the need to mainstream gender
perspectives in all initiatives for conflict prevention,
peace negotiations, peacekeeping operations,
humanitarian assistance, post-conflict reconstruction
and reintegration. In a nutshell, the resolution
legitimized women's place at the peace table. For that
milestone, Kenya is grateful to the Council and the
various other United Nations bodies that worked
tirelessly towards that end.

Kenya expresses its deep gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive and balanced
report (S/2004/814) on implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), presented to the Council for
consideration. The report provides several illustrative
examples of areas where tangible progress has been
achieved. It also acknowledges the formidable gaps
and challenges that stand in the way of implementation
of the resolution. My delegation believes that drawing
inspiration from our success so far will provide a
source of strength in our efforts to tackle the remaining
challenges.

Investing in women can pay dividends in the
Organization's continued search for peace and security.
Faced with entrenched discriminatory laws, policies
and customs, many women are barred from playing a
significant role in peace processes. It is incumbent
upon the United Nations, other international bodies and
national Governments to support the struggle of
women for greater participation in those processes.
Thus, we welcome the various initiatives enumerated
in the Secretary-General's report, which seek to
mainstream gender perspectives in peace processes by,
inter alia, developing policies, action plans, guidelines
and indicators aimed at promoting the role of women.

During armed conflict, women often emerge as
the only voices of reason and calm. That strength of
women can be harnessed into seeking durable, peaceful
solutions to conflicts. Women's perceptions and
concerns must form an integral part of any peace
process. We must break the traditional, stereotypical
barriers that have consistently kept women away from
negotiating tables. In that regard, it is gratifying to note
that the United Nations has made significant progress
in mainstreaming gender perspectives in peace
initiatives.

We thus welcome the recent development by the
Division for the Advancement of Women of a
framework of model provisions on promoting gender
equality and a set of standards for mediators,
facilitators and funding entities involved in peace
negotiations. Those guidelines, we believe, will
provide an invaluable tool to the facilitators of those
processes.

Kenya is aware of the fact that the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) has made great
strides in promoting gender balance among
peacekeeping personnel. Its current approach of
establishing multidimensional peacekeeping
operations, such as those in Sierra Leone, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Timor-Leste and
Afghanistan, has proved to be very effective in placing
the focus on gender issues in peacekeeping.

The incorporation of full-time gender advisers
into peacekeeping missions has been very useful in that
regard. Though gender balance is far from being
attained, we have taken steps in the right direction.
DPKO should redouble its efforts towards achieving
that goal. It must develop and disseminate to Member
States, especially troop-contributing countries,
effective guidelines to ensure sustained efforts in
gender mainstreaming at all levels of peacekeeping
operations.

In conclusion, I wish to thank the Security
Council most sincerely for remaining seized of this
matter. It is through constant reflection and the sharing
of experiences on the role of women in peace and
security that the international community will
successfully restore women to their rightful place at the
peace table.

