Mr. Chavez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Peru
welcomes the initiative of the Ghanaian presidency to
hold an open debate on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and on the role of women in
peacebuilding. We also wish to thank the Secretary-
General for presenting his report. In addition, we
appreciate the statements made by the Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, the
Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on Gender
Issues and Advancement of Women, the Ad Interim
Executive Director of the United Nations Development
Fund for Women and the Coordinator of the NGO
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2007/567)
is revealing, because it indicates that women and girls
continue to be the principal victims of acts of violence
in armed conflicts. Peru wishes to associate itself with
the rejection of all acts of violence and to express its
concern at the information that rape and sexual abuse,
primarily against women and girls, are increasingly
being used intentionally as tools of war by parties to
armed conflict. That is why the international
community must continue to use all instruments
available to put an end to violations of the human
rights of women and girls living in situations of armed
conflict. This battle must be fought at the national and
international levels, with programmes and policies that
promote the prevention of violence through the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in all its
aspects.

In that regard, we also want to highlight the role
of the International Criminal Court in the fight against
impunity, as well as the need for States to make it a
priority to shoulder their responsibility to do justice
and punish those responsible for crimes, as part of a
comprehensive approach to peace, justice, truth and
national reconciliation.

Peru notes with satisfaction the Secretary-
General's report and the initiatives and actions
undertaken by United Nations entities to implement
resolution 1325 (2000). We agree with the Secretary-
General that, if we are to promote the implementation
of the resolution, we must improve and rework
measures adopted by the United Nations and by States
that find themselves in conflict situations or
reconstruction processes. We appreciate the rethinking
of the concept of the 2008-2009 Action Plan to make it
a results-based instrument for planning, following up
on and presenting results-based reports.

We share the view that the Action Plan's central
objective must be to develop the capacity of United
Nations operations to support peace as well as post-
conflict and reconstruction efforts so that they can
assist States in their efforts to strengthen national
capacity to achieve gender equality and the
empowerment of women in the areas of peace and
security. In that connection, we support the Secretary-
General's proposal that a system-wide evaluation of the
progress achieved in the coordinated implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) be conducted in 2010, followed
by the submission of a report to the Security Council.

Peru supports the initiative to hold Security
Council consultations on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and its application on the
ground. Such consultations would enable States to
obtain detailed information about progress, good
practices and difficulties related to the implementation
of the resolution. Furthermore, we believe it is
important that the Secretary-General report on progress
made in mainstreaming the gender perspective in
peacekeeping operations and that disaggregated
information be provided on types of violence -

including sexual and gender-based violence -
committed by parties to armed conflict. We are already
aware of tragic cases that have occurred in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Darfur, among
other places.

Finally, we believe it is important that the
international community support the national
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) as well as
the United Nations System-Wide Action Plan,
particularly by providing sufficient financial resources
in a timely and sustainable manner.

The work still lies ahead and must be tackled
jointly by States, the United Nations system and civil
society in order to strengthen follow-up and
accountability regarding the full implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).

