Ms. Hutchinson: I thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to address the Security Council as the
NATO Secretary General's Special Representative for
Women, Peace and Security.

NATO's mandate is based on the alliance's core
values: democracy, individual liberty and rule of
law-themes that resonate so clearly with the women and
peace and security agenda. The adoption of the women
and peace and security resolutions and the work of the
Council has established a new course in understanding
and responding to the grievous, systematic sexual abuse
of women and girls in and around conflict. Awareness
that conflict-related sexual violence affects not only
women and girls, but also entire communities, is now
entrenched in our collective thinking.

The international community has a responsibility
to better protect women, but we know that protection
cannot exist without the promotion of women's rights
and acceptance that women's full participation in all
decision-making is critical. The elevation of sexual
violence as an international peace-and-security issue
has led to an increased expectation that actors, including
NATO, take a more prominent role in addressing
this issue. Without adequate response, conflict-
related sexual violence will continue to significantly
jeopardize stabilization efforts, as well as sustainable
post-conflict reconstruction.

At NATO, we understand that protection is at the
core of the women and peace and security mandate.
NATO-led forces have a responsibility to protect and
defend women against violence, but we also recognize
that that cannot be, nor should be, separated from the
issue of empowerment and participation. There can be
no protection without participation.

Under the auspices of the NATO policy on women
and peace and security and its action plan, we address
sexual violence through a comprehensive approach,
as part of the wider women and peace and security
framework. The development of military guidelines
to prevent and respond to conflict-related sexual and
gender-based violence has given us a base from which
to work and serves as a practical tool.

However, we recognize that efforts must be
coordinated with other international organizations and
civil society. For that reason, we have established a civil
society advisory panel to garner the views of women
not only from within our borders, but also, and more
important, the views of women from crisis areas, to
help steer our work. Women must be visible in voicing
mechanisms for protection.

Earlier this year, NATO joined forces with United
Nations Special Envoy Angelina Jolie to advance
the issue of conflict-related sexual violence by
mainstreaming efforts through all our core tasks and
functions. We believe that NATO has an opportunity
to be a leading protector of women's rights, drawing on
the strengths and capabilities of its nations and working
with more than 40 partner countries.

At NATO, we tackle protection through a holistic
approach to address the wider issues that affect women
in conflict and post-conflict situations. We focus on
the importance of protecting women and girls from
violence, but we place equal emphasis on the necessity
of supporting and enhancing women's participation.
We recognize that the best defence against sexual
violence is prevention. We attempt to make gender
equality a central tenant of all our efforts, and we are
emphasizing and expanding areas of prevention. The
adoption of early-warning indicators, strengthened
civil society dialogue and reinforced public diplomacy
have reinforced our efforts.

Ultimately, in tackling the issue of abuse and
addressing sexual violence against women and girls, we
do more than help individual victims; we set a tone for
respect of fundamental dignities and human rights. In
doing so, we can lay a foundation for lasting stability.
