Mr. Herrmann: The Holy See is pleased that the
Russian Federation presidency has chosen this topic for
an open debate in the Security Council, thereby bringing
it to the attention of the international community. The
Holy See has long advocated for increased involvement
by women in making, maintaining and building peace.
Therefore it appreciates the initiatives promoted by the
Security Council and Governments to raise awareness
and arrive at a fuller recognition of the vital role of
women in preventing the outbreak of war through
mediation and preventive diplomacy, in reconciling,
rehabilitating and rebuilding societies in post-war
situations and in avoiding relapses into armed conflict.
Women can, and should, play much greater roles in all
of those processes. Their special capacities to bring
order out of chaos, community out of division and peace
out of conflict, and their special gifts in educating
people to be more receptive and sensitive to the needs
of others, are essential to our goal to spare our world
from the scourges of war and to help to heal the wounds
of earlier and current violent conflicts.

In order to harness the special capacities of women
in peace and security, however, an international effort
should be made to enable them to succeed, something
that will be difficult to achieve if women still represent
a disproportionate number of the world's disadvantaged.
The lack of access for women and girls to education,
particularly quality education, must be addressed. Sad
to say, as Pope Francis pointed out in his 25 September
2015 address to the General Assembly (see A/70/PV.3),
not everywhere are girls and women given full access
to education. Most of the time that results in their
being condemned to a second-class role within society
and in their being given no possibility of being heard.
Education is the great enabler for women, making it
possible for them to be able to contribute fully to the
promotion and consolidation of peace and harmony, not
only in the family but also in local communities and in
the entire world.

The Catholic Church has long placed great emphasis
on the absolute necessity of giving young women and
girls access to education. Today young women and girls
constitute the majority of students in many of the more

than 100,000 schools that the Catholic Church maintains
worldwide, from kindergartens to universities,
especially in regions where women and girls still suffer
discrimination. They learn the skills needed to become
well-trained educators and professionals, which will
help them to contribute to a secure and safe society.
The priority of ensuring a quality education for girls
and women is essential if we hope that they will
transmit to boys and men the necessary values to desist
from violence and conflict. The role and influence of
mothers are vital in the education of children and youth
in the values of peace, mutual respect, reconciliation
and healing. The peacemaking role of the mother in
the family is of the essence, not merely for a peaceful
and secure home but also for a peaceful and inclusive
safe society.

Setting up women to succeed in using their
talents for making, maintaining and building peace
also requires combating poverty and ensuring access
to other fundamental resources. In both urban and
rural areas, it is far more common for women to lack
access to basic services, including health care and
social protections. In vast areas of the world, the lack
of a consistent and nutritious food programme, clean
water and sanitation services, as well as the lack of
employment opportunities and decent pay, continue to
undermine women's ability to play their role in the life
of their families and society as a whole.

Helping women to bring healing to the world by
addressing the causes and consequences of war and
violence also means protecting them in that vital
mission. The nearly 50 conflicts raging in various parts
of the world today call upon us to concentrate our efforts
on the plight of women and girls in violent situations.
Women who have fallen victim to violence must be
helped to overcome the stigma and shame to which they
are being subjected in some societies, and they must be
allowed to seek justice. It is so much more difficult for
women to sustain their families and care for their family
members who have been maimed by violence if their
own wounds are not being treated and the injustices
that they have suffered are not being remedied. With
so much money available for weapons, cannot the
world spare resources to compensate for the loss oflife
and limb in the families and homes of those innocent
victims, so as to help them overcome the ravages of
conflict and enable them to become peacemakers?

The fact that women suffer disproportionately from
conflicts and wars, which they have not caused, creates
a false impression that women are solely victims and
not also peacemakers. It is high time - indeed, high
time is long past - that that flawed image be laid to
rest. The one sure way of achieving that is to harness to
the fullest extent the active role of women in all phases
of conflict prevention, mediation, conflict resolution
and post-conflict peacebuilding. Without the input and
specific skills of women, a deep understanding of the
causes of conflicts and of the most effective solutions to
end them and to build peace may never be fully attained.

