Mrs. Vasilescu (Romania) (spoke in French): I
would like to commend the United Kingdom presidency
of the Security Council for having convened this open
debate. This is a timely discussion of a crucial issue
with global repercussions. No State Member of the
United Nations can escape the contemportary scourge
oftrafficking in the most precious commodities: dignity
and human life.

Romania supports the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union, and I express
our firm commitment to the Union's efforts to combat
human trafficking, modern slavery and other forms
of exploitation linked to trafficking. Resolution 2331
(2016), adopted last December, provides an excellent
framework to continue to make progress in this area.
We need to consider this in further depth in order to
address together the causes and effects of trafficking in
persons in conflict situations.

We must make full use of all existing mechanisms
for fighting money-laundering and financing of
terrorism in order to expose traffickers, prosecute
them, freeze their assets and to stop these illegal flows.
The response to human trafficking must be robust and
occur on several levels: security, law enforcement,
the protection of persons and accountability. Human
trafficking in conflict situations undermines the rule
of law and leads to the development of other forms of
organized crime. It therefore has the potential to further
increase insecurity in the region.

The fight against the activities of non-State actors
using legal and institutional mechanisms is becoming
difficult. Therefore, with respect to terrorist groups,
we must adapt our tools and mechanisms against the
traffic to their versatile and flexible structures. The
United Nations process under way currently, including
the implementation of the Sustainable Development
Goals, could help to target our common response to
the object of our debate today. The General Assembly's
high-level review of the Global Plan of Action to
Combat Trafficking in Persons in October will be a
good opportunity in that regard. The same applies
to the upcoming negotiations on the global compact
for safe, orderly and regular migration, dealing with
trafficking in migrants and contemporary forms of
slavery. Romania will contribute fully to the thematic
sessions and to negotiations on the Global Compact,
given the need for a comprehensive and cross-cutting
approach to all forms of human mobility, without losing
sight of the potential for abuses.

In all issues related to trafficking, prevention
plays a key role. Romania, too, has confronted human
trafficking networks for many years, although they
are not necessarily linked to conflict situations. Our
anti-trafficking agency, the main institution at the
national level, pays particular attention to prevention
campaigns, protection and assistance to victims. We
are also focusing on helping victims of trafficking
recover and their reintegration into normal life.
Romania remains firmly committed to every effort to
fight human trafficking in all situations.

