Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): I would like to start by
thanking the Peruvian presidency of the Council for
holding this important debate, and all the briefers for
their statements.

Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union and that delivered
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and
Security. I shall make some additional remarks in my
national capacity.

It is well known that sexual violence has been used
for centuries as a tactic of war, but the wars on the
territory ofthe former Yugoslavia - in Croatia, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and Kosovo - were among the first
to bring reports of mass rape and other sexually violent
crimes into the public eye. Developments since that time
have clearly shown that sexual violence adds to ethnic
and other divisions, entrenches conflict and instability
and leaves horrendous physical and psychological scars
not only on its victims, but also on entire families
and societies. However, sexual violence remains the
least condemned crime from the wars of the 1990s,
before both the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and national courts.

In my own country, Croatia, rape was used as a
method of intimidation and terror during the aggression
to which we were exposed. Some 2,500 people - mostly

women but also men - are estimated to have suffered
severe forms of sexual violence during the Homeland
War. Most of these cases remain unprosecuted and
perpetrators continue to go unpunished. As the
punishment of perpetrators remains a priority for
Croatia, the Law on the Rights of the Victims of
Sexual Violence in the Homeland War, adopted in
2015, provides victims with support, recognition and
compensation, even if the perpetrators are never found
or brought to justice.

However, our experience also teaches us that
advanced legal frameworks and international
agreements are in themselves not enough if attitudes
do not change. Beyond laws, we have to change
hearts and minds and challenge cultural and social
norms to get to a point where the victim receives the
support of the community and the perpetrator is the
one who is stigmatized, excluded and penalized by the
whole community.

The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/250) paints a grim picture. Despite specific
prohibitions against sexual violence in treaty and
customary international law, as well as the political
momentum and visibility gained in recent years, sexual
violence in armed conflicts and other situations of
violence continue to spread around the world. It is thus
essential that we address the problem comprehensively.
Croatia therefore pays particular attention to ensuring
that the guiding norms and principles of the women
and peace and security agenda are integrated into
our national policies and practices. Our continued
engagement in women and peace and security rests
on our firm belief that the full realization of women's
rights is an indispensable basis for safeguarding basic
human rights and achieving lasting peace and security.

Croatia has taken steps to integrate the gender
perspective into the national foreign and security
policy through its national policy for the promotion
of gender equality and its first national action plan for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), adopted
in 2011. We are currently in the process of developing
our second national action plan, which is expected
to be adopted in the first half of this year and will
cover both our domestic and international activities.
Particular attention has been paid to gender-related
elements in regular police and military education, as
well as in the predeployment training of civilian and
military personnel, with a special focus on prevention
and response to sexual violence, and a zero tolerance
policy on sexual exploitation and abuse. In that context,
Croatia strongly supports the Secretary-General's
efforts to prevent sexual exploitation and abuse by
United Nations personnel, and has contributed to these
efforts by signing the voluntary compact on preventing
and addressing sexual exploitation and abuse.

With a special purpose to strengthen the role of
women in peace missions and operations, and in line
with the pledge given at the Summit on United Nations
Peacekeeping in September 2014, for the past three
years Croatia has organized predeployment trainings of
women police officers from countries that contribute
to United Nations peacekeeping missions. So far, a
total of 35 women police officers from 19 countries
of Africa, Asia and Europe have participated in this
training programme, the fourth version of which will
be held in May.

Clear guidance on how to operationalize the
protection of civilians mandate, including the protection
ofwomen and girls from sexual violence, is also needed
for peacekeeping missions. We have the opportunity to
use United Nations expertise, including such human
rights mechanisms as the United Nations Special
Rapporteur on violence against women. We also need
to achieve greater progress in ensuring the adequate
participation of women in peace talks. Peace accords
that fail to include women in post-conflict governance
often hinder their access to economic opportunities,
justice and reparations.

In conclusion, let me point out that sexual violence
in conflict is such a multifaceted issue that can be
discussed at much greater length, including relating to
forced displacement, forced marriages, sexual slavery
and the plight of children born of wartime rape. At the
core of our efforts to stop this horrendous crime lies our
commitment to conflict prevention and addressing root
causes of human rights violations.

Croatia welcomes the emphasis on the urgency
of ensuring that sexual violence considerations are
explicitly and consistently reflected in prevention
efforts and detecting early-warning signs, as well as
in peace processes, ceasefires and peace agreements,
alI security sector reform and other processes in
which the United Nations is involved, as well as in
sanctions regimes.

