Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I have
listened very attentively today to the Secretary-
General's statement and to the words of our friend
the representative of the United States. I would like to
clarify some points, since evidently my statement did
not come across clearly to the Security Council in the
way I would have wished.

First, my delegation's insistence on respecting
the mandate of the General Assembly in investigating
matters related to sexual exploitation and abuse is
based on our belief in the importance of tackling such
cases and eliminating them, enhancing accountability
and the partnerships between the Secretariat, the troop-
contributing countries (TCCs) and other Member States.
No body whose membership is by definition limited
can impose commitments on TCCs without consulting
them and enabling them to conduct investigations,
specify accountability and punish the perpetrators of
such crimes.

On the other hand, I am in full agreement with
the other members of the Council that the majority
of peacekeeping operations are doing heroic work
and making enormous sacrifices, and that intensifies
our objection to a policy of collective punishment of
such forces, including proposals to return or repatriate
entire contingents as a result of one mistake made by
one person or member of a unit. Accountability must
be limited to those actually involved in crimes, and
no one else, or we open the door to arbitrary measures
that are not subject to objective considerations. That is
on top of the fact that there have seen numerous cases
in which troops from outside the United Nations have
participated in sexually abusive activities that have not
been put before the Security Council to enable it to take
the necessary punitive measures. That issue must be
dealt with if we are serious about tackling such crimes
in all their aspects and in a way that preserves human
dignity everywhere, and not selectively.
With regard to the reference to Egypt's position on
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations,
our reservations were due to our rejection of the
concept of field trials, because they are detrimental
to considerations of sovereignty. That is the position
of most of the TCCs. We asked for extra time for
consultations, and we are prepared to look further into
the best ways of finding appropriate and fair solutions.

