Mr. Sinirlioglu (Turkey): First, I would like to
convey our strong condemnation of the heinous and
reprehensible terrorist attacks against worshippers and
civilians in Sri Lanka and express our solidarity with
the people and the Government of that country.

Next, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening today's important debate and express our
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his remarks.
We commend the work of Special Representative Patten
and the valuable efforts of the Team of Experts on the
Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict. We also
extend our appreciation to our briefers today.

As we mark the tenth anniversary of the mandate
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, we acknowledge the
progress that has been achieved within the United
Nations system in terms of combating sexual violence.
The Security Council deserves special credit for
connecting the concepts of sexual violence and
impunity to international peace and security, passing
numerous resolutions and addressing the issue in
various meetings. In this respect, we also welcome the
adoption today of resolution 2467 (2019), which Turkey
co-sponsored. Nevertheless, the Secretary-General's
most recent report to the Council (S/2019/280) reveals
the fact that sexual violence continues to be a tactic of
war and is widespread, particularly in armed conflicts,
including their early stages and in their aftermath. The
report also confirms the nexus among sexual violence,
human trafficking, terrorism and forced displacement.

Sexual violence has consequences for all
affected - women and girls, men and boys. In addition
to its devastating impact on survivors, it has a broad
and long-lasting effect on communities and States as
whole entities for generations. Our responsibility must
be to bring justice, recognition and reparations to the
survivors of these horrendous crimes. The Secretary-
General rightly identifies accountability for crimes of
conflict-related sexual Violence as a key element of his
prevention strategy.

Unfortunately, in conflicts, national judicial and
security systems are often paralysed by incapacity,
resulting in impunity. The absence of efficient criminal
procedures and institutional capacity is common.
Even when legislation and institutions are in place, a
selective application of laws and lack of accountability
often prevails. Accordingly, victims are discouraged
from seeking civil remedies and a culture of impunity
prevails. To address this problem, comprehensive
solutions combining support for the supremacy of
the rule of law and building judicial and security
institutions should be sought. Gaps in both legislation
and implementation must be addressed. Impunity must
come to an end for both perpetrators and those at the
top of the chain of command.

The punishment of a crime often serves as the
most important deterrent. To address sexual violence
during conflicts and ensure that these crimes can
be prosecuted in the post-conflict phase, necessary
documentation and evidence must be gathered while
the conflict is ongoing. The United Nations, other
international organizations, humanitarian agencies and
civil society have an important task in this respect. We
welcome the establishment and the ongoing work of the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
for Syria, the Independent Investigative Mechanism for
Myanmar and the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da'esh. International justice mechanisms are essential,
particularly when sexual violence in the form of
systematic rape and forced pregnancies is used as a
tactic of war. Their work complements those of national
systems in the fight against the culture of impunity,
especially in post-conflict settings.

We concur with the Secretary-General that
achieving gender equality, the empowerment of women
and girls and the recognition of their human rights
are the essential steps for prevention and addressing
impunity. This will also help further our agenda on
women and peace and security. Ending violence against
women is a part of this effort. The Council of Europe's
Convention on Preventing and Combating Violence
Against Women, known as the Istanbul Convention,
stands out as a landmark document in this regard.
Turkey is committed to fostering the objectives of the
Convention and stands ready to share its experiences in
its implementation.

As the conflict in Syria enters its ninth year, millions
of Syrians, particularly women and girls, continue to
live under the threat of sexual violence from various
parties on the ground. The horrific acts of sexual
violence perpetrated by the Syrian regime, especially
during arrest, detention and at checkpoints, have
been documented in various United Nations reports.
As one of Syria's neighbours, and a country with an
open-door policy towards the Syrians fleeing war and
violence at home, Turkey now hosts over 3.5 million
Syrians, 1.6 million of whom are women. Empowering
Syrian women and youth and fostering self-reliance in
them, with zero tolerance for sexual and gender-based
violence, is one of the tenets of our policy, which is
why we exert every effort to provide security and safety
for them, including through partnerships with United
Nations Fund for Population Activities.

The findings on the situation of the Rohingya in
Myanmar in the Secretary-General's report are once
again quite disturbing. The international community
expects the Government of Myanmar to create the
necessary conditions for peaceful coexistence in
Rakhine state and the safe return of refugees. That
requires ending all types of violence, including sexual
violence; giving humanitarian agencies immediate
and unhindered access to populations in need; and
implementing international humanitarian and human
rights law in Rakhine state.

We acknowledge the signing of the joint
communique between the Government of Myanmar
and the United Nations in December 2018 as a good
step in that direction. We expect its full and swift
implementation, including the commitments regarding
accountability for conflict-related sexual violence
allegedly perpetrated by the Myanmar Armed Forces
and border guards. Bringing the alleged perpetrators of
sexual and other violence tojustice will also be ofcritical
importance to putting an end to that vicious cycle.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our full
support for international, regional and national efforts
to end conflict-related sexual violence and respond to
its consequences.

