Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Allow me to warmly
welcome you among us, Madame President. Your
presence and participation in this open debate in the
Security Council underline the importance of the
subject that we are discussing. Let me also thank
the Secretary-General and the briefers for their very
informative and valuable contributions.

In my intervention I would like to touch upon
three main topics: first, the operational significance
of women peacekeepers; secondly, the challenges and
opportunities related to mandate implementation; and,
thirdly, the Polish Government's implementation of the
framework for the United Nations women and peace
and security agenda in my country.

Today's debate is timely as it follows the United
Nations Peacekeeping Ministerial on uniformed
capabilities, performance and protection held
on 29 March. During that event, we heard many
encouraging examples of how women's participation
in peacekeeping operations can bring added value and
increase missions' effectiveness. I would like to mention
one particular female peacekeeper f Lieutenant
Commander Marcia Andrade Braga - who was
awarded the annual United Nations Military Gender
Advocate Award, by the Secretary-General. Her
outstanding performance demonstrates the significant
role that the gender perspective plays in increasing
operational performance and improving the protection
of civilians.

In that context, we call for the increased participation
of women peacekeepers, particularly in front-line
roles engaging with the local population and setting
an example for local women leaders, as they act as the
key initiators of change, starting with the households,
schools and institutions in which they work. In that
vein. I would like to stress the need for the United
Nations and its peacekeeping missions to appoint more
women to leadership roles. We can follow the examples
provided by the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in
Cyprus with its female Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head, Force Commander and
Senior Police Adviser and the United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization, which is represented here
today by Major General Kristin Lund, Head of Mission
and Chief of Staff. Increasing women's participation in
missions still remains a challenge for all of us. That is
why Member States should strive towards nominating
more female candidates for leadership positions at
every level of command, from the top of the mission to
platoon leaders.

I would like to reiterate our strong support for
the obligations set out in the Declaration of Shared
Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations, while underlining that the participation of
women at all phases of the peace process should be full,
equal and meaningful. That also refers to the challenges
and opportunities facing mandate implementation.
Poland believes that only by strengthening adherence to
the women and peace and security principles can a long-
lasting and sustainable solution to any given conflict
be achieved. In that context, we must mention the
significant role of women peacekeepers in addressing
charges of sexual exploitation and abuse. We recognize
their profound role in prevention and raising awareness
during predeployment training, as well as in conducting
proper investigations when allegations arise.

As we all know, words can make a difference
only when they are translated into action. Therefore,
we are glad that, in 2018, Poland introduced its first
national action plan on women and peace and security
for the period from 2018 to 2021. That strategic
approach was jointly developed by different ministries
with the special role of the Government advocating
for equal treatment. It also widely consulted with
non-governmental organizations promoting the role of
women in the security sector. The action plan will allow
for systematizing efforts and assessing progress made
by Polish institutions to implement the women and
peace and security agenda and to set further priorities
in that area.

I would like to conclude by expressing our strong
support for, and gratitude to, all women peacekeepers.
Their sacrifice and dedication help bring hope to
millions of people facing daily threats. It is crucial in
that it sets an example for thousands of women in their
households, local communities and Governments. The
work that they carry out is unique, irreplaceable and
invaluable. We all owe those brave women our greatest
recognition, reassurance and appreciation.

