Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I am
honoured to speak also on behalf of the European
Union.

Mr. President, please allow me to thank you for
taking the initiative to hold this eighth open debate on
women and peace and security, which enables the
Security Council to continue its regular review of this
important theme.

I would also like to thank Ms. Mayanja, Mr. Le
Roy, Ms. Alberdi and Ms. Taylor for their
presentations, which show their real and ongoing
commitment to the cause of women.

Resolution 1325 (2000) sets forth the significant
impact on conflict of the participation of women on an
equal footing with men in society and in decision-
making processes, on the one hand, and of the
protection of women from violence and violations of
their rights, on the other hand. These two factors have
a great influence not only on preventing conflict but
also in determining the playing out of conflict and
during reconstruction and post-conflict phases. It is
thus not only legitimate but also essential for the
Security Council to continue to deal with the place and
condition of women as it deals with security and
peacekeeping situations internationally, complementing
the actions pursued by other United Nations organs,
entities, funds and programmes to promote the
situation of women.

The European Union welcomes the publication of
the Secretary-General's annual report on women and
peace and security (S/2008/622) and on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). This report
shows that the cumulative efforts of United Nations
agencies and departments, regional organizations,
Member States and civil society have helped to raise
the awareness of the whole United Nations system
about the specific needs of women in armed conflict
and post-conflict situations. It also illustrates that it has
been possible to adopt a more comprehensive approach
to implementing resolution 1325 (2000).
The European Union welcomes, in particular, the
following points in the report. The Union is pleased to
note the fact that regional organizations have
committed to implementing resolution 1325 (2000).
Beyond the European Union, such commitments have
been made the African Union, as well as by
subregional organizations such as the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD).
The European Union also welcomes the definition and
implementation of national action plans by a growing
number of countries, including countries directly
affected by the issue of women in armed conflicts.
Another positive note is the important role of local
non-governmental organizations to promote the
participation of women in elections in post-conflict
contexts. Finally, we welcome the fact that a growing
number of troop-contributing countries were able to
increase the percentage of women in their
peacekeeping contingents.

I would also like to stress the greater focus placed
on sexual violence in armed conflicts, as shown by the
creation of new instruments such as the United Nations
Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict, or the joint
project of the World Health Organization (WHO) and
the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) on
gender-based violence data collection.

Although we must commend the progress made
since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), and
particularly the adoption of resolution 1820 (2008) last
June, these two resolutions are still far from being fully
implemented. Today, we have a very alarming situation
for women in North Kivu, Darfur and regions affected
by the fighting of the Lord's Resistance Army, which is
proof of this fact.

The European Union is deeply concerned that, in
great majority of cases, women remain absent from
peace negotiations. Moreover, the European Union
would like to denounce once again the unacceptable
character of sexual violence - often used as a tactic of
war - with tens of thousands of women as its victims
every year. Resolution 1820 (2008) recognized that
sexual violence undermines the restoration of peace
and security.

The European Union regrets that the Secretariat
did not include a more detailed section in its annual
report on the impact of conflicts on women, and, more
broadly, that women's issues continue to be
insufficiently reflected in the country reports submitted
to the Security Council despite the Council's repeated
requests to this effect. The European Union therefore
encourages the Secretariat to surmount these problems
when drafting its forthcoming reports. In particular, the
European Union is expecting a detailed and
action-oriented report next June on sexual violence in
armed conflicts, as provided for under resolution 1820
(2008).

The promotion of women's rights is at the core of
the European Union's policy and is one of the main
priorities of the French presidency of the Union. In this
context, as Ms. Alberdi said just now, France took the
initiative to organize, on 10 October in Brussels, in
cooperation with the United Nations Development
Fund for Women (UNIFEM) and the European
Commission, a conference on the implementation of
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008).

Presided by the French Secretary of State for
Human Rights, the conference brought together
representatives of member States, military authorities,
international institutions and non-governmental
organizations. At that meeting, the European External
Affairs Commissioner pointed out her recent initiative
to propose to the Secretary-General of the United
Nations that we organize in 2010 a ministerial
conference on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).

This conference enabled us to assess the
achievements of the European Union and the steps that
it plans to implement. When defining the mandate of
the European Security and Defence Policy missions,
the component on protecting women and girls in armed
conflict will be strengthened and, with regard to
security sector reform, the participation of women at
all levels of the judicial, army and police sectors must
be ensured. On the operational level, gender advisers in
missions must be involved in the missions' planning
phase, and the participation of women, particularly in
command structures, will be increased. Once on the
ground, local women's networks must be consulted and
their contributions will go freely up the command
chain.

These specific recommendations will, under the
French presidency of the European Union, enable the
implementation of a process to assess and revise
European Union policies and documents on the
protection of women in armed conflict.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm the
determination of the European Union to work in
partnership with all interested countries and
organizations for the cessation without further delay of
Violence against women in armed conflict. The
European Union calls on the United Nations and its
operational partners to pursue and accelerate the
implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008).

