Mr. Than Swe (Myanmar): I thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to take part in
today's open debate. The issues of women and of peace
and security are issues of particular importance for my
country.

The need to prevent armed conflict and to bring
to a speedy conclusion situations of armed conflict
cannot be overemphasized. Resolution 1325 (2000)
calls for all parties to armed conflict to take special
measures to protect women and girls from rape and
other forms of sexual abuses and to end impunity
whenever such dastardly crimes are perpetrated. In
situations of armed conflict, the most vulnerable
among the population include women and girls.
Therefore, we firmly believe that tackling the root
causes of conflict, which include disunity, poverty,
socio-economic and gender inequality and
underdevelopment, is extremely important.
Myanmar fully supports a zero-tolerance policy
with regard to violence against women and girls.
Myanmar's traditions, culture and values strongly
favour our efforts to promote gender equality. They
also contribute strongly to the Government's
endeavours to protect women and girls from gender-
based violence, including sexual exploitation and
abuse. In order to promote and protect the rights of
women and girls, the Government established the
Myanmar National Committee for Women's Affairs in
1996 as a national mechanism to carry out the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action. In 2003, in order
to comprehensively carry out the measures laid out by
the National Committee, the Myanmar Women's
Affairs Federation was formed. One of the key areas
actively dealt with by those organizations is violence
against women.

My delegation has repeatedly stressed here that
the best way to protect civilians, particularly women
and children, in armed conflict is to put a speedy end to
such conflict. We also believe that national
reconciliation is the only way to end conflict in a
speedy manner. My country experienced the
devastating effects of an insurgency that raged in our
country for over 40 years. It is only recently that,
owing to the national reconciliation policy of my
Government, we have emerged from a conflict
situation and are able to put a virtual end to the
insurgencies that had ravaged the country for so long.

Currently, 17 out of 18 major insurgent groups
have come back to the legal fold. With regard to the
remaining Karen National Union (KNU) insurgent
group, its two main factions have opted for peace,
leaving only a small remnant of the KNU and former
narco-trafficking armed groups outside the legal fold.
Peace and stability now prevail in almost all corners of
Myanmar. That has resulted in significant
improvements in the daily life of civilians, in particular
women and children.

My delegation joins the rest of the international
community in its condemnation, in the strongest terms,
of all sexual and other forms of violence committed
against civilians in armed conflict, particularly women
and children. We must work together to prevent such
violence. Here, I wish to stress the importance of
avoiding the politicization of this important issue.
Sexual violence as a weapon of war must be strongly
condemned. In the same vein, fabricating allegations
and using disinformation as a weapon of political
pressure warrant strong condemnation.

My delegation therefore takes exception to the
unfounded allegations regarding sexual violence
levelled against the Myanmar armed forces. We
categorically reject them. The allegations levelled at
the Myanmar military come from groups associated
with the insurgents. Failing in their attempt to topple
the Government by force of arms, they have embarked
upon a disinformation campaign by fabricating
allegations. The Security Council has had first-hand
experience showing that reports emanating from exiles
are at variance with reality.

Rape is regarded by Myanmar people and
Government as a most dastardly and abhorrent crime.
Whenever such a crime is committed, we make sure
that the full force of law is applied against the
perpetrators. Whenever there are allegations,
investigations are carried out by the authorities and
organizations concerned, including the Myanmar
Women's Affairs Federation; where there were genuine
cases, perpetrators were prosecuted and given
sentences ranging from 10 years to life imprisonment.

Rape and any other form of sexual violence are
unlawful in any circumstance and in all places. They
are also an offense against the dignity and integrity of
the victims. The international community, national
Governments and the United Nations system must all
work together to protect women and girls from gender-
based violence, particularly rape and other forms of
sexual abuse.

