Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan) (spoke in Russian): Let me
start by conveying my condolences to the delegation
of the Russian Federation following the tragic death of
Ambassador Andrey Karlov, which took place as the
result of a terrorist attack in Ankara.
(Spoke in English)

We also express our sincere condolences to the
delegation of Germany in connection with the barbaric
terrorist attack that took place yesterday in Berlin,
which claimed the lives of innocent people.

At the outset, I would like to thank the Spanish
presidency for convening this open ministerial debate
on trafficking in persons in conflict situations, in
connection with the agenda item "Maintenance of
international peace and security", as well as for
the concept note on the topic (S/2016/1031, annex).
Azerbaijan is strongly committed to combating
trafficking in persons and other related criminal
offences. We share the concern over the scale and
number of such challenges. The situation has recently
deteriorated owing to increased violence, terrorist
activities and humanitarian crises.

Azerbaijan is a party to the relevant international
and regional instruments, including the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
and its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children
and the Council of Europe Convention on Action
against Trafficking in Human Beings. In implementing
its international obligations, Azerbaijan has adopted
a comprehensive legal framework for effective action
against human trafficking and has developed a national
action plan aimed at defining the key responsibilities
of the competent State bodies and at strengthening
and facilitating their coordination. Furthermore, an
inter-agency task force, led by a national coordinator,
and a specialized police unit within the Ministry of
Internal Affairs have been created. Additionally, the
national system for the identification of and support to
trafficking victims has been established.

In recent years, the need for more international
attention and redoubled efforts aimed at combating
trafficking in persons has significantly increased. In
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, Member
States committed to taking immediate and effective
measures aimed at eradicating and ending modern
slavery and human trafficking. In its presidential
statement of 16 December 2015 (S/PRST/2015/25), the
Security Council particularly noted that trafficking in
persons undermines the rule of law and contributes to
other forms of transnational organized crime, which
can exacerbate conflict and foster insecurity. We are
concerned that civilian populations are often viewed
by armed groups as resources or commodities to be
trafficked in, according to the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2016/949) and the presidency's concept
note. As the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in
persons, especially women and children, noted in his
latest report (A/HRC/32/41), conflicts are prolonged by
actors who take advantage of situations of lawlessness
to reap personal gain through lucrative activities, such
as trafficking.

The international legal framework for combating
human trafficking is based on the rules operating
within the relevant branches of international law that
ensure protection in all situations, including in armed
conflicts. Success in fighting criminal activities during
conflicts, including human trafficking, requires, first
and foremost, strong commitment to the relevant
binding obligations, as well as resolve to put an end
to unlawful situations and to ensure that dispute
settlement and conflict resolution do not serve to
prolong and sustain such trafficking. Dispute settlement
and conflict resolution must be based on respect for
and strict compliance with international law. It is also
essential to address conflict-related violations and
abuses of human rights through all available means.
Strengthening both international and national justice
responses are critically important in order to ensure
accountability for human trafficking in armed conflict.

