Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): May I join others
in thanking you in particular, Mr. President, for
honouring us with your presence today and for
choosing such an important theme for this debate. We
are also pleased to be honoured by the presence of so
many other ministers.

We would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2007/567) and for appearing here today.
We also very much welcome what the Under-
Secretary-General said about the work of the
Secretariat on this important matter. We would like to
extend our congratulations to them for what they have
achieved.

It was also very good to be able to hear from the
Special Adviser, the acting Executive Director of the
United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM) and the Coordinator of the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security. We welcome
them to the Council and congratulate them and their
teams for the important strides they have made on
these issues.

This is not a new issue, as anyone who is familiar
with the Greek play Lysistrata - which means "she
who disbands armies". The role of women in peace and
security is a very old and distinguished one. It behoves
us today to see how we can build on that.

The United Kingdom is committed to the key
resolution 1325 (2000). We continue to promote its
implementation at the United Nations and in the
international community. As many speakers have
noted, there has been progress in the seven years since
its adoption, but much more remains to be done.

Women and children suffer disproportionately in
armed conflict. They constitute the majority of all
victims. The Security Council has a key role to play in
providing for the protection of women from gender-

based violence, including torture, rape, forced
pregnancy, sexual slavery, prostitution and trafficking,
which are all committed during conflict and continue
in post-conflict situations. Conflict is the business of
the Council.

The evidence from countries on the Council's
agenda today shows how much remains to be done.
There is continued sexual violence on a massive scale
in the conflict-affected areas of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. UNICEF recently stated that
18,000 cases of rape were reported in three provinces
alone. The cruelty of the sexual violence inflicted upon
women and children, in particular as a weapon of war,
is unspeakable. This is not a debate about the
institutional niceties of whether the subject does or
does not belong on the Council's agenda. This is a
debate about protecting people who are suffering as a
result of conflict.

The situation in Darfur continues to be
characterized by gross and systematic violations of
human rights and by breaches of international
humanitarian law. That too is a matter for the Council.

In Burma, Mr. Pinheiro, the United Nations
Special Rapporteur on human rights, has reported on
the systematic sexual violence used by the military,
police and border guards as part of the Government's
anti-insurgency tactics.

The Council has a duty to listen to, but also to act
upon, such reports. We welcomed the Arria Formula
meeting hosted by the Mission of France earlier this
month. It is imperative that the Security Council hears
the often unpalatable testimonies of witnesses on the
ground. We heard about public rape in front of families
and communities, forced rape and incest between
victims, the introduction of objects into victims'
cavities, the pouring of melted rubber into women's
vaginas, the shooting of women in the vagina and
inducing abortion using sharp objects.

That sort of cruelty is something that concerns us
all. Events such as the ones described in that Arria
Formula meeting - on the situation of women in
Darfur, Chad and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo - and the report of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to the Security
Council in September regarding conditions in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo are an important
part of the debate.
Much of what resolution 1325 (2000) deals with
takes place at levels where Security Council
resolutions are often not heard. But we do need to hear
about such acts. Resolution 1325 (2000) must be used
as recognized doctrine to inform the Council's
deliberations; in turn, it must have impact on the
ground. That can only be achieved by fully
implementing it. The provisions of resolution 1325
(2000) and successive presidential statements thereto
need to be translated more consistently from words
into actions.

We support Minister Chevalier's call for
resolutions mandating that peacekeeping missions
ensure that that happens. We also welcome what
Minister Pratomo said about the role of regional
organizations and civil society. In addition, we
welcome the updated United Nations system-wide
Action Plan for 2008-2009, which we hope will
promote greater coherence and awareness within the
United Nations system while also promoting gender
mainstreaming within peace-support operations. In that
context, I would like to join other speakers in
congratulating the Secretary-General on appointing
Ellen Margrethe Loj his Special Representative for
Liberia. She is an outstanding choice.

To encourage national implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), Member States should be able
to look to the United Nations for guidance and
assistance in the production and ownership of national
action plans. The Peacebuilding Commission can also
contribute crucially by its development of
peacebuilding strategies.

Violence against women is a crime in itself. It is
an obstacle to long-term peace and security. Evidence
shows that peace and security reconciliation processes
are only sustainable when all actors in society are
involved. We heard today of the need for the female
voice to be heard at the Tripoli conference on Darfur,
as part of a process of bringing in non-State actors. We
would support that.

We also believe that, although the United Nations
Secretariat has done some welcome work, there is more
that can be done to enlist different parts of the
Secretariat - for instance, UNIFEM. and the United
Nations System-wide Action Plan - so that they too
can contribute to the reports that are presented to the
Council and this issue can be given the weight it
deserves.

The issue of sexual and gender-based violence
against women is as much about perpetrators and
tackling impunity as it is about victims. Those accused
of such violations should be named, shamed and
brought to fair trials. The Security Council will only
limit its ability to ensure long-term peace and security
in many of the countries on its agenda if it does not
address gender-based violence.

I would like to turn to the draft presidential
statement before the Council. The United Kingdom
would like to thank your Mission, Mr. President, for its
outstanding work in seeking to promote the agenda of
resolution 1325 (2000), not only through today's
debate but also through the draft statement that it has
prepared. We and other delegations had hoped that the
final draft could have addressed the current and
growing concern in the apparent proliferation of sexual
and gender-based violence within States that are
currently on the agenda of the Security Council.

We are disappointed that consensus could not be
reached on the proposal to request the Secretary-
General to prepare a report within the next six months
that focused on sexual violence in current countries in
conflict. I think that is all the more disappointing given
that the Secretary-General himself and the Special
Adviser and other speakers have said that they would
support such a report. Quite frankly, we find it
astonishing that anyone could object to that on narrow
institutional grounds. We believe that the debate has
shown very clearly why that is the business of the
Council. But we also support what Mr. Chevalier and
Mr. Pratomo have said, namely, that this is not the
exclusive business of the Council. There are other parts
of the United Nations system that can, and should, deal
with this issue. We look to those who do oppose
additional reporting through the Security Council to
lead and produce initiatives in other United Nations
bodies, which we would be happy to support.

We also hope, however, that it will be possible to
return to this issue within the context of the Security
Council when we have the report on the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). A long-term
solution to gender-based violence depends upon the
full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), with
true gender mainstreaming and gender equality. We are
committed to working together towards that goal, and
to do justice to this landmark resolution.
