Ms. Salah (spoke in Arabic): I am honoured to be
here in the Security Council from the Sudan, which is
today full of hope for peace, freedom and justice. My
name is Alaa Salah. I am 22 years old and I grew up
in Khartoum. Before the revolution, I was a student
of architectural engineering. I did not grow up around
politics, but in an ordinary middle-class family. My
mother is a designer, and my father owns a construction
company. As I would walk to university every day, I
would see my fellow citizens around me struggling to
obtain food and medicine, half of the country living
in poverty. How could I not become political? Our
struggle for bread became a struggle for our freedom
in December 2018.

I stand before the Council today to tell my story,
which is one shared by thousands of women and men
of the Sudan who left their homes, schools and daily
work to take to the streets and face bullets and tear gas,
risking their lives and their livelihoods to demand the
end of the dictatorship. My journey here was forged by
countless Sudanese women who fought for peace and
justice in our communities for decades, well before we
arrived at this important moment for the future of the
Sudan. I would not be here if it were not for them.

I address the Council as a member of MANSAM,
a coalition of Sudanese women's civil and political
groups, and on behalf of the NGO Working Group on
Women, Peace and Security. My statement will focus on
two key issues: first, women's meaningful participation
and the protection of women's rights; and, secondly,
accountability and disarmament.

Women of all parts of the Sudan have played an
important role at pivotal moments in our history - in
opposing colonial rule and fighting for the right to vote
as well as in recent struggles against the dictatorship of
Omar Al-Bashir. It also took extraordinary courage to
fight for basic rights - to wear trousers, to leave their
hair uncovered, to voice their opinions on social media
without fear and to share a meal with male friends. All
of those acts were criminalized by the former regime's
public-order laws. Those laws were designed to quash
dissent and target women, particularly from the most
marginalized and working-class communities, such as
tea- and food-sellers, whose working tools could be
confiscated without explanation, who faced fines and
who could be jailed.

Women and young people were at the forefront
of the recent protests, often outnumbering men and
accounting for 70 per cent of protesters. I was one of
many women chanting, singing and walking with my
fellow male and female citizens through the streets.
Women led resistance committees and sit-ins, planned
protests and disobeyed curfews, even in the midst of a
declared state of emergency that left them vulnerable
to security forces. Many were tear-gassed, threatened,
assaulted or thrown in jail without any charge or a fair
trial. Both women and men also faced sexual harassment
and were raped. Women also faced retaliation from
their own families for participating in the protests.

Women served as key members of the Forces of
Freedom and Change and helped shape coalitions such
as MANSAM. and an initiative against the oppression of
women. As part of the Forces of Freedom and Change,
women helped to develop a road map for the Sudan's
transition from military to civilian rule.

However, despite that visible role, despite their
courage and their leadership, women have been
side-lined in the formal political process in the months
following the revolution. Even in the past, when we
achieved a seat at the table - women represented 31 per
cent of parliamentarians in 2018 - they were often
without real influence and left out of decision-making
circles. Despite women standing ready to actively
contribute to the political negotiations that began in
April between the Military Council and the Forces of
Freedom and Change, only one woman participated in
the talks, and only after strong advocacy by women's
groups. Now, unsurprisingly, women's representation
in the current governance structure falls far below our
demand of 50 per cent. We are sceptical that the 40 per
cent quota on the still-to-be formed legislative council
will be met.

For the past 30 years, women's bodies and rights
were policed, and the backlash was swift and violent
when patriarchal norms were challenged. Women
activists, politicians, human-rights defenders and
peacebuilders continue to be systematically attacked
and targeted, including through sexual violence, which
has forced many women out of the country entirely.

Moreover, women's organizations are on the front
line of meeting basic needs and protecting rights
in conflict-affected areas, but security restrictions
and obstructive administrative requirements prevent
critical work from being carried out, in areas such
as Blue Nile and the Nuba Mountains in particular.
Humanitarian access to Jebel Marra, a conflict area in
Darfur notorious for the routine use of mass rape by
security forces to terrorize women and girls, continues
to be a major challenge to the provision of life-saving
services for those communities.

Given women's pivotal role in working towards
peace and development, promoting human rights and
providing humanitarian assistance to communities in
need, there is no excuse for us not to have an equal seat
at every single table. If we are not represented at the
peace table, and if we do not have a meaningful voice
in Parliament, then our rights will not be guaranteed,
discriminatory and restrictive laws will remain
unchanged and the cycle of instability and violence
will continue. After decades of struggle and everything
we risked to peacefully end Al-Bashir's dictatorship,
gender inequality is not, and never will be, acceptable
to the women and girls of the Sudan. I hope it is equally
unacceptable to the members of the Security Council.

The Sudan is one of the most highly militarized
countries in the world. We do not need more firearms.
Yet many Governments continue to sell weapons that
directly contribute to and perpetuate conflict, ongoing
violations of human rights and forced displacement.
The widespread availability of weapons in my country
is one of the factors fuelling violence and insecurity for
all people, including women and girls.

As members of the Council are well aware,
accountability and access to justice have been all but
absent in my country. The existing discrimination
and inequality women face, coupled with conflict and
violence over decades, have resulted in women being
subjected to a wide range of human rights violations,
including sexual and gender-based violence on an epic
scale. Those crimes contributed to the indictment of our
ousted President for genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity. But violence against women did not
end with the end of Al-Bashir's reign. As recently as
early September, seven women living in the Shangil
Tobaya camp for displaced persons in Darfur were
raped by armed men. Those women join the thousands
of women and girls who have borne the brunt of the
violence carried out across the country. Now women
are saying, "Enough". It is time for accountability and
justice for all crimes committed before, during and
after the revolution. This is the least that can be done to
honour those killed or who suffered atrocities.

The strength of the revolution came from the
representation of diverse voices from across the
country. That inclusion is now integral to the legitimacy
of the transition process. Unless the political process
reflects the diversity of our society, women's civil
society groups, resistance groups, ethnic and religious
minorities, those who have been displaced and people
with disabilities, then no agreement will reflect our
collective aspirations. In conclusion, I urge the Security
Council and the international community to take the
following five steps.

First, press the transitional Government, the Forces
of Freedom and Change and movements of armed
struggle to support the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women. We call for at least 50 per cent
representation of Sudanese women across all peace
processes, in current negotiations and at all levels of
Government. We urge the international community to
support our demands in all its engagements with the
transitional Government.

Secondly, actively monitor the situation in Darfur
and halt the scaling down of the peacekeeping mission
until the security situation stabilizes, the protection
of civilians - including those in internally displaced
camps - can be ensured and the conditions for safe and
voluntary returns are met.

Thirdly, support accountability and end impunity.
The transitional Government must fully support an
independent international fact-finding mission to
investigate and hold to account all perpetrators of
human rights violations, including sexual and gender-
based violence. Omar Al-Bashir must immediately be
transferred to the International Criminal Court. The
transitional Government must ratify the Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women without any reservations.

Fourthly, support civil society and ensure that
women human rights defenders are able to carry out
their work unhindered and without fear of reprisals.
Stop the use of lethal and excessive force against male
and female protesters.

Fifthly, stop fuelling conflict. We implore all
countries to stop exporting arms to our country when
there is a risk that they will be used in violation of
international humanitarian law and human rights
law, including to perpetrate sexual and gender-based
violence, in line with the Arms Trade Treaty.
In conclusion, I would like to leave the Council
with a slogan that rang out during our recent protests:
"Freedom, peace and justice - revolution is the
people's choice".

