Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia): I have the honour to
address the security Council on behalf of Latvia,
Lithuania and my own country, Estonia.

Allow me to start by commending the Bolivian
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October for convening this open debate. We thank the
briefers for their remarks and steadfast commitment to
this important issue.

Our delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
made on behalf of the European Union.

The empowerment of women and their inclusive
engagement, as well as gender equality, are a necessary
foundation for a peaceful and sustainable society. We
commend the Secretary-General for his dedication to
further advancing the women and peace and security
agenda. Bearing in mind the broad scope and cross-
cutting nature of this agenda, allow me to focus on
priority aspects for the Baltic countries.

The Baltic countries emphasize the need for the
full and effective participation of women at all stages
and all levels of conflict prevention and resolution, as
well as peacebuilding. It is of the utmost importance
to have a strong focus on prevention. We stand fully
behind the recommendation stressed by the Secretary-
General that the early warning signs of human rights
violations - unfortunately, very often towards women
and girls - must be given due consideration when
monitoring conflict situations. If we fail to act early, the
human political and economic costs can be devastating.
Therefore, more alerts, as well as a coordinated and
comprehensive approach by Member States and the
United Nations system, are essential.

Sexual and gender-based violence is a principal
obstacle to inclusive and durable peace. Moreover,
considering the link between the international arms
trade and gender-based violence, it is crucial to take
meaningful steps, including effective investigation and
prosecution, in order to terminate impunity.

We would like to emphasize the importance of
ensuring women's full and effective participation
and equal opportunities for leadership at all levels of
decision-making and in political, economic and public
life, as universally recognized in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and welcomed in Security
Council resolution 2242 (2015).

Sustainable peace is not possible without the
meaningful participation of women in all aspects
of peace and security, not only as beneficiaries of
the process but as leaders, partners and agents of
change. Women's participation in peace processes
leads to a 35 per cent increase in an agreement's
likelihood of lasting at least 15 years, and therefore
it is even more important to address the root causes
of women's low participation in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts. We also need to pay particular
attention to the needs of women and girls in post-
conflict situations, including physical security, health
services and reproductive and mental health, as well
as to ensure their livelihoods and their participation in
decision-making and post-conflict planning.

Peacekeeping operations and uniformed personnel
remain the most visible representatives of the
United Nations, directly working with communities
each day. Our countries - Latvia, Lithuania and
Estonia - support the Secretary-General's efforts in
the reform process and continuation of the work of
gender advisers and experts, both at Headquarters and,
more important, in the field.

We also commend the work of the Security Council
in mainstreaming gender aspects in the mandates of
United Nations peacekeeping missions. We continue to
contribute to United Nations peacekeeping operations,
while striving to ensure gender parity on peacekeeping
troops by encouraging female military and police
personnel to apply. Training is crucial to raising
awareness and improving the implementation of gender
aspects in peace operations. Before their deployment,
Estonian, Latvian and Lithuanian peacekeepers
undertake high-quality training on human rights and
gender-related issues, including the eradication of
sexual exploitation and abuse and preventing and
responding to conflict-related sexual violence.

While recognizing that States bear the primary
responsibility to respect and ensure the enjoyment of
all human rights by all persons within their territory,
as provided for by international law, the scale and
complexity of the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda requires coherent and
comprehensive efforts. In that respect, the pivotal role of
civil society, including women's organizations, should
be fully recognized. We are pleased that women civil
society representatives now regularly brief the Security
Council during country-specific meetings. That useful
practice should be continued - the more briefings we
have on potential conflict zones, the more effective we
can be in our actions to prevent the outbreak of conflict.

In conclusion, we are convinced that the time
is right to swiftly advance the women and peace and
security agenda in the remaining months leading up
to the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000),
as well as the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action.

