Ms. Sukkar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Sir, for your efforts as
President of the Security Council this month, wishing
Peru every success. I would also like to thank the
Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Amina Mohammed,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Pramila Patten, and Ms. Razia Sultana for their
important briefings.

The unprecedented crises worldwide have
contributed to an increase in sexual violence in conflict.
Various groups have used it as a tool of war and terror
against women, girls, children and men too. It leads
to psychological impact that constitutes a threat to the
fabric of society and international peace and security.
It is a painful phenomenon that plagues victims
throughout the world, in conflicts in Afghanistan, the
Central African Republic, Colombia, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Iraq, Syria, Mali, Myanmar
and elsewhere.

For example, in Iraq, women and girls in areas
under the control of Da'esh, particularly Yazidi and
other minority women, are subjected to violations of
their human rights and of international humanitarian
law that go beyond anything imaginable. The recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/250) describes
the horrors plaguing Rohingya women and calls on
the international community to alleviate the suffering
of these victims, provide them with care and ensure
their reintegration in their societies. It also emphasizes
the importance of accountability and of combating
impunity and discrimination in judgments rendered.

It is important for the United Nations to continue
to monitor and follow up on all mechanisms designed
to protect women and children. Jordan, together with
Finland, is a facilitator of the sixth review ofthe United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, and we
take into account the rights of victims - women,
children and men - who have been subjected to grave
violations perpetrated by terrorist groups. We ensure
that they receive treatment and care and are reintegrated
into society.

Despite the fact that Jordan is located in one
of the most tumultuous areas in the world, we have
remained an oasis of security and stability. However,
the conflicts that surround us have helped us to react
with all due speed to prevent certain impacts. In
Jordan, we are accustomed to seeing a great deal of
displacement, including the recent displacement of
refugees from Syria, which has required us to respond.
We have stepped up our national efforts to address
the demographic changes in our country to maintain
security and stability for us in our homeland and for
others. We have made efforts not to stigmatize refugees
by putting them on equal footing with terrorists
or criminals.

Refugees are the main victims of terrorism.
Refugees flee the ravages of war plaguing their country
with their children, as they await the return of peace
so that they can return to their homes. They need to be
helped to live in greater dignity so that they themselves
do not succumb to obscurantist and terrorist ideologies.
This requires coordination and a pooling of efforts
among donor countries, host countries, the United
Nations and the international community, with a view
to addressing these urgent issues. Based on working
with groups in various sectors, we have launched a
national plan to activate Security Council resolution
1325 (2000) which is geared towards respecting human
rights and promoting the principles ofjustice, equality
and sharing.

The instability plaguing the Arab region is among
the great challenges that imperil the implementation of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Jordan
attaches great importance to the implementation of the
Agenda. We seek to establish social peace and security
and deliver on sustainable development.

Syrian women refugees represent 45.3 per cent of
the total refugees in my country, the overall number
of which is 1.3 million people. The female refugees
in this group need specific protection, and Jordan is
addressing this need by providing a large number of
services in the area of health and security.

Jordanian women are active in United Nations
peacekeeping operations, in military and police units
in Darfur, South Sudan and Abyei. We fully support
the Secretary-General's efforts to implement the zero-
tolerance policy with regard to sexual exploitation
and abuse.

Lastly, we all need to bear responsibility and
facilitate the protection of women by including
them in international peace and security efforts and
implementing political, economic and social policies to
tackle the persistent and renewed threats.

