Mr. Estreme (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First,
I would like to thank the Russian Federation for the
invitation to take part in this important open debate
on women and peace and security on the sixteenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
which Argentina supported as a non-permanent member
of the Council in 2000.

The merit of resolution 1325 (2000) has been to
acknowledge the important role that women play as key
actors in peace processes. The international community
shouldjoin forces to make this role possible. One ofthe
greatest challenges still is the implementation on the
ground by all stakeholders of the commitments made in
the framework of the United Nations.

Sustaining peace will be achieved only if we
increase the participation of women as actors in all
stages of the peace process, including in particular in
peacekeeping operations. We wish to underscore that
15 per cent of Argentine personnel participating in
peacekeeping operations or in special political missions
are women, according to the latest data. That is higher
than the general average of 4.22 per cent. We will
continue to work on deepening that commitment.

Argentina welcomes the establishment of the
informal national focal points tetwork for the agenda
on women and peace and security. I congratulate the
Kingdom of Spain for that initiative. The establishment
of that network multiplies the efforts for the full
achievement of the human rights of women in countries
in conflict, which contributes to the implementation by
States of their obligations and commitments.

Argentina fully agrees with the importance that
the United Nations attaches to the role of women in
preventive diplomacy, at the negotiating table and
in post-conflict reconstruction. That perspective is
naturally linked with the new concept of sustaining
peace, which recognizes the important role to be
performed by women.

For Argentina, the gender perspective in the design
and implementation of public policies is a priority. That
is why the implementation ofresolution 1325 (2000) and
subsequent resolutions is fully embedded in the firm
commitment assumed by the Government of my country
to achieve gender equality, the empowerment of women
and the defence and protection of women's rights.

Argentina is committed to the meaningful
participation of women in decision-making and in all
peace processes. That is why we adopted our national
plan of action for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and subsequent resolutions as an instrument
that integrates all national agencies working in the area
of women and peace and security. One of the goals of
the national action plan is to increase the participation
of women from various spheres - political, social,
economic and security - to contribute to conflict
prevention, peacebuilding and peacemaking.

My country strongly believes that more equitable
and egalitarian societies that respect the rights of
women are more peaceful societies. With that in mind,
strengthening the meaningful role of women in all
the phases of peace processes and mainstreaming a
gender perspective in peace agreements and in public
policies are priorities of our foreign policy in that
area. Argentina also encourages the incorporation of a
gender perspective into all peace processes involving
the United Nations. We consider it fundamental to work
with civil society organizations, which should continue
to participate in designing and implementing policies
related to the topic.

After the adoption of Argentina's national plan
and its launch in 2016, Argentina offered to cooperate
with Columbia on gender topics in order to contribute
to the country's peace process. We are convinced that
working towards the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) will have a real impact on peacebuilding in
various parts of the world, which is why my country
has promoted its policies regarding women's access to
justice and the fight against impunity. It has done that,
to give just one example, by participating in the Justice
Rapid Response initiative; my country is a member
of the initiative's governing body and has nominated
experts to be included in its roster.

In many cases, the violation of women's human
rights and the assaults against the sexual integrity of
women and girls in situations of conflict, as well as
the abduction of women and girls, with the goal of
exploiting them for work, sexual slavery and trafficking,
are committed by members of rebel or terrorist groups,
as well as by members of armed forces or security
forces. In some cases, such crimes are even committed
by members of participating peacekeeping operations.

We need to work in favour of the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) and to strengthen measures
aimed at preventing cases of sexual abuse and
exploitation in peacekeeping operations, in line with
the Organization's zero-tolerance policy. We should
also implement the resolution with regard to its military,
police and civilian components, so as to move from a
culture of impunity to a culture of prevention. Such
measures would have a real impact on peacebuilding in
various parts of the world.

