The Secretary-General (spoke in French): It is a
pleasure for me to join the Security Council today for
this debate on sexual violence in conflict. All over the
world, we are witnessing an appalling number of acts
of sexual violence in wartime. No region can escape
this scourge, which continues to plague women, girls,
boys and men. However, an unprecedented political
momentum has made it possible to make clear progress
in the fight against such crimes. The international
community has finally broken the silence and taboo
surrounding the issue.

(Spoke in English)

Sexual violence is widely recognized as a
deliberate strategy used to shred the fabric of society,
to control and intimidate communities and to force
people from their homes. It is rightly seen as a threat to
international peace and security, a serious violation of
international humanitarian law and human rights law
and a major impediment to post-conflict reconciliation
and economic development. The Council has played a
significant role in ushering in this change, in particular
through several landmark resolutions that confirm
sexual violence as a war crime, a crime against
humanity and a constituent act of genocide. The
designation of 19 June as the International Day for the
Elimination of Sexual Violence in Conflict is a further
sign of heightened engagement and commitment.

Over the past decade, I have sought to do whatever
I could to end sexual violence in conflict and to uphold
the rights of women and girls everywhere. I launched
my UNiTE Campaign to End Violence against Women
and created the post of Special Representative on
Sexual Violence in Conflict. Through the work of my
Special Representative, the United Nations has agreed
frameworks of cooperation and joint communiques with
Governments and regional bodies. The deployment of
women protection advisers to peacekeeping and political
missions has strengthened the monitoring, analysis
and reporting of conflict-related sexual violence and
engagement with parties to conflict, which are vital
steps towards accountability. The United Nations will
continue our own efforts to ensure that peacekeepers
uphold the highest standards of integrity towards the
people they serve.

Today, we and our partners are supporting
thousands of survivors whom we were not reaching
a decade ago, with practical measures ranging from
reporting hotlines to community-based care. Those
policies not only help survivors, they enable societies
to begin their own recovery.

Internationaljurisprudence has also been developed
around sexual violence in conflict, leading to landmark
cases against political and military leaders. The
recent conviction of Jean-Pierre Bemba Gombo by the
International Criminal Court was the latest sign that
the era of impunity for sexual violence as a tool of war
is over.

The past decade has shown that progress is possible,
even in the most difficult and intractable situations.
However, we still face serious challenges. My latest
annual report (S/2016/36l) covers 19 situations of
concern and lists dozens of parties that systematically
commit such crimes. One extremely disturbing aspect
is the use of sexual violence as a tactic of terrorism.
Da'esh, Boko Haram and other extremist groups
are using sexual violence as a means of attracting
and retaining fighters, and to generate revenue. It is
estimated that the Yazidi community gave Da'esh
up to $45 million in ransom payments in 2014 alone.
Abducted women, men, girls and boys suffer the most
terrible trauma through brutal physical and sexual
assault, child and forced marriages and sexual slavery
on a massive scale. The abduction of more than 200
girls from Chibok, Nigeria, more than two years ago, is
one of the most horrific examples of the use of sexual
violence as a tactic of terrorism.

I call for the immediate release of all those taken
captive, and for care and support for those who return,
who can suffer from social isolation and depression.
Women and girls with children may need special
medical and psychosocial support, which must extend
to the children themselves, who can suffer complete
rejection. The shame and social stigma faced by those
women and children should be redirected towards the
brutal perpetrators of violence.

We must continue to speak up for the women, girls,
men and boys whose bodies for too long have been
considered the spoils of war. I look forward to a strong
and unified response from the Council to the concerns
raised in my report.

