Mr. Zhang Yesui (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all, I wish to thank the Vietnamese Government
for initiating this open debate of the Security Council
and Your Excellency, Mr. President, for presiding over
this meeting in person.

Nine years ago, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1325 (2000), a milestone document that has
laid the groundwork for international cooperation in
the area of women and peace and security. Since then,
the Council has taken a number of follow-up actions
under the resolution, and relevant Member States have
also taken vigorous measures in that regard.

Women are shouldering an increasing share of the
responsibility to maintain world peace and are playing
a significant role in peacekeeping, peacemaking and
peacebuilding throughout the world. As the Chinese
saying goes, women can hold up half of the sky.
Nevertheless, owing to the changed nature of conflicts
and a combination of complex factors, the international
community still has a long way to go in fully and
effectively implementing resolution 1325 (2000). The
relevant United Nations organs and organizations
should engage in cooperation while at the same time
carrying out their respective mandates, so as to make
use of the synergy to achieve the best results. In that
connection, I would like to underscore the two
following points.

First, responding to the needs of women in post-
conflict reconstruction and enabling them to play their
full role form an important link in the comprehensive
and full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
Respect for and protection of women and girls are
manifestations of social progress and civilization and
are an indispensable element of a mature social system.
Respect for and protection of women's rights and
interests should be incorporated in the entire peace
process. The special needs and concerns of women and
girls should be accommodated.

Women should have greater access to
participation and decision-making, and their right in
that regard should be institutionalized. Peace in post-
conflict countries is often fragile. Without the effective
participation of women, there cannot be lasting peace
and long-term social stability. Women should fully
enjoy the right of decision-making and participation in
the post-conflict peacebuilding and development of
their countries. They can provide staunch support for
hard-earned peace.

Secondly, the countries concerned should
shoulder the primary responsibility for addressing the
needs of women and girls in post-conflict situations
and comprehensively implement resolution 1325
(2000). Armed conflicts in different parts of the world
vary in cause and nature. The Governments and people
of the countries concerned have the best understanding
of the needs of local women and girls.

Post-conflict countries are often faced with
numerous tasks and difficulties. The international
community should provide them with generous
financial and technical support and should help them to
enhance capacity-building. While providing external
support, the international community and donors
should respect the will of recipient countries, rely on
local governments, fully put to use the enthusiasm of
local women and girls and encourage them to engage in
the peacebuilding process as owners of their countries.

The Security Council has just adopted resolution
1889 (2009). I appreciate the efforts made by the
Vietnamese delegation in drafting the resolution and
during the consultations on it. Resolution 1889 (2009)
requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
Security Council two reports in 2010, one on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and the other
on the needs of women and girls in post-conflict
situations.

A few days ago, the Council adopted resolution
1888 (2009), which requests the Secretary-General to
continue to submit annual reports on combating sexual
violence in armed conflict. We hope that the Secretariat
will strengthen internal coordination, heed the requests
of the two resolutions, avoid duplication of work and
waste of resources and make full use of the relevant
information, in particular to provide high-quality
reports to the Council.

