Mrs. Patterson (United States): Mr. President,
we would like to congratulate you on the selection of
this topic for your presidency's thematic discussion,
and we would also like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Guehenno for his typically candid and clear
report, as well as express our appreciation for the
reports and comments of, Louise Arbour, High
Commissioner for Human Rights, and Thoraya Obaid,
Executive Director of the United Nations Population
Fund (UNFPA).

This is a very difficult issue. The United States
agrees that the United Nations must strengthen its
response to gender-based violence and conflict in post-
conflict situations. The United States delegation would
like to focus its comments today on one element of the
problem, namely, trafficking in persons.

This problem is often worsened by the upheaval
accompanying post-conflict situations, as Ms. Arbour
said. Regrettably, it has also been associated with the
presence of peacekeeping operations.

As you are aware, trafficking in persons is an
issue that continues to grow, sometimes in the same
places that we are charged, as members of the Security
Council, to protect. Annually, between 600,000 and
800,000 men, women and children are involved in such
cross-border traffic. These individuals are recruited,
transported or sold into all forms of forced labour and
servitude, including prostitution, labour, farming and
child armies. The victims range from a 12-year-old girl
in the Congo, forced to have sex with more than a
dozen foreigners a day, to child soldiers in the African
continent to a smuggled Mexican worker toiling in a
Florida tomato field to pay off a hugely inflated debt
that never declines. Of these victims, 80 per cent are
female. Seventy per cent of these girls and women are
trafficked into the commercial sex industry.

The United States is deeply committed to ending
this scourge of trafficking in persons, which poses a
security threat by lining the pockets of criminal groups,
while grossly violating people's human rights and
serving as a public health threat through the spread of
sexually transmitted diseases. This problem also
hampers troop readiness. This is an issue that is
receiving increasing attention from the international
community and from the United States. Last
September, President Bush called on the international
community to create clear standards and certainty of
punishment for the crime of trafficking.

Since the year 2000, the United States has given
almost $300 million to support anti-trafficking in
persons programmes in more than 120 countries. In the
past year alone, 24 nations enacted new laws to combat
trafficking in persons, while 32 other countries are
currently drafting or passing such laws. As a result of
these efforts, nearly 8,000 traffickers have been
prosecuted worldwide, and 2,800 have been convicted.

While these gains are admirable, I am sorry to
say that they fall short of redressing the problem. We
need a concerted effort on the part of all Member
States to end this plague. Not surprisingly, United
Nations peacekeeping missions mirror attitudes and
problems found in the armed forces of the Member
States.

As Security Council members, we should
continue to support the efforts of the United Nations
leadership to effect change within the United Nations
missions. Trafficking in persons violations within
United Nations missions need continued high-level
attention. In July 2004, Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno and the Secretary-General officially
approved an anti-trafficking policy for peacekeepers.
This policy supplements a bulletin issued by the
Secretary-General in October 2003, which also
established guidelines of acceptable conduct by United
Nations peacekeepers. This bulletin prohibits acts of
sexual exploitation and sexual abuse by United Nations
staff or United Nations forces conducting operations
under United Nations command, including the
exchange of money, employment, goods or services for
sex and sexual activity with persons under age 18.

However, policy is only as good as its
enforcement. We welcome Mr. Guehenno's statement
that the United Nations will enforce a policy of zero
tolerance of sex trafficking at every United Nations
mission. We must also enforce the same zero tolerance
policy with respect to prostitution, as this fuels the
demand for human trafficking victims by serving as a
cover under which traffickers operate. We also seek to
put in place trafficking-in-persons training for all
United Nations peacekeepers, which would be
mandatory prior to their deployment.

The United States commends the work of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) Best
Practices Unit to this end. In July of this year, the
Department of State provided $200,000 in funding to
support the Best Practices Unit for the production of
anti-trafficking awareness materials. The Unit will
produce over 60,000 posters, brochures and pocket
cards, translated into 10 peacekeeping languages, for
distribution to all missions, regional training centres
and to the pre-deployment training centres of the main
troop-contributing countries. However, having one
staff member dedicated to addressing the issues of
trafficking in persons among all United Nations
peacekeepers is not enough, especially when that one
position will expire in the next two months. And, while
these efforts are useful in raising awareness, they will
be meaningless unless peacekeepers receive mandatory
training that clearly outlines the zero tolerance policy
of the United Nations and they receive proper
punishment to fit the crime. Most importantly, we need
a dedicated United Nations leadership position to carry
out these goals.

By definition, post-conflict societies are those
that suffer from the weak rule of law. United Nations
peacekeeping missions need to be at the forefront of
ensuring that gender-based violence is eliminated or
redressed. We can do this by creating concrete steps
and actions to ensure compliance.

