Mr. Ochoa Martinez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, we would like to thank South Africa for
convening this debate on the issue of women and peace
and security. We also thank the United Kingdom for
continuing it and enabling delegations inscribed on
the list of speakers to deliver statements on a crucial
subject. We congratulate South Africa on its very
successful presidency and wish the United Kingdom an
equally productive one.

My Government's foreign policy has been openly
declared a feminist policy. Mexico's Congress features
equal representation for women and men, while our
presidential Cabinet is equally balanced. Almost 20
years after the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), we
acknowledge the progress made in incorporating the
gender dimension into the work of the Security Council.
However, major discrepancies remain between rhetoric
and reality. It is inconceivable that in 2019 divisions with
regard to women's rights and gender equality remain.
For Mexico, gender equality and the empowerment of
women and girls are essential, not only for achieving
international peace and security but also for achieving
sustainable development.

Next year, we will mark the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the adoption of the Beijing Platform for
Action. Against that backdrop, Mexico and France, with
the support of UN-Women, will sponsor the Generation
Equality Forum - a civil society-led process aimed at
reviewing the progress made by the Platform for Action,
identify gaps in its implementation and speed up the
pace towards substantive equality. Forty-five years
will also have elapsed since the first World Conference
on Women, held in Mexico under the auspices of the
United Nations in 1975.

Neither the United Nations as a whole nor the
Security Council itself can forgo the participation of
women in conflict prevention or conflict resolution.
As key pillars in all societies and communities, their
right to equal participation in power structures of
the decision-making process at all levels must be
guaranteed. In that regard, we welcome the inclusion
of approximately 30 per cent women in the meetings
of the Syrian Constitutional Committee, whose work
began in Geneva on 30 October. We believe that their
participation will play a key role in the peace process,
as has already occurred in other processes.

In times of armed conflict, it is unquestionable
that women and girls are afflicted disproportionately
by many types of violence and at greater risk of
exploitation, abuse and sexual violence. This is a
reflection of the asymmetric power relations that
continue between women and men today. Such forms
of violence are even more outrageous when attributed
to United Nations officials. We therefore fully endorse
the Secretary-General's zero-tolerance policy aimed
at eradicating sexual exploitation and abuse in the
Organization's missions.

Ensuring access to justice and that perpetrators
are punished are essential for the prevention of such
crimes. Such access must include effective victim-
centred care that meets their biopsychosocial needs
and, in a clear and committed way, to their needs
related to their sexual and reproductive health. In that
regard, while we welcome the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2493 (2019), we would have preferred more
progressive language.

Mexico recognizes the leadership of civil society
organizations, and especially women human rights
defenders, who risk their lives in promoting peace and
security in their communities and still face unacceptable
misogynistic and sexist narratives, which have driven
an increase in violence against them.

We thank the Secretary-General for his latest
report (8/2019/800) on this subject. Accountability,
financing, work with civil society, conflict analysis
with a gender perspective, the appointment of women
mediators and negotiators in peace processes and the
ratification of the Arms Trade Treaty are crucial steps
in the implementation of the resolution.

Mexico promotes the participation of women in
peacekeeping operations. Women now account for
15 per cent of contingents. This is obviously not enough.
We want to make further progress and have plans for
doing so. We hope to participate actively in the Elsie
Initiative Fund, promoted by the Canadian Government
and UN-Women.

Gender equality is one of the priority issues that my
country, if elected to the Security Council, will promote
during its membership during the period 2021 to 2022.
Women's rights are non-negotiable human rights, and
their full realization is an essential precondition for
sustainable development in a peaceful world.

