Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): It is
an honour for Costa Rica to speak today in its capacity
as Chair of the Human Security Network, consisting of
the following countries: Austria, Canada, Chile, Costa
Rica, Greece, Ireland, Jordan, Mali, Norway, Slovenia,
Switzerland and Thailand, and South Africa as an
observer.

To begin, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this important
debate. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his presentation. We welcome the
submission of his report (S/2009/362), which contains
valuable recommendations on combating sexual
violence.

In the past 10 years, the Security Council has
increasingly considered security issues with a gender-
equality perspective and has enshrined its commitment
in resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008). Those
resolutions place women at the centre of consideration
of security issues, recognizing them not merely as
victims but also as important actors in building
sustainable peace and security and in fostering
development in societies experiencing or emerging
from armed conflict. Furthermore, resolution 1612
(2005) and the recently adopted resolution 1882
(2009), both on children and armed conflict, along with
resolution 1674 (2006), on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, strengthen and expand the Security
Council protection framework in the area of sexual
violence.

We commend the progress the Security Council
has made in thematic discussions on this issue and the
positive developments stemming from it. We also
welcome the active interest and the commitment on
gender-related issues seen in the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council, the Human Rights
Council, the United Nations funds and programmes
and the relevant human-rights treaty bodies, especially
the Committee on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women.

Unfortunately, progress towards implementation
of cross-cutting gender commitments, with regard to
curbing, punishing and protecting against sexual
violence in armed conflict situations, has been slow
and uneven. This is the result of a number of factors,
including weak coordination and fragmented responses
within the United Nations system, insufficient funding
and human resources, inefficient accountability
measures and a lack of firm political will. The
Secretary-General's report highlights the challenges
posed by inadequate preventive measures, the failure to
end impunity and persistent discrimination against
women and girls in law and in practice, and the
insufficient and inadequate access to assistance and
treatment for victims.

In the light of those challenges, we believe that a
more comprehensive and strategic approach is needed,
focused on six critical areas: prevention, protection,
women's participation, accountability, assistance to
victims and data collection.

The first area is prevention, which is essential in
combating sexual violence and which must be tailored
to the specific circumstances of each situation. Gender-
based violence, discrimination and inequality
contribute to exacerbating sexual violence when the
rule of law breaks down. Efforts must be made to
eliminate prejudice, discriminatory social patterns,
historically rooted inequalities and harmful traditional
and cultural practices that condone sexual violence. In
addition, these measures should be aimed at raising
community awareness and eliciting more direct
engagement by traditional and religious leaders.

The second focus is on the need to strengthen the
protection capacity not only of States but also of
United Nations personnel on the ground. Security
sector reform and the rule of law can play a vital role
in this process. International cooperation should
increase resources to improve policing and civilian
capacities, as well as providing technical assistance
and mentoring to help train military, police and other
security forces to deal with cases of sexual violence.
Without question, this can result in an increased
awareness of human-rights standards and obligations
under international law.
In dealing with peacekeeping operations and
protection mandates, we need to develop clear gender-
sensitive operational guidelines in order to effectively
tackle sexual violence. Enhanced coordination,
integrated strategic frameworks and united priorities
among the various United Nations actors on the ground
are fundamental to producing a more effective response
to this problem. Such a response, combined with the
contributions of the Peacebuilding Commission, would,
we believe, result in a more strategic approach and
more effective engagement.

The third area concerns participation. Despite the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) nine years ago, the
participation of women in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding remains minimal. As reaffirmed in
resolution 1820 (2008), we must continue to strive to
encourage the empowerment of women and their
systematic and effective participation at all levels in
peacekeeping and political missions. We should also
increase the number of female heads of mission,
military observers, civilian police and United Nations
mediators. Women also have a critical role to play in
the long-term prevention of conflicts. At the same time,
we must also study and understand the obstacles to
promoting women's participation in these fields if we
are to reverse that trend.

The fourth area of interest is accountability,
which, through justice, fosters the promotion and
sustainability of peace. In this regard, we consider that
amnesties should exclude crimes of sexual violence.
All parties, State and non-State, must always refrain
from committing and tolerating sexual violence. All
necessary steps should be taken to protect individuals,
punish perpetrators and provide remedy to victims.
Zero-tolerance policies and the principle of command
responsibility are also important measures to enforce
accountability.

In this context, the genuine commitment of
civilian and military leaders is important to reducing
sexual violence. International cooperation must support
efforts to hold perpetrators accountable and to ensure
equal and effective access to justice under
internationally agreed standards. The complementary
role of international justice mechanisms, such as the
International Criminal Court, inter alia, can also play a
relevant role in supporting national efforts to fight
impunity, as appropriate.

The Security Council has recognized that sexual
violence in situations of armed conflict may, under
some circumstances, constitute a threat to international
peace and security. Therefore, we believe that the
Security Council should include gender equality
concerns as well as provisions to prevent and respond
to sexual violence when establishing or renewing
peacekeeping mandates. The Security Council should
consider targeted and effective means to ensure
compliance. In addition, the Council should improve
the communication and exchange of information
among its subsidiary bodies in order to ensure a more
coherent approach to combating sexual violence.

The fifth area that deserves our attention is
assistance to victims. In addition to the aforementioned
measures, there must be a multisectoral approach to the
assistance and social protection of victims, in
particular to ensure their access to medical care,
psychological and psycho-social support, legal
assistance, education and sustainable socio-economic
reintegration. Assistance measures must focus on
avoiding the marginalization and stigmatization of
victims, and facilitate victims' social reintegration to
prevent further trauma. Initiatives such as the United
Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict
should be complemented by efforts to address the root
causes of violence. In the case of refugees and
displaced persons, the special needs of women and
girls, including medical care during repatriation and
resettlement, should also be taken into account.

Lastly, timely, objective, accurate and reliable
data collection is important to enhancing our
understanding of the various forms of sexual violence
in armed conflict situations and their aftermath so as to
ensure the appropriate responses and to move forward
in the implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000) and
1820 (2008).

We also encourage donors, researchers and others
to support ethical investigation and data collection
efforts in post-conflict settings that improve our ability
to prevent and respond to this problem. Furthermore, in
collecting data, it is important to ensure the
disaggregation by age and sex of victims and
perpetrators alike in order to target prevention and
response activities.

We need to improve the effectiveness of
monitoring and reporting to facilitate strategic planning
and assessment of progress. We will revisit this
important matter once the Secretary-General submits
the recommendations in his next report.

