Mr. Thomson (Fiji): The Fiji delegation wishes
to convey its salutations to you personally, Madam, and
to your Government on the occasion of your
presidency of the Council, and to express our gratitude
for the convening of this important debate. We also
thank the Secretary-General for his most
comprehensive report (S/2011/598*) and his valuable
recommendations.
Fiji associates itself with the statement delivered
earlier today by the Permanent Representative of
Vanuatu on behalf of the Pacific small island
developing States.

We are encouraged by the initiatives currently
being undertaken by the Secretary-General and
UN-Women on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). We acknowledge that progress has been made
in all four thematic areas of the United Nations system-
wide action plan. We believe, however, that much work
remains to be done; not only in relation to the United
Nations strategic framework, but, importantly, in
national implementation of the resolution.

We need to take a holistic response to effectively
make progress in the implementation of the resolution.
We depend upon the guidance of the Security Council
and the advice of the Secretary-General, UN-Women,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and other
relevant United Nations departments and agencies. We
need the input of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations and the Peacebuilding
Commission, as well as the assistance of civil society
and regional organizations. In addition, we need to
build local capacities by learning from the experiences
and good practices of other countries on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

We welcome the initiatives of the Security
Council and the work carried out by the Secretary-
General in establishing the set of indicators for
tracking the implementation of the resolution and to
provide guidance for all Member States in their efforts
to achieve its desired goals. Such universal indicators
should be complemented by national implementation
frameworks and policies to ensure that the various
thematic areas of the resolution are addressed. It is for
that reason that Fiji supports the development of a
regional framework for the Pacific small island
developing States as an important step towards the full
implementation of the resolution in the Pacific. We
believe that a framework that incorporates the
principles of the resolution, with clear policy
guidelines on its application to our unique national and
regional characteristics, will accelerate the
implementation process in the Pacific.

Fiji's commitment to the resolution is
exemplified in our policies that, among other things,
strongly encourage the recruitment of women in our
security forces and their deployment with equal
opportunities to peacekeeping missions. We support the
global effort to increase the participation of women in
United Nations police peacekeeping roles to 20 per
cent by 2014. We encourage the provision of pre- and
post-deployment training of our peacekeepers and
welcome further assistance and expertise in that regard.
Furthermore, we support the participation and
representation of women at all levels of decision-
making.

In our consultations and interactions with civil
society and the public, we acknowledge the work of
FemLINK Pacific, a Fiji-based non-governmental
organization that deals specifically with resolution
1325 (2000). The Fijian Government promotes the
enhancement of efforts to collaborate with the
expertise and experience of women's groups, with a
view to enhancing the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) at the national level.

We welcome the pronouncement by the
Secretary-General in his report that the most
significant institutional development with regard to
women, peace and security has been the creation of
UN-Women, with the purpose of leveraging the entire
United Nations system to ensure the accelerated
implementation of all relevant resolutions on the issue.
In conclusion, we look forward to working with
UN-Women in achieving the goals of resolution 1325
(2000).

