Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this debate. France
endorses the statement to be delivered by the
representative of the European Union.

I think that everyone around this table is in broad
agreement regarding the need to improve the
effectiveness of the means by which the international
community takes action to prevent a country recently
emerged from conflict from relapsing into a crisis. I
believe there is also consensus on the fact that this is a
long-term and difficult endeavour. It is difficult
because it requires that institutions with very different
practices and traditions, and that clearly cherish their
autonomy, work together. It is also difficult because we
must simultaneously conduct a set of very different
tasks - from the disarmament of armed groups to the
strengthening of State institutions - and because one
cannot employ a sequential approach. As we have
already heard in this Chamber, we have to
simultaneously conduct peacekeeping and lay the
groundwork for peacebuilding. Lastly, it is difficult
because we must better assess the risks associated with
new threats, such as drug and human trafficking,
organized crime and even corruption, which have great
potential to destabilize fragile countries.

In this respect, I believe that there is no more
telling example of what we are discussing here than the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I
am not the first to cite this example. We know that we
cannot indefinitely remain in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, but that we can withdraw the United
Nations forces only if we leave behind State
institutions that are sufficiently sound to ensure the
development and stability of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We will do so, of course, alongside the
Congolese authorities.

These reconstruction tasks are tremendous.
Moreover, we might well ask ourselves whether the
area is really in a post-conflict situation. It is therefore
essential that a responsible relationship be established
between the authorities of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the actors of the international
community as a whole.

The United Nations have drafted a state
reconstruction plan for Kivu - the stabilization and
reconstruction plan for areas emerging from armed
conflict - and we must ensure that all the international
institutions, in particular the European Union, which is
the leading donor to and backer of countries emerging
from crisis, work together towards the same goal.
There is a need for synergy. Given the gravity of the
crisis from which the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has only recently emerged, it is the primary
challenge for our Organization.

We have examples of relative success. Sierra
Leone was raised as an example by my British
colleague, but we also have the positive experiences of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
the Central African Republic and the United Nations
Integrated Office in Burundi. We must learn from these
experiences insofar as they guarantee a political
dialogue with the authorities of the host country and
close coordination in the reconstruction efforts led by
various United Nations agencies.

The withdrawal strategy for these offices should
be carefully prepared - because these situations are
looming already and will continue to be an issue - in
order to avoid opening new gaps or the re-emergence
of tensions due to a lack of resources or attention from
the international community. There is no one-size-fits-
all solution. Each problem must be considered on a
case-by-case basis by the international community.

We are closely following the work of the Senior
Advisory Group for the Review of International
Civilian Capacities, led by Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno.
This matter was raised by Mr. Peter Wittig and the
Ambassador of Austria. We are awaiting bold
recommendations to better meet the real needs of post-
conflict countries and the competencies available at the
international level from other Member States and our
system as a whole.

To work towards peacebuilding as soon as an
armed conflict has ended is to pay due attention to the
contribution of women as a key aspect of
peacebuilding. How could we imagine setting aside
half of a society that is trying to rebuild itself? Leaving
women out would undoubtedly pave the way for future
disasters. That is why we believe that women must
have access to decision-making in the political,
economic, social and cultural arenas in a more
systematic manner and on an equal footing with men.
In this regard, we fully support the work of the
Secretary-General and we invite the United Nations
system - and above all UN Women and its Executive
Director, Ms. Bachelet - to implement it.

We have been discussing this matter for a long
time. It is a complex task, but we have unfortunate
examples in Timor-Leste and Haiti demonstrating that,
without integrating the peacebuilding stage into the
very design and implementation of peacekeeping
operations, we will fail. We must therefore continue to
improve the resources at our disposal. That is why, Sir,
I thank you once again for organizing this debate.

