Ms. Quiel Murcia (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
Let me begin by welcoming South Africa's leadership
in convening this timely debate, as well as the readiness
of the presidency of the United Kingdom to conclude it.

Nearly two decades since the unanimous adoption
of landmark resolution 1325 (2000), we have certainly
made significant progress in the participation of
women and girls, but that progress is still uneven
and remaining challenges are not inconsequential.
Systematic violence against women and girls continues
to disproportionately violate their most basic rights,
placing them at a disadvantage and leaving them behind.
In the face of that situation, States and society in general
cannot be lax, let alone indifferent. We welcome the
recommendations contained in the Secretary's report
(8/2019/800) and his call for concrete measures to bring
about genuine changes.

The unavoidable link between the women and
peace and security agenda and the achievement of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development requires the
participatory role and leadership of women be enhanced
as a basis for peacebuilding and conflict prevention.
The ever-increasing number of social conflicts requires
women's participation in particular because maintaining
spaces for women's voices is essential to strengthen
and keep open the channels of any democratic process.
The scope of the development to which we aspire
enshrines inclusion and equality as fundamental
values of the process. That is why it is necessary to
reverse this ongoing exclusion and recognize the
prominent role women play as agents of change, whose
full participation in the design, development and
implementation of decisions is indisputably positive
and conducive to peaceful and constructive processes.
It is also necessary and urgent to increase resources
for the protection of human rights, so that they are not
ultimately insufficient for the situation of vulnerability
in which women have been kept.
We have witnessed in different regions of the world
how conflicts serve as a context for rape and other
forms of sexual violence against women, which are
even worse in the case of women rights defenders. It
is urgent that we eliminate discriminatory legislation,
cultural and attitudinal barriers and gender stereotypes,
among other aspects that tend to lessen the rights and
value of women in all participatory spaces in society.

As we have pointed out before, violent extremism
has intensified and degenerated into the worst forms
of violence against women, using sexual violence as a
weapon of war. The obligation incumbent upon States
to strengthen collective action and national plans and
strategies takes on greater meaning when harm and
loss are measured in human lives. The empowerment
of women will be possible only if we as a society
manage to overcome the damage of exclusion and take
action to address human rights violations flowing from
xenophobia, racism, intolerance and other attitudes that
erode any conflict resolution process.

At the present juncture, it is unacceptable to continue
debating and questioning neither the leadership of
women and their right to hold high-level positions nor
the equal participation of 100 per cent of the population
in any sphere of political, social and economic life/

In conclusion, my delegation is of the view that
progress in the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda does not necessarily entail the
adoption of new measures by the Security Council, but,
rather, the ability to require full compliance, without
exception, with existing provisions, including with
regard to accountability for perpetrators of sexual
violence in conflict situations.

The full text ofPanama's statement will be available
on the PaperSmart portal.

