The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Secretary-General, the Ministers and the other
representatives present in the Security Council
Chamber. Their participation is an affirmation of the
importance of the subject matter under discussion.

In accordance with rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Armenia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus,
the Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador, Estonia,
Finland, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Latvia, Lebanon,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Malaysia, Mexico,
Montenegro, Namibia, Nepal, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania,
Senegal, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South
Africa, Spain, the Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine and
Uruguay to participate in this meeting.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the following briefers to participate
in the meeting: Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict; Ms. Angelina Jolie, Special
Envoy of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees; and Ms. Jane Adong Anywar, of the Women's
Initiatives for Gender Justice.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Ioannis Vrailas,
Deputy Head of the Delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations, to participate in this meeting.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Tete Antonio,
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the United
Nations, to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite Archbishop
Francis Assisi Chullikatt, Apostolic Nuncio and
Permanent Observer of the Observer State of the Holy
See to the United Nations, to participate in this meeting
in accordance with the Council's provisional rules of
procedure and previous practice in that regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/20l3/368, which contains the text ofa draft resolution
submitted by Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Montenegro, the Netherlands, Norway,
Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Romania,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Togo, Ukraine, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
the United States of America and Uruguay.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to documents 8/2013/335, which contains the text
of a letter dated 7 June 2013 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper
on the item under consideration.

I now give the floor to His Excellency Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon.

