Mr. Singer (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to thank the Plurinational State
of Bolivia and you, Sir, as President of the Security
Council, for convening this open debate on women and
peace and security. Our thanks also go to Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres and the Executive Director
of UN-Women, Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, for
their briefings and recommendations. We extend our
continued support to UN-Women in its role to advance
the women and peace and security agenda. We also
thank the civil society representative for enriching this
debate by sharing her experience.

Decisions on issues such as the distribution of
power, electoral systems, the management of natural
resources and the restitution of land and property
have a profound impact on the lives of women as well
as on prospects for lasting peace. They can influence
women's economic and physical security and their
political participation, as well as how war crimes
against women are prosecuted.

Gender inequality, like poverty, is an injustice that
exacerbates conflict and undermines peace. Gender
equality and the full participation of women, as well
as their political, social and economic empowerment,
play a fundamental role in the prevention and resolution
of armed conflict, peacebuilding, peacekeeping, the
prevention of sexual violence and the protection of
women and children.

The women and peace and security agenda has
made significant regulatory gains since its inception in
2000. However, despite the adoption of nine resolutions
and the progress made, we continue to have serious
problems with their implementation. Women and girls
are not only victims of conflicts; they are also actors
and agents of change. The participation of women at
all levels of peace processes is therefore vital. Their
contribution to the prevention and reversal of conflicts,
as well as to the maintenance of sustainable and lasting
peace, is essential. We recall that when we have had
more women in international criminal tribunals, there
was a significant increase in indictments where sexual
violence was considered a war crime.

As recent evidence of the impact of women's
participation in mediation and peace processes,
we are proud to cite the signing in 2016 of the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Lasting Peace between the Government and
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-
Ejercito del Pueblo, ending more than 50 years of
conflict and representing the first agreement of its
kind to include gender as a central theme. According
to the Secretary-General's report (S/2018/900), in July
45.5 per cent of the commissioners on United Nations-
supported truth commissions in Colombia were women.
That achievement is also due to the vast number of
women and women's organizations that were involved
in the process. The Colombian peace agreement should
be seen as a benchmark and an inspiration for other
peace processes.

Resolution 1325 (2000) is not merely about having
more women at the decision-making table, but about
integrating their perspectives and that of women's
organizations in mediation processes, thereby ensuring
women's full and effective participation and the
credibility and sustainability of the peace processes
themselves. We must therefore redouble our efforts
to address existing gaps and structural barriers to
women's participation and leadership.

We also recognize - and as experience on the
ground indicates - the importance of cooperating with
and supporting civil society and human rights defenders
in the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), and
of involving them in the work of the Security Council.
However, the threats, violence and killings to which
women in civil society and human rights defenders are
exposed compel us to urgently establish and strengthen
mechanisms for their protection.

We welcome the Informal Expert Group on Women
and Peace and Security and pledge to participate
actively in its work to facilitate a more systematic
approach to the Council agenda, including through
resolutions, reports and field visits. It is essential to
implement the Security Council's normative framework
on women and peace and security. The Council should
include that agenda and gender analysis in its responses
to humanitarian crises, and that it ensure that more
female military personnel are deployed in United
Nations peacekeeping operations, where their presence
empowers other women and makes them feel more
identified with the operations.

In that connection, we congratulate the Secretary-
General on achieving, for the first time in history,
gender parity among Secretariat leadership positions,
including through the appointment of a woman
as Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations and the recent appointments of women as
Special Representatives to the assistance missions in
Somalia and Mali.

As a sign ofthe Dominican Republic's commitment
to zero tolerance on sexual abuse and exploitation,
President Danilo Medina signed the voluntary compact
on preventing and addressing sexual exploitation and
abuse and is part of the Secretary-General's Circle of
Leadership on that issue.

We celebrate the fact that the fight against sexual
violence has gained recognition through the award of
the 2018 Nobel Peace Prize to activist Nadia Murad
and Congolese physician Denis Mukwege. It is not only
a recognition of their courageous work in defence of
the victims of conflict-related sexual violence, but it is
also a beacon of hope in a world where sexual violence
is used as a weapon of war to silence, humiliate and
terrorize women, girls and their communities.

In conclusion, the Dominican Republic will occupy
a position as a non-permanent member of the Security
Council starting in January 2019. As such, we would like
to reaffirm our commitment to the women and peace
and security agenda, and pledge that we will continue
to give due attention and priority to that agenda in order
to ensure its full and effective implementation.

