Ms. Beham: I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for
allowing the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) to participate once again in this
important debate and to share our experiences in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). It is my
special pleasure to be here today on behalf of the
OSCE Secretary General. Let me also express my
appreciation and congratulate you, Sir, and the Security
Council on the adoption of another seminal resolution
on women and peace and security. I wish also to thank
previous speakers and in particular the briefers for their
interesting and inspiring presentations.
The fifteenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000)
is a very appropriate occasion for us all to reflect on
how we can make our world more peaceful and just by
creating security that is fully inclusive.

The OSCE is the largest regional security
organization in the world dealing with early warning,
conflict prevention, crisis management and post-
conflict rehabilitation. We have a holistic approach
to security that includes politico-military issues and
economic and environmental security, as well as
human rights and the rule of law. Gender equality as
a cross-cutting issue is one of the cornerstones of our
comprehensive and cooperative security concept, and
therefore the women and peace and security agenda
plays a central role in our work.

There are a number of key OSCE policy documents
that explicitly refer to resolution 1325 (2000). Looking
back at the 15 years of implementation of the resolution,
we can clearly see that progress has been made. For
example, 27 of the 54 existing national action plans
on resolution 1325 (2000) are from the OSCE region,
and several more are in the making. A number of
OSCE participating States apply the provisions of the
resolution without having a national action plan.

In practical terms, our network of 59 gender
focal points throughout OSCE executive structures
assists staff in gender-mainstreaming their work,
involving women in all of our projects and actions, and
incorporating gender analysis in our work on the conflict
cycle. We also have developed tools and instruments
for this purpose, and we undertook a study on the 27
national action plans to get a deeper understanding of
where we stand with the implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda in the OSCE region.

The results of the study were largely consistent
with the conclusions of the regional consultations we
held with UN-Women and the Lithuanian Government
in Vilnius in April this year to feed into the global
study on resolution 1325 (2000). Drawing from these
findings, we will focus our priority attention on, inter
alia, the following issues.

First, we deliver training to our staff, senior
management and special representatives on gender-
inclusive mediation and other conflict-prevention
measures. Early warning, confidence-building, dialogue
facilitation, preventive diplomacy and mediation are
still predominantly male-dominated areas.

Second, we assist participating States in improving
existing national action plans and other strategies
or developing new ones, with a focus on creating
coherence between domestic and outward-looking
implementation activities.

Third, as we believe that preventing sexual and
gender-based violence in conflict starts with combating
violence against women and domestic violence in
peacetime, we have strengthened our activities in this
area and, inter alia, promote the ratification of the
Istanbul Convention as a key international document
and tool.
Fourth, we need more quality information and data
to inform policies and systematic responses and to learn
more about the impact of the work we are doing on
women and peace and security. We need more research
and intend to cooperate more closely with academia.

Fifth, we are working on strengthening the
interchange between international organizations, States
and civil society. We must not forget the important role
that civil society has played from the very beginning in
pushing for the women and peace and security agenda
as well as its vital role in the implementation of national
action plans and providing much-needed monitoring
and oversight.

Sixth, over the past years the OSCE has sought
to highlight the role of women and gender issues in
the context of countering terrorist radicalization. The
Global Counterterrorism Forum, at its Ministerial
Conference on 27 September 2015, adopted a document
on good practices on women and countering violent
extremism, which was drafted and developed by the
OSCE in cooperation with the Forum.

Seventh, we empower women through establishing
mentoring networks and have started to partner with
the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs to
boost women's empowerment in the area of peace and
security in order to create a critical mass of trained
women in the OSCE region to address disarmament and
non-proliferation issues.

The OSCE remains fully committed to
comprehensive and inclusive peace and security. It
is for this reason that Secretary General Lamberto
Zannier is organizing an OSCE Security Day on
13 November 2015 to discuss ways to further advance
the women and peace and security agenda. This will
be a good opportunity to identify how the conclusions
of this high-level review and the global study can be
operationalized in the framework of the OSCE.

