Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Let me first
express our deepest appreciation to Argentina for
organizing this important open debate on women and
peace and security. We especially welcome the special
focus on displaced women and girls. The urgency ofthis
topic is evident. The world faces unprecedented numbers
of refugees and displaced persons. Three-quarters of
them are women and girls.

We also thank the Secretary-General for his
annual report (S/2014/693) on resolution 1325 (2000).
The Netherlands fully endorses the report and its
recommendations. We align ourselves with the
statement delivered earlier on behalf of the European
Union.

In view of the time constraints, my full speech
will be available via Twitter and on our website. Here,
I will limit myself to the key points on the need for
women's leadership, the need for the implementation of
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 2122 (2013), and the way
ahead.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands strongly believes
in the power of women. They must be leaders; they
must be key participants in political decision-making,
in conflict prevention, in conflict resolution, and
in conflict recovery. Women can and must play an
important role in addressing the root causes of the
conflicts that cause so many refugees. Women must
participate in decision-making on humanitarian issues,
such as the provision of emergency assistance.

We admire the work of women's human rights
defenders, who fight for equality, also within conflict-
affected areas. The international community should
acknowledge the risks they face, support their efforts
and ensure their safety. We support the call of the
Secretary-General for comprehensive sexual and
reproductive health and rights services in conflict-
affected settings in all its aspects, including family-
planning material and safe abortions for victims of
rape.

In the light of the current humanitarian needs
around the world, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
has substantially increased humanitarian funding,
providing a total of €570 million for the period 2014-
2017. This includes €10 million for UNICEF in view of
its focus on the vulnerability of girls in humanitarian
emergency situations.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands gives priority to
the implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 2122
(2013). We supported the women of Syria in coming
together under the Syrian Women's Initiative for Peace
and Democracy. We made their voices heard, working
closely together with the Department of Political
Affairs and UN-Women. We invest in gender expertise
at strategic positions to allow for a more effective and
strategic implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda. In addition, we believe in the added
value of training people on the ground on issues related
to women and peace and security.

In our National Action Plan 1325 (2000), the
Government, knowledge institutions and civil society
work in partnership in the Netherlands. The purpose of
the Plan is to empower women in six focus countries
and in the Middle East and North Africa. It has an
annual budget of €4 million. This cooperation is a
powerful instrument for effective action for women'
s empowerment. We aim for the inclusion of women
in peace negotiations and of women and peace and
security dimensions in peace agreements. We welcome
the sustained positive trend reflected in the report
of the Secretary-General, and we are committed to
working with the United Nations system and with other
countries and relevant partners to further improve on
this trend.

With respect to the way ahead, we are horrified by
today's violent extremism and its despicable effects on
women and girls. We should include the women and
peace and security agenda while drafting responses
to these terrible situations. We should support the role
of women as mothers, wives and sisters in countering
violent extremism, and we should strengthen women's
civil society and women's political participation
and leadership. Furthermore, we should use the
opportunities which the coming year has to offer. The
Netherlands supports the inclusion of a stand-alone
goal on gender equality and women's empowerment in
the post-2015 agenda, and we support the integration of
these issues across the framework.

In February, the Kingdom of the Netherlands will
organize an international conference that will address
the 1325 agenda and the review process for peace
operations. The results of the conference will provide
input for the United Nations high-level review of peace
operations, the report of which should be ready by April
2015. Key issues, in our view, will be the participation
and leadership of women in conflict and transitional
situations.

In conclusion, together we must maintain the women
and peace and security agenda as a priority. Together,
we must translate our words into concrete action on the
ground, by empowering women, by promoting gender
equality, by investing in training, by working together
with civil society, by learning from each other, and by
seeing women as leaders, and not just as victims. The
Kingdom of the Netherlands has the ambition to be a
partner for peace, justice and development, and women
are crucial in all these three domains.

