Mr. Shin Dong Ik (Republic of Korea): This
year marks the twelfth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security. While the achievements of the past decade
have been remarkable, there remain persistent gaps
and challenges, including the low level of women's
participation in conflict prevention and peacebuilding
processes.

We are satisfied that the presidential statement
adopted last year (S/PRST/2011/20) gave renewed
attention to the issue of the participation and role
of women in conflict prevention and mediation.
We also welcome the fact that this year's
annual report of the Secretary-General (S/2012/732)
provides us with valuable information on the issue and
updates us on the progress in the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).

Against that backdrop, I would like to underscore the
following four points with regard to the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) and women's participation in
that regard.

First, my delegation welcomes the growing
attention of United Nations human rights mechanisms
on women, peace and security issues. We would like to
encourage all Member States to cooperate closely with
such mechanisms in order to ensure implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) at the national level. As the
report of the Secretary-General rightly points out,
consistency is crucial in ensuring robust progress on
the women, peace and security agenda. We believe that
the recommendations of United Nations human rights
mechanisms, including treaty bodies and the special
procedures of the Human Rights Council, serve as
significant tools to ensure consistency in implementing
resolution 1325 (2000).

Secondly, we need to pay more attention to the role
and participation of women in post-conflict settings. It
is regrettable that, of the nine peace agreements signed
in 2011, only two contain specific provisions on women,
peace and security. That means that we are missing
invaluable opportunities to enhance women's political
participation and empowerment in transition periods.
My delegation notes that temporary special measures,
including gender quotas in post-conflict elections, have
proved effective in increasing women's representation
in decision-making bodies. We believe that serious
consideration should be given to such measures in other
post-conflict situations.

Thirdly, my delegation would like to underline
the crucial role played by women's civil society
organizations in conflict resolution and peacebuilding
processes. Their special expertise, skills and capacities
have been critical to building confidence between parties
and to integrating a gender perspective in transition
structures. However, women's organizations still face a
number of challenges, ranging from few opportunities
to participate in formal conflict resolution or political
dialogue, poor funding and cultural and social barriers
to frequent security threats, which all prevent their
long-term planning. In that regard, we welcome the fact
that the report of the Secretary-General highlights the
importance of the financial sustainability of women's
organization, as well as their sufficient representation
in the formal peacebuilding discourse.

Fourthly, we should continue to strengthen efforts
to prevent and respond to conflict-related sexual and
gender-based violence. It is disturbing that there are
continuing reports of rape and other forms of sexual
violence not only in situations of armed conflict, but in
the context of elections, political strife and civil unrest.
We support the Secretary-General's recommendation
in his report to ensure the gender-responsiveness of
transitional justice mechanisms, including targeted
outreach to victims, reparation programmes and
explicit references to sexual violence, in the mandates
of transitional justice actors.

We truly appreciate all the support shown for the
Republic of Korea during our successful campaign for
a non-permanent seat on the Security Council for 2013-
2014. As a staunch supporter of the Council's activities
on women, peace and security and as current President
of the Executive Board of UN-Women, the Republic of
Korea will do its utmost while serving on the Council
to address the most pressing issues on women, peace
and security.

