Mr. Mgobozi (South Africa): Allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, and the Peruvian
delegation on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of April. Furthermore, we
would like to extend our appreciation to you, Sir, for
organizing this open debate on the very important
topic of sexual violence in conflict. I would also like
to thank the Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Amina
Mohammed, Ms. Pramila Patten and Ms. Razia Sultana
for their briefings.

South Africa welcomes the Secretary-General's
leadership on conflict prevention and sustaining peace.
We note that the effective implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda directly contributes to
those objectives. My delegation also welcomes the
Secretary-General's report (S/2018/250) on conflict-
related sexual Violence and notes its content.

Of all the evils that occur during a conflict,
systemic and widespread sexual violence remains one
of the most despicable. As an instrument of war, it is a
f Iagrant violation of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. We call on all parties to
fully support the survivors of all those atrocious acts
and strongly condemn the use of sexual violence in
all its forms as a tactic of war and terrorism and as an
instrument of torture.

Women and girls continue to be disproportionately
affected by conflict situations, especially with regard
to sexual abuse and violence. The lives of the survivors

of sexual violence are changed forever, with many
survivors bearing not only the physical scars but
also the hidden trauma and unwarranted stigma as a
result of those acts. The use of sexual violence as an
instrument of war destroys families and communities,
with the ultimate goal being to divide, dominate and
control society. Ending this evil scourge, addressing
the resulting trauma and holding those responsible for
committing such heinous acts accountable is integral
to the reconciliation and peacebuilding process.
Therefore, my delegation calls on all parties in conflict
zones to make and implement commitments to combat
sexual violence, in accordance with resolution 2106
(2013), on the issueo of sexual violence in conflict.

We must all do more to prevent sexual violence
in conflict. In that regard, we encourage the Security
Council to give close consideration to addressing the
risk factors and early-warning signs of systemic sexual
violence. South Africa believes that that can be achieved
through the inclusion of a greater number of deployed
female peacekeepers, particularly women protection
advisers, in peacekeeping missions, and we call on all
Member States to support the inclusion of such posts in
the mandates and budgets of peacekeeping operations.
In that regard, South Africa has one of the largest
contingents of women peacekeepers deployed in United
Nations peacekeeping missions. The contribution of
women to peacekeeping and peacemaking efforts is
recognized as a contributing factor to the effectiveness
and long-term success of United Nations deployments.

Allowing women to talk to women about their
experiences creates a more conducive and safe
environment for women to communicate their immediate
protection concerns, including the reporting of
instances of sexual abuse and their overall perspectives
on the security situation. The ability to speak freely
contributes to the empowerment of women in conflict
situations, which, in turn, provides space for women to
contribute to and participate in the peacebuilding and
reconciliation process.

Access to justice and legal recourse for cases of
sexual violence is another essential component of the
peacebuilding and reconciliation process. Without
perpetrators having to face the consequences for their
actions, there can be nojustice for the survivors of sexual
violence, and there can be no peace without justice.

Sexual abuse and discrimination are inextricably
linked to gender inequality, poverty, exclusion and
marginalization. My delegation believes that we need
to directly address those contributors to conflict,
including the promotion of gender equality and greater
participation by women in all forms of mediation, post-
conflict recovery and peacebuilding processes, if we
are ever to tackle the root causes of conflict. Women's
voices must be prominent during peace negotiations
and conflict resolution processes to ensure that all
those affected by conflict, especially those who are the
most marginalized and vulnerable, namely, women and
girls, are given an opportunity to play an active role in
changing their environments.
In that regard, the necessary legal framework
needs to be strengthened to address all forms of
discrimination against women, including with respect
to land ownership, access to economic opportunities,
employment, education and health care, which are
all essential components of an inclusive, open and
peaceful society.

In conclusion, South Africa continues to prioritize
the participation of women in peace and security
processes, particularly through training programmes
on mediation, dialogue and conflict resolution. We
remain committed to addressing the scourge of
conflict-related sexual violence in all its forms. We
will work vigorously towards a non-discriminatory and
non-sexist global society in which all women and girls
are treated as equal citizens. The end of discrimination
against women will significantly help to address the
root causes of sexual violence.

