Mr. Milanovic' (Serbia): I am greatly honoured to
address the Security Council at this meeting convened
to mark the 15 years since the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) and to express my gratitude to Spain and
personally to you, Mr. President, for convening this
important meeting. This is an opportunity to review
the implementation of the resolution over the past
15 years, but it also a chance to see what still remains
to be done and how we can better deliver in the future.
In that regard, we welcome the recommendations of
the global study on women and peace and security, as
well as the report of the Secretary-General on the issue
(S/2015/716). In my statement, I shall outline some
of the most important experiences of the Republic of
Serbia in implementing the resolution.

Based on its firm commitment to the goals and
objectives of the resolution, in 2010, my country
adopted a national action plan to implement resolution
1325 (2000) on women and peace and security in
the Republic of Serbia over the period 2010-2015.
Its seven chapters, encompassing seven general
goals, 15 specific goals and 106 activities, have been
successfully implemented over the past five years. The
action plan established a structure of gender-equality
institutions and mechanisms, such as the Government's
political council, the governmental multisector
coordination body, the National Assembly Committee
on Gender Equality, analytical groups and research
teams, counsellors and ministers/directors for gender
equality, which have been established, for the time
being, only within the defence and security system.
It also established a colleague-assistance mechanism,
called a "person of trust". The structure incorporated
the standards of the United Nations, European Union
and NATO Partnership for Peace programme in the
field of gender equality.

Along with the progress made in building a more
democratic society and in protecting human rights, a
significant step towards laying the foundation for a
better and more humane and secure future for women
has been made in the field of gender equality as well.
The action plan is currently being evaluated, and the
extension of its implementation in the coming mid-term
period, 2016-2020, is being considered.

Figures show clearly the progress achieved.
Compared to 2010, when women made up 27.4 per
cent of the defence and security system in the Republic
of Serbia, in 2015, women now account for 31.47 per
cent. Women held 14.47 per cent of the management/
command positions in 2010, whereas in 2015, that
percentage has risen to 19.68 per cent. More so than
in administrative positions, the percentage increase
tended to occur in operational positions - the so-called
women-in-uniform posts in the military, police and the
customs and correctional services. In addition, women
make up 10.06 per cent of the total staff complement of
the Ministries of Defence and the Interior and Serbia's
armed forces deployed in 11 multinational operations.
Seven of those operations are under United Nations
auspices.

In order to further the normative and effective
protection of women, in particular protection against
violence in partnership and family relations, government
agencies, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), the
media and other stakeholders have instituted a number
of projects aimed at taking preventive measures to
reduce violence against women and children. Projects
have also been devised in the field of education, both
by the Government and by civil society, and are being
implemented in Serbia and the region. My country has
maintained intensive cooperation with international
actors, including UN-Women, the United Nations
Development Programme/South-Eastern Europe
Clearinghouse for the Control of Small Arms and Light
Weapons, NATO, the Geneva Centre for the Democratic
Control of Armed Forces and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).

Two years ago, the 2014 Swiss and 2015 Serbian
OSCE Chairmanships identified gender equality as
one of their priorities in the joint workplan for their
consecutive Chairmanships. In June 2014, the first-
ever OSCE Gender Equality Review Conference took
stock of progress in the implementation of the 2004
OSCE General Action Plan, as well as a number of
follow-up Ministerial Council decisions. It identified
implementation gaps, challenges and lessons learned
since the adoption of the Action Plan in 2004. The
current Serbian OSCE chairmanship is working on
the adoption of an addendum to the Action Plan at
the meeting of the Ministerial Council in Belgrade, in
December, in order to update the Gender Action Plan
and operationalize the recommendations developed
during the 2014 Gender Review Conference. Over the
past decade, the OSCE has made important strides in
implementing measures to achieve gender equality
in its policies and programmes, including in the
political-military dimension. That development goes
hand in hand with a steadily growing global awareness
of the importance of the women and peace and security
agenda.

The Serbian OSCE Chairmanship is committed to
strengthening the role of women in peace and security
by building on the many efforts already undertaken
by OSCE participating States and the OSCE executive
structures. However, multiple challenges still lie ahead,
and considerable efforts will have to be invested at the
global, regional and local levels in order to make much

more effective progress than has been made so far.

