Ms. Wronecka (Poland): We commend South
Africa for convening this important debate. We
welcome the focus of the debate on the implementation
ofthe women, peace and security agenda and on making
our common commitment a reality. We congratulate
South Africa on its leadership and efforts in bringing
about a new resolution on women, peace and security
(resolution 2493 (2019)). Poland was pleased to support
the resolution adopted today.

The need to include women in peacebuilding,
conflict prevention and conflict resolution has been
gradually acknowledged by the international arena.
The women, peace and security agenda has been
greatly enriched over the past 19 years, including by
highlighting the disproportionate impact of armed
conflict on women and girls, the great benefits of
enhancing the involvement of women in conflict
prevention and disarmament initiatives, as well as
peace processes, and the absolute necessity to tackle
the scourge of conflict-related sexual and gender-based
violence as a tactic of war. It is also widely understood
that women and men have different experiences and
needs both during and following conflict and that
women have a unique set of challenges related to
peacebuilding and security.

There is no doubt that despite such achievements,
much remains to be done. There has been a marginal
increase in the number of women involved in formal
peace talks. Consequently, women's concerns are rarely
on the agenda ofpeace talks. According to UN-Women,
in recent years women's participation in negotiating
delegations in peace processes supported or tracked by
the United Nations has not improved. In 2018, out of six
active processes led orjointly led by the United Nations,
women were included in 14 out of 19 delegations.
Between 1992 and 2018, women constituted 13 per cent
of negotiators, 3 per cent of mediators and only 4 per
cent of signatories in major peace processes tracked.
The meaningful, full and equal participation of women
in political processes regarding peace and security
is not only about ensuring the equal representation
of women and men but also about the quality of their
participation. It concerns women's leadership. We need
to identify and support policies that strengthen women's
voices and women's engagement in decision-making
from the initial phase of the peacemaking process to the
establishment and development of local and national
governmental institutions.

We are aware that there is a huge number of
highly qualified women who are adequately prepared
and available for high-level positions, including those
of negotiators and mediators. A major challenge is to
raise the awareness of decision-makers that women's
participation provides a great added value and is a
crucial element needed to bring about change in post-
conflict environments. Realizing that change requires a
mind shift by politicians, negotiators and mediators on
how they view the role of women in conflict prevention
and peacekeeping.

We must not forget that including women in peace
efforts is not simply a matter of human rights and
women's empowerment. It is also a security imperative.
Evidence shows that security efforts are more
successful and sustainable when women contribute to
prevention and early warning, as well as peacemaking,
peacekeeping and post-conflict resolution and
rebuilding. The central role of women in many families
and communities affords them a unique vantage point
from which they are able to recognize unusual patterns
of behaviour and signs of impending conflicts, such as
arms mobilization and weapons coaching. Women are
well-placed to detect the early signs of radicalization
because their rights and physical integrity are often the
first targets of fundamentalists.

Including women at the peace table can also increase
the likelihood of reaching an agreement, as women are
often viewed by negotiating parties as honest brokers.
One study found that the substantial inclusion of
women and civil society groups in a peace negotiation
makes the resulting agreement 64 per cent less likely to
fail, and, according to another study, 35 per cent more
likely to last at least 15 years. Moreover, women, being
disproportionately affected by sexual and gender-based
violence, are more likely to advocate for accountability
and services for the survivors of conflict-related
sexual violence.

As a strong proponent of the women and peace
and security agenda, Poland is focused on ensuring the
meaningful representation of women in operations and
missions abroad and on strengthening their position
by increasing their presence in command-and-control
structures and leadership roles. One good example is
our newly deployed contingent to the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), where the Polish
contingent will have a 7 per cent female ratio - one of
the highest in UNIFIL. We will seek to extend that to
the overall mission representation.

If we are serious about our commitment to a
more peaceful, sustainable and prosperous world,
there is simply no alternative to investing in women,
giving them a voice in all relevant decision-making
processes and supporting their political and economic
empowerment. We need to stop seeing women as
merely victims of war but rather look at them instead
as leaders for peacemaking and peacekeeping. Finally,
we need to reflect on not only what women can do
for peace but, even more, on what peace can do for
women. Sustainable development and lasting peace are
preconditions for women and girls to be able to grow,
study, work and use their potential.

