Mr. Lambertini (Italy): At the outset, I wish to
thank the French presidency for having organized this
important debate. I would also like to extend heartfelt
thanks to all of our briefers for their important,
exhaustive and passionate contributions.

Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), the
women and peace and security agenda has become
an essential pillar and a necessary tool in conflict
prevention, conflict resolution, peacebuilding and
humanitarian action. The statements delivered today
clearly attest to the fact that the women and peace
and security discourse - namely, the announcement
of women's participation in leadership in peace and
security processes - is also proving to be an important
entry point for fostering dialogue with countries in
conflict and post-conflict situations.
The 2015 global study on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) recognized that the meaningful
participation of women is crucial to the operational
effectiveness, success and sustainability of peace and
security processes. The evidence of that is increasingly
solid and undeniable, as shown by the Secretary-
General in his latest report on women and peace and
security (S/2017/861). Nonetheless, the perspective
and voices of women, including at the grassroots level,
often go unheard, since they are still rarely included
in peace negotiations. The exclusion of women from
those processes directly and negatively impacts the
sustainability of peace agreements, as well as the
quality of democracy, the development of inclusive
societies and respect for human rights.

And still, in many countries around the world,
women continue to be sexually exploited, trafficked,
subjected to female genital mutilation and forced
marriages. We warmly welcome the gender parity
strategy recently launched by the Secretary-General,
as we believe that the United Nations has to lead by
example and be a standard-setting Organization.
Unfortunately, according to some studies, at the current
rate, it will take around 170 years to achieve gender
parity worldwide. This is why we welcome your call,
Mr. President, to Member States at this year's open
debate to present concrete actions and share best
practices aimed at closing implementation gaps and
accelerating progress. We encourage the adoption of
this as a common practice at future open debates.

In our view, the implementation of the whole women
and peace and security agenda is closely linked to the
strengthening of women's meaningful participation in
the life of their communities, in particular throughout
the peace process cycle. Let me provide some
concrete examples.

First, in line with the Secretary-General's
commitment to women's leadership and gender
equality as a vital element of his prevention agenda,
I am very proud to announce that the Mediterranean
Women Mediators Network was launched yesterday in
Rome. The aim of the Network is twofold: prevention
and mediation, on the one hand, and capacity-building
on the other.

In the Mediterranean region issues of migration
combine with human trafficking, transnational
organized crime, increasing violent extremism,
refugees and humanitarian emergencies. In such a
context, women can help countries prevent conflicts
and strengthen national reconciliation processes by
ensuring a gendered and inclusive perspective on issues
of security, justice and governance, which are often the
root causes of violent conflicts. The Network is also a
concrete way for women to acquire and develop further
capacity and expertise to successfully contribute to
mediation efforts as official United Nations mediators
or mediation experts.

The launch was possible thanks to the fact that,
for the first time, our national action plan on women,
peace and security was granted a financial contribution
enhanced by the Italian Parliament. We encourage
all Member States to properly finance their national
action plans, since the implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda demands change,
and no real change is possible without the necessary
financial resources.

Secondly, Italy believes that women's empowerment,
gender equality and the protection of women's
rights are intrinsic to sustainable development and
conflict prevention. Therefore, to step up efforts
in the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda, in 2017 my country has committed
approximately $10 million to supporting a number of
projects led by UN-Women in Africa, the Middle East
and Central America in the areas of both women's
empowerment and engagement in peace and security
processes. That reflects our belief that the efforts to
implement the women and peace and security agenda
and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development are
mutually reinforcing.

Thirdly, and finally, we encourage the United
Nations to use in a more consistent way the women and
peace and security discourse with countries in conflict
and post-conflict situations. In that regard, we welcome
the joint high-level mission conducted by the United
Nations with the African Union last July in Nigeria
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which had
a strong women and peace and security angle focused
on women's meaningful participation in peace, security
and development. We encourage the United Nations
to continue along this path and to organize similar
missions in other countries by working in synergy with
regional and subregional organizations and initiatives,
such as women mediators' networks.

I want to stress that when we talk about women's
participation it is not only a question of numbers, it is
a question of ensuring their meaningful participation
in conflict prevention, mediation and preventive
diplomacy processes. The meaningful participation of
women is indisputably an accelerator for peace that will
lead to higher peace dividends in dispute settlements.
And if we really do care about peace, making full use
of their potential is a smart thing to do.

Allow me to conclude by recalling three pivotal
moments that we experienced this year in the Security
Council. One was the Arria Formula meeting we
organized two weeks ago, co-hosted with France,
Sweden and Uruguay, on school attacks. We also recall
the incredible participation of Joy Bishara in that
event and the message of pride and bravery that she
conveyed to all ofus. I also want to recall the Council's
two missions in Africa, one in the Lake Chad basin
and the other, as was remembered by the Ambassador
of Bolivia, some weeks ago in the Sahel region. The
meeting that we had with the female members of
parliament and representatives of civil society and
in the refugee camps was by far the most important
meeting that we had in that mission.

