Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank you very much, Madam President, for organizing
this debate and for your presence here today.

(spoke in English)

Equality between women and men, and the full
and meaningful participation of women and girls
in all aspects of the life of their communities and
countries, is at the core of Canadian values. Canada
is committed to protecting and promoting the human
rights, empowerment and well-being of women and
girls around the world. We are concerned about the
dire situation in countries where the barriers to a life of
dignity for women and girls undermine their safety and
security, preventing them from reaching their potential.
Not only does that affect the fate of those women and
girls, it affects the fate of entire communities.

Girls must be protected and educated if they are
to grow and become full and contributing members of
their society. Women must be empowered to become
active members of their communities and to contribute
to all decision-making, including in the political,
economic and peace processes. It is only through
women's empowerment that countries can reach their
full potential and prosperity. It is not enough to have
issues affecting women and girls discussed in the halls
of power; women must be in those halls, at the head of
the table, talking about security and prosperity in terms
of their own experience.

(spoke in French)

Canada is also committed to improving maternal,
infant and child health around the world, and to
bringing an end within one generation to the highly
destructive practice of the early and forced marriage
of children. Eliminating all forms of violence against
women, including sexual violence, is an integral part
of the future security and development of communities
and countries. We commend countries that defend those
causes with similar determination. We are constantly
made aware of the ways in which armed conflict
further jeopardizes women's and children's security,
dignity, health and development. For example, in times
of war it is often impossible to access basic maternal
and neonatal health services. The most vulnerable are
too often the biggest targets.

(spoke in English)

Women and girls are at an increased risk of
violence in humanitarian crises and are often subject
to abuse, including in exchange for assistance or
protection. Refugee and displaced families are known
to force marriage on their daughters in badly misplaced
attempts to provide for their security or in response to
their daughters' rape. Rape is all too often used as a
weapon of war, with devastating effects on the victims,
their families and their communities that can endure
long after the conflict ends.

The so-called Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) has taken sexual violence in conflict to a
horrifying new level of depravity. Women and girls
from ethnic and religious minorities are being raped,
forced into marriage and openly sold as slaves. Canada
is at the forefront of international efforts to address the
situation in Iraq and will continue to collaborate with
like-minded partners in responding to the crisis. We
are contributing to humanitarian assistance for those
in need, including refugees and displaced persons,
and we have committed more than $62 million in
humanitarian, stabilization and security programming.
Most important, however, our commitment includes up
to $10 million to support survivors of sexual violence
in ISIL-held areas, including supplying funding for
Justice Rapid Response and the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights to respond to and
investigate sexual violence and other serious abuses.
The perpetrators of those crimes must be held to
account.

(spoke in French)

A disproportionate number of women and girls are
suffering in conflict situations today and are unable
to play a significant role as agents of resilience and
positive change. Their full participation in the lives
of their communities and countries is essential to
sustainable prosperity, peace and development. The
international community is addressing the problem
through, for example, today's debate, as well as at such
events as the Global Summit to End Sexual Violence in
Conflict, recently held in London.

(spoke in English)

In 2015 we will have further chances to address
those important matters in several initiatives, including
the planned global study of the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), the Secretary-General's high-
level review of the agenda on women and peace and
security. We will also have reviews of our peacebuilding
architecture and of the post-2015 development agenda.
The role of women and girls is essential to all of this
work, and Canada looks forward to continuing its
engagement with the United Nations and its agencies,
and with like-minded Member States, to ensure follow-
through.

