Ms. Jolie: It is an honour to address the Security
Council. I thank Foreign Secretary Hague for the United
Kingdom's leadership, and Zainab Bangura, Special
Representative for her important and extraordinary
work.

The Security Council was established 67 years ago
and has witnessed 67 years of wars and conflict, but
the world has yet to take up war-zone rape as a serious
priority. Hundreds of thousands, if not millions, of
women, children and men have been raped in conflicts
in our lifetimes. The numbers are so vast and the subject
so painful that we often have to stop to remember
that behind each number is someone with a name, a
personality, a story and dreams no different from ours
and those of our children.

Let us be clear what we are speaking about: young
girls raped and impregnated before their bodies are able
to carry a child, causing fistula; boys held at gunpoint
and forced to sexually assault their mothers and sisters;
women raped with bottles, wood branches and knives
to cause as much damage as possible; toddlers, even
babies, dragged from their homes and violated.

I will never forget the survivors whom I have met
or what they told me - the mother in Goma whose
five-year-old daughter had been raped outside a police
station in plain view, or the Syrian woman I met in
Jordan last week who asked that I hide her name and
face because she knew that if she spoke out against the
crimes against her, she would be attacked and possibly
killed.

Rape is a tool of war. It is an act of aggression and
a crime against humanity. It is inflicted intentionally
to destroy the woman, the family and the community.
It ruins lives and fuels conflict. The Charter of the
United Nations is clear; the Security Council has
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. Rape as a weapon of
war is an assault on security, and a world in which these
crimes happen is one in which there is not and never
will be peace. Addressing war-zone sexual violence
is therefore the Council's responsibility, as well as the
duty of the Governments and countries afflicted by
it. In fact, the truth is that in many conflict situations
there is no Government to take responsibility, so
there is no protection and no accountability. When
Governments cannot act, the Security Council must
step in and provide leadership and assistance. For those
crimes happen not because they are inherent to war, but
because the global climate allows it.

That five-year-old girl was raped because her
attacker knew that he would get away with it. Because
the world has not treated sexual violence as a priority,
there have only been a handful of prosecutions for
the many hundreds of thousands of survivors. They
suffer most at the hands of their rapists, but they are
also victims of a culture of impunity. That is the sad,
upsetting and, indeed, shameful reality.

I understand that there are many things that are
difficult for the Security Council to agree on, but sexual
violence in conflict should not be one of them. That
it is a crime to rape young children is not something
that I imagine anyone in the Chamber would not be
able to agree on. The rights and wrongs of the issue are
straightforward, and the actions that need to be taken
have been identified. What is needed is political will,
and that is what is being asked of Member States today:
to act on the knowledge of what is right and what is
unjust and to show the determination to do something
about it. Every country in the world is affected by sexual
violence in one form or another, from domestic abuse
to female genital mutilation. All countries therefore
have a responsibility to step forward, but the starting
point must be the Security Council, shouldering its
responsibilities and showing leadership. To women in
refugee camps or those struggling to survive in war-
torn communities, there is no greater power in the
world that can stand by them. That young Syrian rape
victim is here because the Council represents her. That
five-year-old child in the Congo must count because
the Council represents her. In her eyes, if her attacker
gets away with his crimes, it is because the Council
has allowed it. The Council sets the bar. If the Security
Council sets rape and sexual violence in conflict as a
priority, it will become one, and progress will be made.
If it does not, this horror will continue.

I thank and encourage those countries that are
already setting a powerful example. My plea to all
members of the Council is to adopt and implement the
draft resolution that is before the members today, so
that the perpetrators are finally held to account and
survivors can at last feel that they are on safer ground.
Please, do not let the issue fall to the wayside when
leaving the Chamber. Meet your commitments; debate
the issue in your Parliaments; mobilize people in
your countries and built it into all your foreign policy
efforts, so that together you can turn the tide of global
opinion, shatter impunity and finally put an end to this
abhorrence.

