Mr. Waxman (Israel): At the outset, I would like
to express my appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
convening this open debate on women and peace and
security - a subject of great importance for all of us in
the international community.
Israel believes that women must play an equal role
in all aspects of the State and civil society. The Jewish
people and the Jewish State have always understood
that the progress of women is critical for the progress
of all. The principle of gender equality has been a
fundamental principle of the State of Israel since its
inception. The World Zionist Organization, founded
by Theodore Herzl as an umbrella organization for the
modern Zionist movement, as early as in 1898 granted
equal voting rights to women.

Gender equality is enshrined in our 1948 Declaration
of Independence and in the 1951 Equal Rights for
Women Law. Israel was the third country in the world
to elect a female Prime Minister, Golda Meir, and
women in Israel today hold senior leadership positions
in Government, business, law and academia. Women
take an active, vibrant and visible role throughout
Israeli civil society. Israeli women from across the
political, cultural and religious spectrum are involved
in a broad variety of issues, including advocating for
conflict resolution and peace.

Israel continues to strongly support the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and its
subsequent resolutions. The Israeli Knesset, our
Parliament, recognizes the importance of gender
equality in peacemaking and conflict resolution. It
recently enacted legislation requiring that Israeli
women be included on all Government investigative
committees and all Israeli peace negotiating teams.
Israel is proud of the progress it has made in ensuring
women's social equality and is deeply committed to
empowering women worldwide.

In 2003, the Golda Meir Mount Carmel Training
Center hosted an international conference for women
leaders entitled "Women's Role in Conflict Resolution
and Peacebuilding". As a result of the conference, the
Center initiated a series of seminars entitled "Women
Building a New Reality". Those seminars promote
dialogue between Israeli and Palestinian women. The
past decade has seen over 1,000 Israeli and Palestinian

women participate in more than 20 such workshops.
Just last month, the Center held its most recent seminar.

We are honoured to serve as a member of the
Commission on the Status of Women - the principal
global policymaking body dedicated to gender equality
and the advancement of women. We are especially
proud to serve as Chair of the Commission's Working
Group on Communications on the Status of Women.

Israel welcomes the United Nations call to move
from a culture of reaction to one of prevention. The
Kampala Declaration of December 2011 represents a
unique and historic opportunity to take meaningful
action to prevent sexual and gender-based violence. We
hope that the Declaration will end the impunity of the
perpetrators of such violence and ensure that its victims
receive the necessary and appropriate support.

It is important that we do more to ensure women's
participation in decision-making on mission drawdowns
and transitions. The United Nations must take the lead
in the involvement of women and set an example for
the international community. Israel supports the work
of UN-Women in that regard. We encourage the United
Nations to increase the number of women in United
Nations leadership positions, including as special
representatives and deputy special representatives of
the Secretary-General.

The Secretary-General's annual report (S/2012/732)
on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
noted progress in investigating accusations of sexual
misconduct committed by United Nations personnel
in peacekeeping operations. That progress is
encouraging. Let me emphasize that the United Nations
should investigate all accusations swiftly, fully and
transparently. In addition, all United Nations personnel
must be properly trained in the appropriate conduct.
The United Nations policy of zero tolerance must be
strictly enforced. The reputation of all United Nations
peacekeepers is at stake.

We echo the call of the Secretary-General to
exercise special vigilance to protect women human
rights defenders. Last month brought another reminder
about what is at stake, when the Taliban attacked
15-year-old Malala Yousafzai, because she dared to
promote education for girls.

We must recognize the clear link between promoting
peace and promoting equal rights for women. In too
many parts of the world, especially in the Middle East,
women have been subjugated and denied even the most
basic of rights, including the right to vote, the right to
drive and even the right to control their own bodies.
That mistreatment of women cannot be ignored. It has
created and will continue to create major barriers to
understanding and conflict resolution. It is high time
that the United Nations seriously address the dire
situation of women in the Arab world. We know from
our own history that when women lead, society gains.
And Israel will continue to stand with the international
community to work for the empowerment of women in
all corners of the world.

