Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for your initiative in organizing
today's debate.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the Nordic
countries of Denmark, Finland, Iceland and Norway
and my own country, Sweden.

First, I would like to thank the Special Representative
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Hawa
Bangura, for her statement and for her activities and
hard work. I would also like to thank Ms. Hamsatu
Allamin for her participation in today's meeting.
The role and influence of civil society in preventing
conflict, building peace and promoting human rights is
essential and it should be supported.

We warmly welcome the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2015/203) and its concrete and specific
recommendations on actions, and we commend Special
Representative Bangura and her Office for their work in
this regard. I would also like to commend the Team of

Experts on Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict
in strengthening the capacities of States to address such
violence, but despite rising recognition and attention to
this issue, the picture is appalling. Nothing less than
zero tolerance is acceptable in this area.

The fight to prevent and eradicate conflict-related
sexual Violence must be pursued on several levels.
These crimes do not emerge in a vacuum; they take
place against a backdrop of structural, gender-based
discrimination. Sexual violence is a reflection of
gender inequalities. Therefore, a systematic and broad
gender approach, which includes increasing women's
empowerment through political participation and
influence, strengthening women's economic rights and
empowerment, promoting and protecting sexual and
reproductive health and rights, improving women's
and girls' security and furthering the education of
women and girls, needs to be applied. These issues are
fundamental.
I would like to raise three more points. First,
measures dealing with the consequences of sexual
violence need to be stepped up. Assistance to survivors
and witnesses, including sexual and reproductive health
services and psychosocial, legal and livelihood support,
is crucial, as was stressed by my Colombian colleague.
It is urgent that we take further concrete steps to ensure
accountability and end impunity, as many around this
table have said today. We welcome and support the
efforts of the Chief Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court and the ongoing work of Justice Rapid
Response and UN-Women for enhancing the capacity
to investigate sexual and gender-based violent crimes
which deny women and girls their human rights.

Secondly, there is a growing recognition that men
should be involved to a larger extent in the work in
favour of gender equality, as it cannot be left to women
alone. There is a need to look at the impact of masculine
identities on gender inequality, conflict and Violence.
Evidence suggests that violent notions of masculinity
not only perpetuate gender-based violence but can also
fuel armed conflict, while more positive notions of
masculinity could be instrumental in promoting peace.

Thirdly, we note the rise of violent extremism and
terrorism, which are often built on perceptions that
deny women their enjoyment of human rights. More
attention on the human rights of women is therefore
needed, particularly in the context of terrorism and
counter-terrorism, especially with regard to the specific
consequences of violent extremism on women's and
girls' rights. Sexual violence and the denial of rights
and freedoms, including the right to control their
sexuality and reproduction, are integral to the ideology
of extremist groups and used as part of a strategy to
spread terror, persecute ethnic, religious and sexual
minorities, and suppress whole communities that
oppose these groups' ideology. It is clearly a tactic of
terror and needs to be addressed in the international
community's response. We therefore welcome the
recommendation that efforts to prevent and address
sexual violence and promote human rights of women
should be closely and strategically aligned with efforts
to prevent Violent extremism. Conflict-related sexual
violence should be a topic fully integrated into the work
of relevant Security Council sanctions committees.

Women protection advisers and gender advisers
have a central role to play in ensuring competence
and knowledge in order for United Nations missions
to meet actual needs in the field. A11 missions should
have a gender adviser with a sufficiently high level
of authority and who should work directly with the
mission leadership. Gender advisers, gender focal
points and women protection advisers should be funded
from the regular budget. Nevertheless, the ultimate
responsibility to secure the gender dimension naturally
lies with the leadership of the mission.

The Nordic countries are firm supporters, including
financially, of United Nations Action Against Sexual
Violence in Conflict. We believe that United Nations
Action makes the United Nations system work in a
more holistic and coordinated way.

Lastly, the important role of media and civil society,
including women's rights organizations, should not be
underestimated. We need to draw on their knowledge
and experience and recognize the pivotal role they play
in changing social norms, attitudes and behaviours and
help ensure that women's rights are upheld and that
their voices are fully heard.

