Ms. Bassols Delgado (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
We align ourselves with the statements delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union and by
the representative of Canada, on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security.

As we do every year, we are meeting once again to
address a problem as old, and yet as current, as sexual
violence in conflict. The Council has developed a vast
regulatory corpus in the area, and this may be one
of the topics of our open debates that Member States
agree on most readily. So what is still preventing the
effective implementation of resolutions, international
humanitarian law and international human rights law?
From time to time it is suggested that the women and
peace and security agenda and the issue of sexual
violence in conflict do not belong at the centre of the
Council's activity. The prevalence and consequences
of such issues are underestimated. Nevertheless,
the fact that we are witnessing worrying patterns
of sexual violence in a recent and rapidly unfolding
humanitarian crisis such as that affecting Myanmar's
Rohingya population confirms once again that this
agenda represents a central challenge to international
peace and security. This paradigm shift in the classic
concept of security should therefore have immediate
practical consequences.

Spain is grateful to the Peruvian presidency for
organizing this open debate in connection with the
prevention efforts on the United Nations agenda. We
appreciate the commitment of the Deputy Secretary-
General and of Special Representative Pramila Patten
and the contribution and courage ost. Razia Sultana in
particular. Testimonies like hers are vital to preventing
the normalization of sexual violence as an inevitable
consequence of war.

Much has been said in this debate on the
prevention of sexual violence in conflict. I would like
to add some thoughts and proposals. With regard to
root causes, who are the primary victims of sexual
violence in conflict situations? In a majority of cases
they are women and girls who are economically and
politically marginalized. That is true whether we are
speaking of the women and girls of the Central African
Republic, those in Kivu, the Kasais or Tanganyika in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Yazidis
in Iraq or the Rohingya in Myanmar, where there has
even been talk of ethnic cleansing. We must address the
root causes - inequality and the absence of women's
empowerment and participation - and we must respond
to early warnings. The Council has the necessary tools
if it chooses to use them i the Informal Expert Group
on Women and Peace and Security, peace operations"
mandates, the work of women protection counsellors,
and sanctions, to name a few. I therefore urge Council
members to address the issue of sexual violence in the
context of their next visit to Myanmar and Bangladesh.

Spain believes that we must make the fight against
sexual violence in conflict a priority in every context.
We observe how sexual Violence is sometimes a factor in
forced displacements in places such as Colombia, Iraq
and Syria. The risk does not disappear in refugee camps,
and fear of sexual assault prevents many displaced
people from returning to their communities. The case
of the Rohingya is particularly worrisome. We believe
that the negotiations on the global compact on refugees
would provide a good opportunity for addressing sexual
violence in those contexts. Let us take advantage of that
opportunity and those negotiations.

Resolution 2331 (2016) recognizes the nexus
between sexual violence and human trafficking during
conflicts. It also explores the use of sexual violence
as a terrorism tactic employed by certain groups and
includes it among their possible sources of financing.
We find it surprising, as many representatives have
pointed out today, that to date no member of Da'esh
or Boko Haram has been prosecuted for sexual assault.
Nor have we made progress in acknowledging the
victims of sexual violence as victims of terrorism or
conflict in such contexts.

We must fight stigmatization. The fear of ostracism
is even greater when the victim is a man or a boy, and is
exacerbated by the fact that many countries do not see
men as possible victims of sexual violence. We therefore
suggest that this perspective be taken into account in
cooperation projects and humanitarian assistance. That
was one of the topics addressed at the recent meeting
in Berlin of the Women, Peace and Security National
Focal Points Network, which my country established
in 2016 and which is chaired by Germany this year.
The meeting also included a specific session on
accountability for crimes of sexual violence as a central
element in preventing conflicts.

In order to achieve implementation of the resolutions
on sexual Violence in conflict, the specialized
knowledge of the expert panels of the Sanctions
Committees, mediators and negotiators of any peace
process, the military, the United Nations Police and the
humanitarian actors is essential. The Security Council
can and must do much more in that area, for example
by including specific listing criteria on sexual violence
in all sanctions regimes and ensuring subsequent
follow-up.

In the area of training, Spain has worked to
strengthen guidance for its security-sector personnel,
We also provide such training to other countries, such
as Palestine and Colombia, and contribute to the United
Nations initiative against sexual violence in conflict
among the other projects outlined in our second national
action plan for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), which includes specific measures to combat
sexual violence, including in the humanitarian field.

Finally, impunity today breeds impunity tomorrow.
It must be addressed through mechanisms for improving
the preservation of evidence, which require specialized
knowledge. The prosecution of two landmark cases in
the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo, and thejudgment
ofthe International Criminal Court in the case of Bosco
Ntaganda, not only strengthens the victims' trust in
justice but also deters possible perpetrators.

The United Nations must lead by example. I propose
that we all work to better implement the zero-tolerance
policy of the United Nations on sexual exploitation and
abuse and that we prevent and fight sexual violence, the
most silent crime in armed conflicts. We owe that to the
thousands of victims who have suffered and continue to
live with the consequences.

