Mr. Kenes (Belgium) (spoke in French): More than a
decade ago, the Council recognized that sexual violence
is often used as a tactic of war for which there can be
no amnesty. It will soon be 10 years since the Council
established the Office of the Special Representative on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, the team of experts and the
functions of women's protection advisers. My country
wishes to thank all these indispensable actors both for
their dedication to the prevention of sexual violence and
for their commitment to justice. In adopting resolution
1820 (2008), the Council - including Belgium, which
was a member at that time - called unanimously for the
immediate and complete cessation of sexual violence
and for an end to the impunity of the guilty parties.
Today, 10 years later, the collective responsibility
to protect civilians from this threat remains ours
and unchanged.

Belgium thanks Germany for having organized
this important debate under its presidency. My country
also thanks this morning's briefers, who have painted
a very clear and serious picture. The bodies of women,
men and children continue to be used as a battlefield;
conflict-related sexual violence continues to wreak
havoc on families and entire communities with the aim
of displacing populations and creating lasting fear. We
must intensify our efforts and further strengthen the
tools available to the Council.

While the Council has made great strides, we must
pursue our efforts. The testimonies of Dr. Mukwege
and Ms. Murad made that clear, as did today's other
briefers. The Council is very honoured to welcome them
here today. Their exemplary work makes a difference
for victims and contributes to awareness and, in so
doing, to prevention. Dr. Mukwege, in Bukavu, provides
rape survivors with emergency medical care, including
sexual and reproductive health care. But beyond that, he
advises them so that they can cope with horror they have
suffered, get back on their feet and, most importantly,
survive. The voice of Ms. Murad, herself a survivor
whose action echoes the voices of thousands of others,
today represents many women, men and children, all
with different needs if they are to heal and survive.

One of the key points of the draft resolution before
us today is a survivor-centred approach. Belgium
particularly welcomes the inclusion of particularly
disadvantaged groups, such as lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender and intersex people, who face multiple
and cross-gender forms of discrimination. My country
welcomes the fact that, for the first time, the Council
is talking about children born of rape. We have heard
testimony from Rohingya refugees in Bangladesh and
that of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General. As in other conflict zones, children born
of rape and their mothers risk being ostracized from
their communities and even losing their citizenship or
official identity.

In that regard, Belgium has urged the Security
Council to call on States to provide comprehensive
service and care to victims, including sexual and
reproductive health care, legal services, psychosocial
services and socioeconomic support. For Belgium,
that includes freedom of choice and access to abortion
without risk for women who have been raped. In the
context of sexual violence in conflict, the restoration
of victims' sexual and reproductive health is indeed
critical and in line with the resolutions adopted by the
Security Council in the past, including resolutions 1889
(2009), 2106 (2013) and 2122 (2013).

Sexual violence will never be stopped or prevented
if we accept impunity. That has come through clearly
in this morning's debate. The fight against impunity is
a long-term goal of Belgium's foreign policy, including
by means of the prevention of new crimes. The
perpetrators of such crimes must be brought to justice.
Our country will support the strengthening of States'
capacities and is already funding the Team of Experts
on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict.

In cases in which States either refuse or are unable
to mete out justice, Belgium calls for supporting the
work of international mechanisms such as international
commissions of inquiry, the independent international
fact-finding mission on Myanmar, the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant in Iraq, and the Impartial and Independent
MechanismtoAssistinthe Investigation andProsecution
of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011. Documenting the crime
in question is a necessary step in bringing justice to
survivors. We believe that the International Criminal
Court also plays a key role in that area.

Within the Council, we must continue to strengthen
existing mechanisms to combat impunity and step up
prevention, such as by means of separate designation
criteria for conflict-related sexual violence in
connection with relevant Security Council sanctions
regimes. While we welcome the holding of this open
debate and the adoption of draft resolution S/2019/328,
Belgium regrets that a consensus could not be reached
to establish a formal working group, which would have
made it possible to strengthen the monitoring of the
implementation of Council resolutions by State and
non-State actors.

Crimes of sexual violence will stop only if we
address the root causes of sexual Violence. Such a
paradigm shift requires us to pursue efforts to achieve
gender equality, include women's empowerment in
prevention measures and, more generally, step up
support for organizations dedicated to the protection
of women's rights and human rights defenders in
accordance with resolution 1325 (2000), the twentieth
anniversary of which we will celebrate next year.

