Mr. Cohen (United States ofAmerica): Ithank you,
Madam President, for convening today's open debate
and for being with us in the Council this morning. I
would also like to thank our briefers today.

I reaffirm the United States commitment to the
full, effective and meaningful participation of women
in the United Nations peacekeeping operations. With
its Women, Peace, and Security Act of 2017, the United
States became the first country to translate resolution
1325 (2000) into national law. That historic milestone
demonstrates the commitment and leadership of
the United States regarding the agenda on women
and peace and security. We are also advocates for
improving peacekeeping performance in general, and
increasing the meaningful participation of women in
peacekeeping is at the heart of performance. Security
Council resolutions 2242 (2015) and 2436 (2018), as well
as the Secretary-General's Action for Peacekeeping
initiative, charge us to expand opportunities for women
in peacekeeping.

As many previous speakers have affirmed, women
improve the operational effectiveness of peacekeeping
missions and can be important role models, both in
the communities where they are deployed and within
their own national systems, but we still have much
work to do in overcoming their sparse participation in
military contingents, police units and civilian support
forces, let alone in addressing the paucity of uniformed
women in the higher ranks of peacekeeping operations.
The United States continues to work with troop- and
police-contributing countries through its Global
Peace Operations Initiative and International Police
Peacekeeping Operations Support programme, which
strengthen international capacity and capabilities for
executing United Nations and regional peace operations.
More than 11,000 female military and police personnel
have already participated in United States peacekeeping
training events.

In our Global Peace Operations Initiative partner
countries, we are also investing in infrastructure,
among other things by building women's barracks and
latrines and removing barriers to women's effective
participation and peacekeeping training. Our partner
countries have increased the number of women military
peacekeepers deployed to United Nations peace
operations by 89 per cent since 2010, compared to a
7 per cent increase among countries that are not partners
in the Initiative. The International Police Peacekeeping
Operations Support programme has funded United
Nations-led workshops for women peacekeeping police
candidates, with a focus on improving communications,
investigating and report-writing, driving and firearms
skills. Since 2014 we have increased the number
of francophone women police eligible to deploy to
United Nations missions, almost doubling the number
recommended for deployment from 36 per cent to more
than 50 per cent.

We encourage all Member States to adopt and revise,
where appropriate, national action plans and strategies
on women and peace and security. These important
tools serve to catalyse commitments to increase the
number of women in peacekeeping and enhance their
recruitment, retention and deployment. We welcome
the uniformed gender-parity strategy of the Department
of Peace Operations for increasing the number of
women in the military and police contingents of United
Nations peacekeeping operations. We urge troop- and
police-contributing countries and all other stakeholders
in peacekeeping to support the strategy's objectives.

Individually, we should all be taking steps to address
the persistent barriers facing women peacekeepers
and to overcome those impediments in our systems.
Collectively, we should remove those barriers and
advance the meaningful participation of women in
peacekeeping through our resolutions and programmes.
Success depends on our determined, coordinated
efforts to improve peacekeepers' performance by
championing women's participation in all aspects of
our peacekeeping efforts.

