Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I
welcome the initiative of your delegation,
Mr. President, to hold this open debate on the topic of
women and peace and security. I also thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for introducing his report
(S/2009/362) pursuant to resolution 1820 (2008) and
for his presence here today.

The Secretary-General points out in his report
that, with regard to sexual violence in conflicts and
post-conflict situations, "the majority of past abuses
remain to be accounted for" (5/2009/362, para. 9).
That is why passivity before this scourge is not an
option. The lack of action would send the wrong
message that sexual violence is permissible. The
international community, and the Security Council in
particular, must act and show unequivocally that acts
of sexual violence will not remain unpunishcd.

My delegation reiterates the call on Member
States that have experienced cases of sexual violence
in conflict or post-conflict situations to investigate
these crimes and to launch judicial proceedings against
those allegedly responsible for these crimes. The
brutality of sexual violence in some conflicts is
alarming. In the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, there have been at least 200,000 cases since
1996, while today we are even seeing a trend towards
the use of sexual violence against men. We
acknowledge the decision of President Kabila to
implement a zero-tolerance policy with respect to the
use of sexual violence by the Congolese Armed Forces,
and we will follow attentively the trials of five high-
ranking army officers who allegedly committed serious
human rights violations, including crimes involving
sexual violence.

Mexico once again reiterates the importance of
the International Criminal Court in prosecuting, when
appropriate, those responsible for certain acts of sexual
violence that, in accordance with the Rome Statute,
constitute war crimes and crimes against humanity, for
which there is no room for consideration of rank or
privilege.

The recent adoption of resolution 1882 (2009),
although it refers to children, represents a significant
step towards tackling sexual violence, since it broadens
the criteria for including, in the annexes to the
Secretary-General's reports, parties to armed conflicts
who, in violation of relevant international law, commit
acts that cause the deaths and mutilation of children,
rape and other forms of sexual violence. The resolution
also calls for improved communication between the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict and
the sanctions committees of the Security Council
through an exchange of information on violations and
abuses committed against children.

The Secretary-General's report clearly illustrates
the complexity of the task of collecting information on
sexual violence, given its inhuman nature, the
psychological and physical trauma that it inflicts, and
the fear, shame and stigma that it entails for its victims.
That is why my Government welcomes the
recommendation to establish a commission to
investigate violations of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law and to report on
these violations, focusing in particular on cases of
sexual violence in the situations in Chad, Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Sudan. We also
welcome the possibility of establishing such
commissions for other conflicts in which sexual
violence is perpetrated. The commission of enquiry
should also identify those responsible for crimes of
sexual violence and report on the measures that States
and other parties to the conflict may take or fail to
take. Such information will be extremely useful to the
work of the various sanctions committees.

My delegation also takes note of the other
recommendations of the Secretary-General, and agrees
that Security Council resolutions establishing or
renewing mandates or imposing measures under
Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter must
include provisions to prevent and, most importantly, to
respond to sexual violence, and on the obligation to
report the Council.

With respect to the possibility of appointing a
senior person with responsibility to attend to the
prevention and response to sexual violence across the
United Nations system, Mexico believes that a very
careful consideration of the matter will be necessary, in
particular with regard to whether this option would
truly be the best response the United Nations system
could provide in addressing the scourge of sexual
violence.

We welcome the actions of the Secretary-General
to strengthen coordination within the United Nations
system in order to work jointly to prevent and respond
to sexual violence, and we invite him to continue to
update this coordination, in particular among the teams
on the ground, since that is where the victims of sexual
violence are to be found.

With respect to political leadership, Mexico
supports the Secretary-General's request for high-level
officials of the Secretariat and the heads of the relevant
organizations, funds and programmes to play a greater
role in raising awareness on sexual violence. The
United Nations response to this scourge must be
multisectoral, organized and coherent. We need a
thorough analysis of the work undertaken by the
various agencies and United Nations teams in this area,
with a view to avoiding duplication of efforts and to
promoting a more effective exchange of information.
This would require a major but justified effort to
address sexual violence.

Finally, I would like to stress the need for a full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and the
importance of incorporating the gender perspective in
efforts to deal with situations of armed conflict.
Women's participation in police and armed forces and
peacekeeping operations must be a priority in conflict
situations where there is sexual violence in order to
contribute to its eradication. Similarly, the inclusion of
women in mediation processes is crucial to
guaranteeing lasting peace.

