Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation listened carefully to the
statements by Mr. Guehenno, Ms. King and Ms.
Heyzer. We appreciate the efforts that they have made
in the promotion of the full and equal participation of
women in peacekeeping, as well as their invaluable
recommendations.

The causes and nature of armed conflicts vary in
the different parts of the world. However, all have a
grave impact on women. This question is increasingly
the subject of concern and attention on the part of the
international community. In recent years, the United
Nations adopted the Beijing Declaration, the Windhoek
Declaration and the Namibia Plan of Action. Two years
ago, the Security Council adopted resolution 1325
(2000). More recently, the special session of the
General Assembly on women adopted a political
declaration. All those initiatives demonstrate fully the
determination and resolve of all States to enhance the
status of women and to let woman assume their role.
However, it is important to note that these declarations
and resolutions have not been implemented in a full
and comprehensive manner.

With regard to the issue under discussion today, it
is key to address two issues. First, the rights and
interests of women in armed conflict should be
protected. Women should be encouraged to participate
in peace negotiations and decision-making. The
advantage and potential of women should be utilized in
conflict prevention, reconciliation efforts and social
reconstruction. Secondly, effective measures should be
adopted to eliminate or reduce the tremendous harm
done to women by small arms, mines, HIV/AIDS and
other violent actions.

Once again, we strongly urge all parties to
conflicts to abide by international humanitarian law
and to respect human rights. We call upon all
Governments to investigate and to punish those who
have committed crimes against women. We call upon
the international community to discuss the practice of
double standards and to fully investigate recent events
in some regions of the world that have harmed
civilians. The international community should make
concerted efforts to eliminate the root causes of
conflicts, to alleviate poverty and to spread education,
so as to protect the rights of women and children from
harm in a fundamental manner.

If more women can participate in conflict
resolution and peacekeeping activities, it will be
possible not only to minimize the impact of conflict on
women but also to promote the establishment of lasting
and effective peace. This question touches upon a wide
range of areas. It calls for concerted efforts by all
parties. The agencies of the United Nations system
should utilize their collective advantage so as to
achieve the greatest results in their work. Conducting
work in this area, the Security Council should fully
respect the work conducted by the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council and other organs.

We support the action plan on the division of
work formulated by the task force of Inter-agency
Committee on Women and Gender Equality. We look
forward to the publication of the integral report of the
Secretary-General on the impact of gender on the peace
process.

