The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Chile.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Austria on behalf of
the Human Security Network.

Chile proposed this open debate on the challenges
of protecting women and girls in armed conflict and
post-conflict situations because the protection of
civilians in armed conflict is one of the most pressing
issues before the Security Council. Promoting respect
for humanitarian principles is among our shared actions
and responsibilities to protect civilians - obligations
that the United Nations assumes when a State is unable
or unwilling to apply these principles.

The challenges of protecting women and girls in
armed conflicts and their aftermath call for us to help

promote and ensure the equality of women before the law
and justice. In that context, all discriminatory provisions
against women that increase their vulnerability in
conflict situations, such as those relating to citizenship
and access to land, must be repealed.

It is crucial to address threats to women's safety
by promoting and protecting their rights and by
empowering them to fully enjoy those rights, taking
account of the particular needs. Likewise, we must
eradicate practices that are unacceptable regardless of
sociocultural or religious context, such as the use of
sexual violence as a weapon of war.

During 2014, the Council addressed humanitarian
situations affecting millions of women and girls, many
of them displaced or refugees. Serious violations and
abuses of human rights and international humanitarian
law, such as those committed by Boko Haram,
in particular against women and girls, including
abductions, are abhorrent acts and must cease. We
reiterate the call for the immediate and unconditional
release of all hostages, including the school-age girls
abducted in April 2014.

We welcome the contributions of the International
Committee of the Red Cross and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to make available
to those providing assistance concrete programmes and
measures to ensure the protection of women and girls
such as promoting the equal protection of women before
the law and their access to justice; integrating women in
all peace processes and peace agreements; and ensuring
their participation in the planning and implementation
of recovery and reconstruction programmes in post-
conflict rehabilitation.

The United Nations and the Security Council
must take a rights-based approach in addressing the
multidimensional character of gender issues, thus
rejecting relativism and disregard for universal rights.
This should be part of a broader set of measures to
prevent violence against women in armed conflict or
post-conflict situations, guaranteeing reparations for
and the reintegration of victims, as well as fighting
against impunity. These concerns must not be left out
as we build a comprehensive post-2015 development
agenda.

Resolution 1325 (2000), together with its related
resolutions, constitutes a turning point for addressing
the major impact of armed conflict on women and girls,
who are victims of violence and surrounded by barriers,
discrimination and inequality. The document also
provides solutions in terms of participation, protection,
prevention and post-conflict recovery - the so-called
"four Ps" - which must be supported with sustainable
budgets for their implementation.

Gender must be mainstreamed throughout
international peace and security decision-making
bodies, mechanisms and processes, and integrated into
the formulation and implementation of the mission
mandates and the work of the Council. That should
include briefings from the relevant organizations and
Special Envoys as a preventive and early-warning
mechanism.

The Council's upcoming 2015 high-level review to
measure progress on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) and the global study on its implementation
provide an opportunity to take advantage of the
experience we have gained and to improve the
capabilities of States and of the United Nations
system in this area. We are convinced of the need for
synergy between this review and those related to the
peacebuilding architecture, peacekeeping operations
and the special political missions of the Secretary-
General.

It would also be useful to conduct a working
meeting to analyse and recommend practical measures
that would complement the incorporation of the
protection of women and girls and a gender perspective
into the architecture to protect civilians within the
United Nations. As part of the agenda for the World
Humanitarian Summit in 2016, a fourth topic, focused
on addressing the needs of persons in conflict, could be
an interesting vehicle to consider these issues.

We trust that this debate will strengthen political
support to achieve the effective protection of civilians in
the terms enshrined in international law, international
human rights law and international humanitarian law.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to be able to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements
are kindly requested to circulate their texts in writing
and to deliver a condensed version when speaking in
the Chamber. I would also like to appeal to speakers
to deliver their statements at a normal speed so that
interpretation may be provided properly. I wish to
inform all concerned that we will be carrying this open
debate right through the lunch hour, as we have a very
large number of speakers.

I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Sweden. I would also like to extend our
sincere condolences on the passing away of our friend,
Mr. Marten Grunditz.

