Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): First I
should like to congratulate you, Sir, on behalf of the
Moroccan delegation for convening this debate on
sexual violence in conflict, which is important for the
international community. This is the first time I am
speaking here in my capacity as the new Permanent
Representative of the Kingdom of Morocco, and I am
delighted to do so under your presidency and on a topic
chosen by Nigeria, to which my country attaches great
importance.

I should also like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, Ms. Zainab Bangura, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
and Ms. Rhoda Misaka of the NGO Working Group on
Women, Peace and Security for their briefings.

We welcome the convening of this debate, which
enables us to take stock of the progress made and
difficulties encountered by Member States in protecting
women and childrenfrom sexual violence in conflict
and post-conflict situations. The Secretary-General's
report (S/2014/181) is an exhaustive list of events that
took place during the reporting period and of national
experiences that have much to teach us and which
reflect a desire to assume national ownership in ending
sexual Violence on the part of the countries concerned.

Women often need protection and support; they
are the hardest hit by devastating impact of violence
and, regrettably, pay a high price for their increased
vulnerability and difficult living conditions. Protecting
women against sexual violence in conflict remains a
collective responsibility and requires us to act with
resolve, coordination and as one to strengthen measures
to stop the perpetrators and instigators of the violence
and to prevent such violence from recurring.

The Secretary-General's report rightly underscores
that the slowness of progress made in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, as well as the
impunity enjoyed by the perpetrators of sexual violence,
promote a high-risk environment for women and girls.
Resolution 2106 (2013) seeks to strengthen the existing
legal arsenal protecting women against multiple types
of violence. The resolution has allowed us to define a
comprehensive prevention strategy through concrete,
targeted and situation-specific actions. The Secretary-
General's report also underscores that rape is often
the most widespread use of violence in refugee and
internally displaced people camps. Unfortunately, these
camps offer no security to women, particularly single
women or heads of families, because ofthe proliferation
of small arms and light weapons, the infilftration of
armed elements among the refugee population, and
even the militarization of camps.

The reform of the security sector, accountability
and strengthening the access of victims to justice, as
well as awareness-raising of human rights and training
within national security institutions, would provide
better protection for victims. My delegation would
like to welcome the work done by the Team of Experts
on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict
in assisting countries to strengthen their national
capacities, to promote transitional justice and to reform
the security sector.

The signing of peace and ceasefire agreements
and implementing programmes to prevent gender-
based violence, and the drafting of codes of conduct for
security forces have helped to launch investigations to
establish the criminal responsibility of the perpetrators.
My delegation welcomes the efforts made by United
Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict in
training peacekeeping personnel so as to strengthen
their operational capability for rapid reaction and
response to prevent violence.

My delegation also wants follow-up, analysis and
information-sharing arrangements established pursuant
to resolution 1960 (2010) to be improved in order to
take better account of realities on the ground through
the collection of objective, viable and credible data. We
also want the orientation note on contact points between
these arrangements and the information-management
system on gender-based violence established by United
Nations Action to enable us to improve the ways in
which we gather and share information. Awareness-
raising campaigns to protect women in conflict
depends on the involvement of public authorities and
national human rights institutions, civil society and
local women's organizations, as well as religious heads,
who play a key role.

My delegation belives that the mandates of women
protection advisers in peacekeeping operations and
special political missions need to be clearly defined and
periodically evaluated in order to enable each context to
be borne in mind and to improve coordination between
among the advisers in carrying out their missions so as
to avoid any possible duplication of work on the ground
and to ensure better consistency in their work.

While parties to conflict bear the primary
responsibility for violence against women and girls,
United Nations action must reflect the benefits
not only of dialogue and cooperation, but also of
deterrence through resort to legal means, prosecution
and incarceration for the perpetrators of these heinous
crimes. Accountability must be the principle on which
the United Nations should base its work. Combating
impunity must be an ongoing parameter for the work
of the international community in combating sexual
violence, strengthening access to justice systems in
place, promoting and strengthening the rule of law,
and restoring security, peace, stability and sustainable
development in the countries affected.

