Ms. Inyumba (Rwanda): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting and for
giving my delegation the opportunity to participate in
this debate, as we mark the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000). I also welcome the report of
the Secretary-General on women and peace and security
(S/2010/498) and endorse the recommendations in that
report. The Rwandan delegation aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the Minister of International
Cooperation of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security.

The Rwandan Government officially launched, on
May 17th this year, a national action plan on the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000) for the period 2009-2012. The development of
this action plan started with a baseline study which
highlighted tremendous contribution that Rwandan
women have made to peace, security, justice and
reconciliation since the genocide of 1994, together
with current challenges facing women in conflict
management. This process was carried out in a very
participatory way. Our country has a national steering
committee chaired by the Ministry of Gender and
Family Promotion, with the participation of the
Ministries of Foreign Affairs, Defence and Security,
the private sector, civil society and United Nations
agencies. I would say that the process in my country
has been very participatory and very engaged.
10-60385

Our action plan has a number of major
components. The first is our commitment to the
prevention of violence and conflict. Our national
programme commits us to dissemination of national
and international laws dealing with women, the
revision of all discriminatory laws and the
identification of all existing discriminatory practices
and adoption of strategies to address these challenges.
We have also begun the ratification of international
laws and conventions, and we are in fact in the process
of domesticating those laws.

Also in our action plan we have a specific chapter
on the protection and rehabilitation of victims. We
have started to establish gender-based violence centres
at the grass-roots level throughout the country, and we
initiated a law on prevention and punishment of
gender-based violence, which was passed in 2009. It
includes penalties and substantive mechanisms to
empower the national police, the Ministry of Defence
and other security agencies to contribute to
stabilization and to ensuring that women are protected
in conflict. In Rwanda we also have gender desks in all
departments. Specifically, we emphasize training for
all personnel involved with the issue of gender-based
violence in our country. We have also initiated an
action plan and an awareness and training programme
especially for our peacekeeping forces that go to
Darfur. Other than the general mandate that they have
as part of a peacekeeping mission, they also have a
special objective of ensuring that women and refugees
in the Sudan are protected.

Last week, my country deployed a delegation of
90 women police officers to the Sudan as
reinforcements for their brothers there and ensure that
they promote best practices, from which Rwandan
women have also benefited. It is in the context of the
high-level International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region that we have today begun in my country an
international conference, chaired by our President, on
the role of security organs as part of the celebration of
the tenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000).

In line with our action plan and with the
reinforcement of women's participation in decision-
making organs relating to peace and security, I am
proud to say that we have advanced in terms of
women's participation, with a high level of
representation of women in parliament - 56 per cent.
This extends into the lower echelons such as local
government, the judiciary and the private sector. The
3
action plan in our country also promotes
peacebuilding, especially bearing in mind that, with
our experience in conflict management in a post-
genocide situation, we have a lot to offer the region.

We remain firmly committed, and we will
continue to play an important role at the national,
subregional and global level in the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). We recently established a
successful structure called the Women's Forum of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
whose sole mandate is to ensure that resolution 1325
(2000) is fully embraced in the region and that all
women from the 11 countries of the Great Lakes region
benefit from it and share their experiences in the
region.

