Mr. Bermudez Alvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):At the outset, I wish to congratulate Bolivia
on having organized this open debate and to thank
the Secretary-General, the Executive Director of UN-
Women and civil society representative Ms. Randa
Siniora Atallah for their briefings.

Uruguay aligns itself with the statement made by
the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security.

Today's debate focuses on a very sound concept.
The empowerment of women and girls and gender
equality are fundamental to conflict prevention and
the maintenance of international peace and security.
The Secretary-General's report (S/2018/900) highlights
that we continue to witness flagrant disrespect for
international human rights law and humanitarian law
in various conflicts, particularly with regard to grave
violations of women's human rights. Unfortunately,
those grave violations are not spontaneous, but are an
extension of other violence perpetrated more covertly
within societies. That violence is rooted in inequality,
widespread discrimination against women and the
denial of their fundamental rights, which is why States
must take action to address those underlying deeply
rooted structural causes in many societies.

By protecting their rights, women will be able to
reduce their vulnerability and participate in political
and economic life, thereby fully contributing to the
growth of their communities. That is key not only for
national development, but also for the maintenance of
sustainable peace. In that connection, the Uruguayan
Government approved a national strategy for gender
equality by 2030. It was developed in conjunction with
civil society to address inequality and discrimination
from a human rights perspective. The strategy includes
political and institutional guidelines and establishes a
road map to influence public policies and guide State
action on gender equality.

Education plays a fundamental role in the political
and social empowerment of women. All States must
guarantee that right to women and girls. Education
enables them to overcome discrimination, allows them
to better understand their rights, gives them greater
confidence and freedom to make decisions that affect
their lives and empowers them to become actors and
protagonists ofpeace.

According to UNESCO, more than 60 million
girls around the world do not have access to education,
while two thirds of illiterate people around the world
are women. Without an education, women and girls are
unlikely to escape the cycle of poverty and violence.
Uruguay has adhered to the Safe Schools Declaration,
launched at the initiative of Argentina and Norway,
and expresses its dismay at the increasing number of
attacks on schools and universities, many of which
have deliberately targeted women and girls as victims.
We take this opportunity to encourage other States to
endorse the Declaration.

Peacekeeping operations are one of the main
instruments available to the Organization; it is now
irrefutable that the presence of women in those
contingents increases their effectiveness. Uruguay
provides a proportion of women that is higher than
the average deployment, but we continue to make
great efforts to further increase that level of female
participation. The National Peace Operations Training
Institute of Uruguay also provides mandatory training
to the personnel that will be deployed on topics such as
preventing and responding to violence against women.
At the same time, the Uruguayan Government carries
out ongoing work in the implementation of a zero-
tolerance policy in cases of abuse, exploitation or other
acts that violate the code of conduct.

In parallel to the efforts made at the domestic
level, experience shows that, in order to increase the
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations, it is essential
to cooperate with other troop-contributing countries,
Member States and the Organization as a whole.
Inspired by that firm conviction, my country was one
of the first to support the Secretary-General's Action
for Peacekeeping initiative, which includes a collective
commitment to implementing the agenda on women
and peace and security, guaranteeing in equal footing
the full participation of women at all stages of the peace
process and increasing the number of uniformed and
civilian women in peacekeeping operations. Likewise,
the President of Uruguay, Mr. Tabare Vazquez, is a
member of the Circle of Leadership to combat sexual
exploitation and abuse, with a commitment to ending
impunity and restoring the dignity of the victims.

Uruguay has also joined the Elsie Initiative on
Women in Peace Operations, launched by Canada, to
ensure an increase in the number of women deployed
in peacekeeping operations. I would like to take this
opportunity to inform the Council that, next December,
my Government will be holding a preparatory meeting
with the United Kingdom for the 2019 United Nations
Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial Conference. We
will devote attention to the training of Blue Helmets
on issues related to women and peace and security and
specific training for women peacekeepers.

Another mechanism that I want to highlight is
the Women, Peace and Security National Focal Points
Network, established at the behest of Spain, which
Uruguay will have the honour to co-chair with Canada
in the year 2020. The Network has the potential
to generate political momentum and implement
resolutions on women's aid and protection, and it is
already demonstrating its usefulness with regard to
gender cooperation and the exchange of experiences
and good practices. Finally, I would like to express my
gratitude for the invaluable and constant contribution
of civil society in the defence of women's rights and
call for protection and an end to the growing threats
and persecution suffered by human rights defenders
and the defenders of women's rights.

Allow me to conclude by recalling that, at the time
that the Charter ofthe United Nations was being drafted
at the San Francisco Conference, Uruguay, together
with a few other countries of the global South that had
women in their delegations, requested that an explicit
reference to women's rights be included in the Charter.
Thanks to that effort, and despite the reluctance of the
vast majority of the participating States, we managed
to include the only two provisions on gender in the
Charter. The equality of the rights of men and women
is enshrined in the Preamble and it was established in
Article 8 that,

"The United Nations shall place no restrictions
on the eligibility of men and women to participate
in any capacity and under conditions of equality in
its principal and subsidiary organs."

Seventy-three years have passed since then. History
has shown that, without the participation of women and
respect for equality and their fundamental rights, it will
not be possible to achieve peace in the world.

