Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): I would like to thank
the presidency of the Republic of South Africa for
prioritizing the women and peace and security agenda
and welcome the adoption of resolution 2493 (2019)
earlier today. We also thank the Secretary-General for
presenting his report (S/2019/800) and commend his
leadership in promoting gender-responsive policies
and equal opportunities for women and girls across the
United Nations system.

The upcoming twentieth anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000) will be an important opportunity to
strengthen the collective response and take resolute
action to address all forms of violence against women
and girls and ensure the full protection of their human
rights in times of conflict and crisis. That landmark
resolution has created a comprehensive normative
framework to scale up the efforts of the international
community in mainstreaming the role of women in
prevention, post-conflict reconstruction, rehabilitation
and peacebuilding and in addressing the special
protection needs of women and girls in conflict
situations. Armenia firmly believes that women have
a key role to play in all conflict stages, particularly
in confidence-building and promoting peace and
reconciliation. The inclusive engagement of all women
affected by conflict in peace and security efforts is
vital to promoting lasting and durable settlements and
sustaining peace.

We emphasize the need to protect the rights of
women and girls residing in conflict areas, as the
most affected part of the population, and to advance
their meaningful participation and representation in
prevention and peacebuilding processes. I would like
to recall in that regard the Women for Peace campaign,
initiated by the spouse ofthe Prime Minister ofArmenia,
which is an important example of an inclusive platform
for women and mothers to raise their voice for peace,
non-violence and reconciliation across dividing lines.

Armenia attaches great importance to advancing
the women and peace and security agenda in the
framework of its national policies aimed at ensuring
the political and public participation of women, their
empowerment and the promotion of gender equality. In
February, in close cooperation with civil society and
international partners, the Government adopted the
national action plan on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, thereby
consolidating national policies and strategies with the
aim of making them more coherent and coordinated.

The national action plan focuses on prevention,
protection, participation, relief and recovery with clear
objectives, timelines and performance indicators. It
identifies a concrete set of measures to increase the
engagement of women in the security sector, including
in peacekeeping missions, and to promote the political
participation and economic empowerment of women
in the context of conflict prevention and resolution
and peacebuilding. It places particular emphasis on
the protection of the rights of vulnerable population
groups, such as women residing in border communities
and women affected by conflicts.

In the light of the upcoming twenty-fifth
anniversary of the adoption of the Beijing Declaration
and Platform for Action and the five-year milestone
towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals,
next year will be a critical moment in scaling up the
realization of gender equality and the empowerment of
all women and girls.

The Commission on the Status of Women, the
main United Nations policymaking body in the area
of the empowerment of women, is also a particularly
important platform for advancing the women and peace
and security agenda. As Permanent Representative of
Armenia and Chair of the sixty-fourth session of the
Commission, I look forward to contributing to gender-
mainstreaming in security sector governance and
reform and the substantial involvement of women in
peacebuilding and peacekeeping activities.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Armenia's
firm commitment to further enhancing the
empowerment of women in its reform agenda and
ensuring their inclusion and active participation in
political and public life as important prerequisites for
promoting peace and security.

