Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): I am speaking today in
Austria's capacity as the current Chair of the Human
Security Network (HSN), an interregional group of
countries also comprising Canada, Chile, Greece,
Ireland, Jordan, Mali, the Netherlands, Norway,
Slovenia, South Africa, as an observer, Switzerland and
Thailand. The aims of the Network are to increase
awareness of human security at the political level, to
add real value to the international debate and to
improve the implementation of existing standards in
the field of human security through concrete actions.

The adoption of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000), on women, peace and security, in October
2000, was a landmark decision that prompted HSN
countries to work on the implementation of concrete
measures to ensure that the needs of war-affected
women and girls are taken into account and that
women are full and equal participants in all aspects of
conflict resolution and post-conflict reconstruction. A
concrete action undertaken in this field by the Network
was the workshop on gendering human security, held in
Oslo in January 2001.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his excellent report, which highlights important aspects
regarding the roles and experiences of women and girls
in armed conflicts and its aftermath.

From the point of view of the Human Security
Network, I would now like briefly to focus on four
issues. The first is human rights education.

The report of the Secretary-General recognizes
the need for adequate training and education in several
areas, including multidimensional peacekeeping
operations and reconstruction and rehabilitation
processes. Human rights education is one of the two
priority issues on Austria's agenda as the Chair of the
Human Security Network. For its next ministerial
meeting, which will be held at Graz in May 2003,
Austria will draft a document regarding the principles
of human rights education, as well as a manual on
understanding human rights, that will contain
substantive elements on the human rights of women.

Second is the special needs of girls. The second
priority of the Human Security Network this year is
children affected by armed conflict, with a particular
emphasis on the special protection needs of girls. A
common human security network support strategy is
being developed involving an alarm function, support
for monitoring activities and training of monitors and
rehabilitation experts for children. We welcome the
Secretary-General's recommendation to increase the
number of programmes for child soldiers and to fully
incorporate attention to the specific situation and needs
of girl soldiers.

Third is the protection of women from sexual
exploitation and trafficking. The report of the
Secretary-General reflects the grave consequences of
violence, including sexual abuse in the context of
armed conflict, on the physical and mental health of
women and girls, such as the increased threat of
contracting sexually transmitted diseases and
HIV/AIDS. Therefore, the Human Security Network
calls on all parties to armed conflict to take special
measures to protect women and girls from gender-
based violence, particularly rape and other forms of
sexual abuse, and all other forms of violence in
situations of armed conflict. These forms of violence
clearly undermine human security, the upholding of
which is a fundamental aspect of peacekeeping
operations. The Human Security Network welcomes
efforts to strengthen early warning capacities in this
respect, including concerning the trafficking in
persons.

Fourth is the protection of and assistance to
displaced women. Women and children constitute the
vast majority of the world's refugees and internally
displaced persons. As pointed out in the report of the
Secretary-General, the differential impact of armed
conflict and the specific vulnerabilities of women and
girls can be seen in all phases of displacement. The
Human Security Network is therefore committed to
enhancing the protection of and assistance to displaced
women during their displacement and upon their return
to the communities of origin.

Today's debate provides an important opportunity
to evaluate the impact of armed conflict on women and
girls. We need to ensure that the security and the rights
of women are protected, that any violations are
prosecuted and that those responsible are brought to
justice. But women are not only victims in situations of
armed conflict; there are also many examples of
women making a critical difference in the promotion of
durable peace and in creating more equitable societies
in the aftermath of conflicts. We therefore share the
concerns of the Secretary-General that there is an
urgent need to enhance the involvement of women in
peace negotiations and their participation in United
Nations peace operations. We will do our utmost to
identify and nominate qualified women for upcoming
vacancies in this regard, and we will actively support
the full implementation of Security Council resolution
1325 (2000) on women, peace, and security.

