Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for your efforts on this issue, and the
Secretary-General and the Executive Director of UN-
Women for their briefings this morning. I would also
particularly like to thank Ms. Lusenge, Ms. Mohammed
and Ms. Murabit for their participation here today. The
bravery and commitment of women's organizations
in preventing conflict, building peace and promoting
human rights, often in very dangerous situations, is
admirable and deserves our full support.

We are here today not only to celebrate the fifteenth
anniversary of the ground-breaking resolution 1325
(2000), on women and peace and security, but also
to support and promote women as actors for peace. It
is high time that we accelerated our common efforts
and moved from normative commitments to full
implementation.

Enhancing gender equality and women's
contributions to peace and security are top priorities for
the Swedish Government. Promoting gender equality
means promoting not only the economic, political and
social empowerment of women but also development
and conflict prevention. I would like to highlight three
areas that are particularly important to us and to which
Sweden wants to pledge its continued support.

First, indisputable evidence, as the global study
highlights, has shown that women's participation leads
to more sustainable peace. Yet women's experience,
knowledge and expertise are too often excluded from
peace processes. Change therefore needs to start, and it
needs to start at home. My Government has committed
to strengthening women's human rights, improving their
access to resources and increasing their representation,
in times of war and in times of peace.

Our revised national action plan will make women's
participation in peace and security a top priority. In
order to make sure that the new plan duly reflects the
needs and experiences of women and girls in conflict-
affected societies, we have held consultations in five
countries dealing with or emerging from conflict. All
of the women, ranging from those in Afghanistan to
those in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo,
conveyed the same, very clear message, which is that
no sustainable peace can be achieved without them.
We must hear their plea and commit to continuing to
support and fund women's organizations in conflict and
post-conflict countries. We have increased that support
threefold over the past five years, but we will strive to
do even more. Sweden is also developing a network of
women peace mediators, and we have also participated
in the creation of a Nordic women's mediation network
with a capacity to assist peace efforts wherever they
may be needed in the world.

Secondly, we should acknowledge that sexual
violence in conflict is a core security challenge that
must remain on the Security Council's agenda and
particularly now, when the use of sexual violence has
been taken to new and horrific levels in which sexual
violence is not only condoned but openly prescribed as
a method of warfare. There must be accountability for
such crimes and an end to impunity. As a major donor to
the United Nations Action Against Sexual Violence in
Conflict, we will seek further ways to increase support
to the victims and survivors of sexual violence. We
will continue to cooperate with relevant stakeholders,
such as the Office of the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court, in order to create stronger national
capacities for investigating and prosecuting sexual and
gender-based crimes.

In 2016, we will assume the leadership of the Call
to Action on Protection from Gender-Based Violence
in Emergencies initiative, which aims to foster
accountability and mitigate gender-based violence
in humanitarian crises. Our main objective for next
year will be to take the initiative from policy to action
and from words to deeds. We want to work with all
our partners in the initiative, and with everyone here
in the Council, to make a real and positive impact on
how we address gender-based violence in humanitarian
crises. Sweden will also support organizations working
to engage men and boys in pursuing gender equality.
Recent good practices from conflict-affected countries
have shown the importance of engaging men and boys
in the prevention of gender-based violence.

Thirdly, a lack of resources, or their uneven
distribution, is often at the core of inequality. We need
a thorough analysis of how resources are allocated, and
to whom. If we are to achieve real change, political
commitment must be accompanied by sustainable
financing. We are committed to allocating 1 per
cent of our gross domestic income to development
cooperation. Gender equality and women's rights
and empowerment will remain top priorities in our
development cooperation and humanitarian assistance.
Gender equality was the primary focus of 16 per cent of
our development support to conflict-affected countries
in 2014. We challenge the United Nations to reach its
set target of 15 per cent gender funding within all aid
flows to conflict-affected countries.

We welcome resolution 2242 (2015), adopted today
by the Council, and its call on the United Nations
to redouble efforts to integrate women's needs and
the gender perspective. By strengthening gender
competence and accountability at strategic, tactical and
operational levels, the United Nations will be better fit
to cater to the needs of women and men, boys and girls.

We are committed to supporting those efforts
and will continue to offer predeployment training on
resolution 1325 (2000) and gender to peacekeeping
mission staff, as well as seconding gender advisers
to international institutions and missions. We also
remain committed to a strong and adequately resourced
UN-Women. We were the programme's top donor in
2014, with a total support of $35 million.

In conclusion, in order to take our common
commitment seriously, we need to ensure that women's
voices are being heard and that the needs and realities
of women living in conflict and post-conflict countries
influence our decisions. It is time for a paradigm shift.
Sustainable development and peace and security can
never be achieved if half the population is excluded.

