Ms. Oehri (Liechtenstein): We align ourselves
with the statement delivered by the representative of
Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women,
Peace and Security.

Eight resolutions adopted by the Council reflect
the significant progress we have made in the area of
women, peace and security. In resolution 1820 (2008),
the Council recognized for the first time that sexual
violence can constitute a war crime, a crime against
humanity or a constitutive act with respect to genocide.
A decade later, patterns of sexual violence remain a
sad reality in many conflict situations, and effective
responses have been rare.

The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/250) documents sexual violence including
rape, sexual slavery or forced prostitution, pregnancy,
abortion, sterilization and marriage in 19 conflict
situations, committed by 47 parties. Patterns of sexual
violence are often embedded in and compounded by
underlying structural conditions such as inequality,
gender-based discrimination and the violation of
minority rights. The empowerment of women is
therefore a key ingredient of an effective response.
This requires the increased representation of women in
mechanisms to address conflicts and the incorporation
of a gender perspective in conflict resolution and
peace processes.

The situation of the Rohingya community is of
high relevance to our discussion and we welcome
the presence of an advocate for the Rohingya today.
Many of the 700,000 civilians fleeing Rakhine state to
Bangladesh have endured physical and psychological
sexual assault. Rape, sexual slavery and other forms
of grave sexual violence have mostly been committed
against Rohingya women and girls. Those who have
fled are vulnerable to further violations, including
trafficking for the purpose of forced marriage or
sexual exploitation. We commend the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) for exploring the
option of investigating the deportation of the Rohingya
community as a crime against humanity. This is
precisely the type of situation for which the ICC was
created, and the Council should refer it to the Court.

In Syria, sexual violence has been used as tactic
of war and as part of an attack against the civilian
population, committed by various parties to the conflict
with rampant impunity. It is shocking in particular that
not a single member of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant has been prosecuted for sexual violence offenses
as of yet. The International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic, created by the
General Assembly in light of paralysis in the Security
Council, has made sexual and gender-based violence a
priority of its work. We call on all States to cooperate
with the Mechanism by sharing relevant information
and through financial support.

Accountability is an essential part of the fight
against conflict-related sexual violence. International
criminal justice mechanisms have done groundbreaking
work. The finding in the Akayesu case before the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda that sexual
violence can amount to genocide was a landmark
decision. Of comparable relevance was the verdict
of the ICC in finding Jean-Pierre Bemba Gombo
criminally responsible for war crimes and crimes
against humanity for sexual violence on the basis of
command responsibility. The Prosecutor of the ICC
has made sexual and gender-based violence crimes
one of her strategic priorities as a reflection of the
very progressive stance of the Rome Statute, adopted
20 years ago, on sexual and gender-based violence.
Justice Rapid Response has also done invaluable work
to investigate sexual and gender-based violence.

Women and girls are disproportionately affected
by sexual violence, but we must not ignore the fact
that many men and boys become victims as well.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/250)
documents incidents in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, South Sudan, Sri Lanka and Syria.
The rape and sexual torture of men and boys are all
too commonly practiced in detention settings, often
aimed at extracting confessions during interrogation.
Such patterns continue to be underreported, owing to
cultural taboos and fear of being stigmatized. Sexual
violence against men and boys in situations of armed
conflict warrants our increased attention in order to
inform our response to gender-based sexual Violence
overall, with accountability and necessary services to
victims as key components.

