Mr. Viinanen (Finland): 1 have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Nordic countries: Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden.

I would like to begin by thanking the Ugandan
presidency and the Council for taking these issues into
consideration together and for the briefings we have
heard this morning. This gives the Council an excellent
opportunity to discuss peacebuilding comprehensively.

In his report on peacebuilding in the immediate
aftermath of conflict (S/2010/386), the Secretary-
General outlines ambitious but vital goals for the
United Nations in becoming more effective in its
support for post-conflict countries. We welcome his
progress report, and the steps taken so far in its
implementation. We also congratulate the Secretary-
General on having delivered a strategic action plan on
the participation of women in peacebuilding. The
Nordic countries fully support its clear
recommendations and comprehensive approach, and
stand ready to do their part in fulfilling these measures.

The Nordic countries believe that the following
recommendations deserve particular attention: first,
inclusive participation as a key to legitimate and
sustainable peace; secondly, adequate and timely
financing of the post-conflict needs of men and women
alike; and thirdly, improving the response of the system
as a whole in the immediate aftermath of a conflict.

As the Secretary-General notes in his report,
rebuilding after a conflict offers an opportunity to
create a virtuous cycle, starting from more inclusive
peace processes. The report also draws an important
link between women's participation and the wider
question of gender equality. Women need to be
included in all phases of peace processes and in post-
conflict governance institutions. Outside actors cannot
dictate the composition of the negotiating delegations,
but there is a lot that can be done. Peace mediators and
their supporting teams can ensure that sufficient gender
expertise is provided to the parties; they can also
organize parallel consultations with women's groups if
they do not have a seat at the table.

Special measures might also be needed to support
women's representation in the governance institutions
that emerge after a conflict. The United Nations often
acts as the adviser in crucial decisions, such as the
composition of constituent assemblies or the choice of
electoral system, including possibilities for quotas or
preferential treatment. We believe that such measures
can be effective and justified in ensuring more
legitimate State institutions, thus leading to a more
durable peace.

Timely, flexible and predictable funding is
necessary to successful post-conflict State-building.
Steps have been taken during the past 12 months to
shape the Peacebuilding Fund based on the new terms
of reference. Considerable work has also been
undertaken in the context of the International Network
on Conflict and Fragility of the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development. The success
of this challenging work, however, will largely depend
on the cooperation of donors, partner countries, the
United Nations and other international organizations
and funds.

We congratulate the Secretary-General on
committing the United Nations system to ensuring that
at least 15 per cent of United Nations-managed funds
in support of peacebuilding are dedicated to projects
whose principal objective is to address women's
specific needs, advance gender equality or empower
women. As donors, we are happy that the
Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) is already employing a
gender marker and that Bureau for Crisis Prevention
and Recovery of the United Nations Development
Programme is already exceeding the target of 15 per
cent. However, in all United Nations post-conflict
multi-donor trust funds, the proportion is far behind the
target. We encourage the United Nations to work
towards the target of 15 per cent.

A coherent early response requires clearly
defined roles and strong partnerships from the United
Nations and other international actors. A lot has been
achieved in the field of leadership and accountability
and in developing tools for integrated strategic
frameworks. Nevertheless, further efforts are needed,
especially regarding partnerships with international
financial institutions.

The ongoing review of civilian capacities is a key
component of reforming United Nations support to
countries emerging from conflict. We are encouraged
by the breadth and depth of the review, and look
forward to the upcoming report. Its recommendations
are needed to make sure that the international
community can deploy the right type of support and
expertise at the right time. The Nordic countries remain
committed to making the review a success.

The Secretary-General's action plan on ensuring
the participation of women in peacebuilding offers a
good example of a system-wide strategy. We welcome
the establishment of UN Women and congratulate
Michelle Bachelet on her appointment as Under-
Secretary-General and Executive Director. We pledge
our full support to Ms. Bachelet and hope that UN
Women will have a leading role in the area of women,
peace and security. The full collaboration of all
relevant United Nations actors - such as the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
Department of Political Affairs and the Development
Operations Coordination Office - will be fundamental
to ensuring the implementation of a system-wide
approach.

Finally, I would like to conclude by commending
the excellent work of the three facilitators of this year's
review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture. The consultations showed that we may not
have come as far as we had hoped. Nevertheless, the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), the PBF and the
Peacebuilding Support Office have to some extent
helped to fill what the Secretary-General in 2005 called
a "gaping hole" in the United Nations machinery. We
welcome the facilitators' report (S/2010/393, annex)
and look forward to seeing continued strong leadership
from the Secretary-General in taking the peacebuilding
reform processes forward.

Speaking here in the Security Council, the Nordic
countries would like to highlight the report's
observations that there is potential to create a new
dynamic between a more forthcoming Security Council
and a better performing PBC. In particular, we support
the recommendations that the Council benefit from
PBC advice at an early stage in the framing of
peacekeeping mandates, when mandates are renewed,
and as drawdown approaches.

We look forward to discussing the report in more
detail at a future date and guarantee that the Nordic
countries will remain committed partners in making the
PBC and the United Nations peacebuilding architecture
a success.

