Mr. Chungong (Cameroon) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, let me in turn commend you for have
placed on the agenda of this Security Council meeting
the item entitled "Women, peace and security".

I should like also to thank the Special Adviser on
Gender Issues and Advancement of Women, Ms. King,
as well as the Executive Director of the United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM), Ms.
Heyzer, for their outstanding contributions to this
debate. I would add to this list Mr. Guehenno, Under-
Secretary-General for the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, whom I wish to thank for the information
he has given us this morning.

Women and girls remain vulnerable in time of
peace and in time of war because of the profound
gender inequalities that still characterize our societies.
In time of conflict, they are targets for all kinds of
violence, in particular rape and other sexual attacks.

They are also the majority of victims of anti-
personnel land mines, and they are the most vulnerable
to the scourge of HIV/AIDS and other sexually
transmitted diseases due to sexual violence and to the
failure of our health-care systems. Their fundamental
rights are continually flouted.

The rights of women and girls are an inalienable,
integral and indivisible part of universal human rights,
and the abuses they endure in situations of armed
conflict are violations of international law applicable to
the rights and to the protection of women and girls as
civilian persons. Also, one cannot stress enough the
need for scrupulous compliance with the provisions of
international humanitarian law and of the various
instruments concerning human rights that guarantee the
protection of women and girls during and after
conflicts. We also believe that it is the duty of Member
States to put an end to impunity and to prosecute those
who are guilty of crimes, exaction and acts of sexual
violence against women and girls. In this regard, my
delegation welcomes the fact that the International
Criminal Court, in accordance with the Rome Statute,
has declared acts of sexual violence in times of conflict
to be a war crime and in some specific circumstances
to be a crime against humanity.

In addition, due to the regrettable events of the
recent past, it seems useful to consider the creation of a
code of conduct for the personnel of peacekeeping
missions and the implementation of a system for the
notification of sexual violence in peacekeeping.

Women are educators for peace both within their
families and in their societies. More and more, they
play an effective role in negotiations and contribute to
the creation of an environment favourable to the
resolution of conflicts and to peace-building.
Therefore, my delegation fully supports the idea of
incorporating the general considerations of gender
equality in peacekeeping missions.

In addition, peacekeeping operations are by
nature multifaceted and complex, involving
humanitarian assistance, political aspects, the holding
of elections, and programmes for disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and reconstruction. All
that requires, for the promotion and maintenance of
international peace and security, a more complete
understanding of the impact of armed conflicts on local
populations, especially on women and children.

For that reason, we welcome the study being
completed by the Secretary-General on following up
and implementing Council resolution 1325 (2000).
That resolution offers a global political framework for
addressing the role of women in the post-conflict
political process. It earnestly appeals to Member States
to take appropriate measures so that women will be
better represented at all levels of decision-making in
national, regional and international institutions and
mechanisms for the prevention, management and
resolution of conflict.

In its declaration of 2000 on the occasion of the
International Women's Day, the Security Council
recognized that women and girls were particularly
affected by the consequences of armed conflict. In
addition, the Council recognized that peace was
inextricably linked to the equality of men and women
and declared that the maintenance and promotion of
peace and security required the equal participation of
women in decision-making. Women should therefore
be able to take their rightful place at the table of
decision-making on questions of peace and security.

In this regard, my country would like to
encourage the appointment of women as special
representatives and envoys in missions to pursue good
offices on behalf of the Secretary-General.
Accordingly, we welcome the supporting and advising
role of the United Nations Development Fund for
Women (UNIFEM) in promoting the participation of
women in the decision-making process at all levels
peacekeeping and peace-building.

It is with genuine interest that we have followed
the preparation of the report of the Secretary-General
on the effects of armed conflict on women and girls.
We have also studied the assessments made on the
ground with the coordination of UNIFEM, which
perfectly complement that study. We believe that the
study is right on target in that it enables the Security
Council and the other principal organs of the United
Nations, particularly the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council, to have at their disposal
new information leading to a better understanding of
the needs of women on questions of peace and security.

We welcome the synergy of efforts made in the
preparation of this study, which is part of the follow-up
to Council resolution 1325 (2000). We support
UNIFEM's evaluation of various conflict situations.
We also encourage priority being given to women and
to peace-building in the framework of cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations.
We hope that the networks of women involved in the
struggle for the peace and security of nations can
contribute to those efforts.

We also welcome the recommendations of the
seminar workshop of UNIFEM's consultations on
Central Africa, which took place in my country, at
Douala, from 28 to 30 May 2002. In this context,
networks and organizations of the women of Central
Africa for peace have asked the Economic Community
of Central African States to strengthen its support and
collaboration with them in order to ensure the greater
participation of women in the management of conflicts
and in peace-building in the subregion.

Accordingly, in its sixteenth ministerial meeting,
the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa recommended the
creation of a network of women of Central Africa for
peace with a view to involving them in ongoing peace
negotiations on Central African conflicts. In this
regard, I would like to mention the remarkable role
played by women in the recent inter-Congolese
negotiations on the political situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which took place in Sun City.

In conclusion, the delegation of Cameroon awaits
with interest the final text of the Secretary-General's
report on women, girls, peace and security, to be
published in October 2002. Cameroon hopes that
today's debate will strengthen the efforts of the United

Nations system to improve the conditions of all
women.

