Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): We thank the
Deputy Secretary-General, Mr. Fedotov and Mr. Grono
for their briefings. And I pay tribute to Nadia in the
same spirit as others have today. Her testimony is
very confronting because of its reality, but it is also
confronting to us in our reality in the Council.

When I came to this place 35 years ago, we spent
a lot of time elaborating and increasing the intricate
array of documents to protect human rights. Thirty-five
years later, we are dealing with the reality that slavery
is alive, well and living in our world. We have made
some progress in normative instruments, and we have
gone backwards in our practices. That is the horrible
reality that we are facing today. We therefore thank the
United States for bringing the Council's attention to
this issue. We thank Nadia for her bravery in having
shared with us, in harrowing detail, the horrors that
have been visited upon her, her family and her people.
We are reminded that similar treatment has been meted
out by Boko Haram and to the women caught up in the
conflicts in South Sudan, the Central African Republic
and elsewhere.

We share the revulsion at the violations perpetrated
by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant's (ISIL)
against thousands of Yazidis, in particular women and
children, and the institution of what is apparently a
programme of mass slavery. As Nadia has reminded
us, some women and girls are simply given away
as gifts. What is particularly concerning about this
issue is that it can be self-perpetuating. Trafficking
exacerbates conflict and conflict exacerbates
trafficking. Trafficking, as we have heard, comes in
many forms and has many purposes. It is also prevalent
in the Western world. It often has a gender dimension,
disproportionately affecting women as well as children.
Trafficked victims are used as combatants and sex
slaves, forced into marriage, or used as forced labour
on land and at sea. People become chattel and a source
of revenue that funds conflict or terrorism.

We recognize the difficulty of dealing effectively
with this phenomenon, particularly in the context
of conflicts that are themselves intractable and
deeply resistant to international intervention. This is
particularly so in areas where the rule of the State is
ineffective, as is the case in the worst instances we
have heard today. However, it is a phenomenon that
we must address, including through more effective
conflict prevention. Investigation and accountability
are paramount. Acts associated with trafficking,
including those committed by ISIL, may constitute
crimes under the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court. Such acts can amount to crimes against
humanity, genocide or war crimes. Investigation and
accountability measures should be taken at both the
domestic and international levels, and there should
be an increased readiness to work together when
trafficking crosses borders. Member States must also
ensure that appropriate services are in place to address
both physical and psychological trauma experienced by
victims and their families.

Like others, we urge States to join the Palermo
Protocol, which sets out a comprehensive framework
to prevent and address trafficking in persons. We also
encourage support for political-level initiatives like
the recently established International Parliamentary
Coalition for Victims of Sexual Slavery. New Zealand
Member of Parliament Melissa Lee is one of the five
founding members of that initiative. Such initiatives
send a powerful message to perpetrators and victims
that there is political attention on and condemnation of
such acts.

We wish to acknowledge the value of civil
society actors, who play a vital role in disseminating
information to populations about their human rights
and who engage with Governments on the ground. As
others have said, we need to ensure that the United
Nations itself does not fuel trafficking in persons. Our
presence should provide an assurance of protection,
and our ability to do that is vital to the success of our
operations. We support the continued implementation
of the Human Rights Up Front initiative, the United
Nations Human Rights Due Diligence Policy, and the
Secretary-General's zero-tolerance approach to sexual
exploitation and abuse.

Finally, we believe that there is scope to explore
how the Council can better address this issue in the
context of improved situational awareness and the
protection of civilians. The Council should continue to
monitor this issue, acknowledge it as an increasingly
important dimension of conflict, and be ready to take
action to prevent it when it is possible to do so.

