The President (spoke in French): I will now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Cameroon.

I wish to first thank the Secretary-General, who
came this afternoon to personally introduce his report
on the impact of armed conflict on women and girls, as
well as on the role of women in peace-building. In
doing this, he confirmed, if that were necessary, his
firm commitment and determination to help eradicate
the causes of conflicts and their consequences for the
most vulnerable civilian populations, particularly
women and children.

I also wish to pay a well deserved tribute to
Ms. Angela King, Special Adviser on Gender Issues
and Advancement of Women, and to Ms. Noeleen
Heyzer, Director of UNIFEM, for their major
contribution to the preparation of this instructive and
thorough report. In addition, I would like to pay tribute
to Ms. Carolyn Hannan, who is present with us at this
discussion.
The Beijing Declaration and Plan of Action quite
correctly underscored that the consequences of armed
conflicts and other conflicts were among the major
concerns for women in today's world. The Security
Council reaffirmed the role of women in the peace
processes at the celebration of International Women's
Day on 8 March 2000. It was along these lines that for
the first time it devoted its work to the consideration of
the question of women, peace and security. In doing so,
it clearly highlighted the specific situation of women
and girls in the context of the protection of civilians in
armed conflicts.

On 31 October 2000, the Council unanimously
adopted resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace and
security. The goal of that resolution was, and remains,
to ensure that women and girls in conflict situations are
protected and that those committing acts of violence
against them in conflict situations are prosecuted, and
that women may, on equal footing, occupy their proper
place when it comes to taking decisions on questions of
peace and security.

The Government of Cameroon fully endorses this
important objective, which is fully in line with the
efforts it has made on the national level to provide
protection for women and girls in situations of armed
conflict. I note here that this dynamic programme for
the advancement of women in a broad range of
activities associated with peace and security is backed
by a collection of normative texts. Cameroon has
acceded to the four 1949 Geneva Conventions, which
deal with the protection of victims of war and of
women and girls in situations of armed conflict, and to
most instruments relating to human rights. It is also a
signatory of the statute that created the International
Criminal Court and is preparing to ratify it.

We are therefore genuinely pleased to welcome
the report of the Secretary-General in document
S/2002/ 1154. The recommendations therein take stock
of the strategies to be implemented to promote
partnership between women and men in order to
enhance the effectiveness of the multidimensional
peacekeeping operations.

Cameroon and the Central African region have
played an active part in the preparation of the proposals
in this report. On the initiative of UNIFEM, and in
conjunction with the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa, a
regional consultation on the topic "Parity and
Development: participation of women in Central
Africa" was held in Douala from 22 to 30 May 2002. It
provided an opportunity for regional actors, women
and civil society in particular, to make forceful
suggestion about ways and means of promoting
implementation of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000).

The work done at Douala resulted in the adoption
of a regional plan of action for which follow-up will be
provided by a group comprised of representatives of
Governments and civil society. That plan of action
identifies a set of problems that underlie conflicts in
the region and their consequences for women,
consequences associated with, among other things,
their marginalization, the unlawful circulation of
weapons, and failure to comply with relevant national
and international legal instruments.

The Douala plan of action advocates a number of
measures that if implemented would significantly
improve the situation of women vis-a-vis peace and
security. It proposes, among other things, that
consciousness-raising campaigns be organized to
combat impunity; that the networks of Central African
women be reactivated in order to engage in activities to
promote peace in the countries of the sub-region; that a
study be carried out on traditional conflict management
practices; that the weapons-for-development
programme be implemented; that a dialogue be
organized with men in uniform and militia personnel;
and that peaceful demonstrations be organized in
favour of peace and security.

Before I conclude, I wish to commend the Arria-
formula meeting of 23 October 2002 on the question of
women, peace and security, which made it possible to
hear some particularly moving testimony concerning
the situation actually experienced in the field by some
of the participants. That meeting was also an
opportunity for us to engage in a profound process of
thinking along with civil society about ways of
enhancing the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).

The role played by women in conflict prevention,
in encouraging reconciliation and helping to rebuild
what, alas, is destroyed by conflicts has been very
clearly described. The Arria-formula meeting,
skillfully chaired by Minister Lee, produced a number
of recommendations relating, among other things, to
the incorporation of gender specific measures in the
mandates of peacekeeping missions, and the real
participation of women in peace negotiations. All of
these measures converged to a great extent with those
presented in the report of the Secretary-General which
my delegation supports unreservedly. I am convinced
that were these measures to be implemented, they
would lead to genuine advancement for women and
greater appreciation of their role, and thus, to their full
and complete involvement in the promotion of peace
and security.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council. I give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Ivan
Simonovic', President of the Economic and Social
Council.

