Mr. Suarez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Venezuela is grateful for
the presence and briefings ofDeputy Secretary-General
Jan Eliasson; Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC); Mr. Nick Grono, Chief Executive Officer of
the Freedom Fund; and, especially, Ms. Nadia Murad
Basee Taha, whose statement, I dare say, expresses
the silenced voices of thousands of women and girls
who even today are the victims of such despicable and
abominable acts.

Human trafficking is a transborder crime that
spares no country or region of the world. The different
causes and motivations that favour that crime have been
exacerbated in recent years as a result of situations
of armed conflict in various parts of the planet,
particularly in the Middle East and North Africa. The
mass displacements of civilian populations affected
by situations of armed conflict increase people's
vulnerability to this reprehensible crime, especially
that of women, girls, boys and adolescents. In addition,
it has been observed that human trafficking is being
used by extremist groups and terrorists as part of their
strategy for financing their criminal activities.

According to the 2014 Global Report on Traflicking
in Persons, published by UNODC, according to
information compiled in the course of the preparation
of the report, between 2011 and 2013 eight countries
around the world reported human trafficking victims
from Syria, while it was recognized that prior to
2011, when the conflict in that country began, it was
extremely rare to find Syrian victims of that crime.

From that we should be able to conclude
that, unfortunately, the training, outfitting and
encouragement of non-State actors whose actions are
based in violent extremism aimed at dismantling States
for politically motivated reasons serve to promote the
activities of groups such as the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham, the Al-Nusra Front and the Army of
Conquest. As such, they lead to the perpetration of
a range of atrocities, war crimes and crimes against
humanity, especially aimed at those most vulnerable,
such as women and children.

In that regard, we again reiterate our call to all
actors of the international community to fully respect
the provisions of international law and the resolutions
of the Security Council concerning the prohibition
of supplying weapons and financial and logistical
support to such armed groups, in order for there to be
an effective decrease in the capacity of those non-State
actors, and therefore a decline in the likelihood of
human trafficking and the exploitation of populations
at risk.

The grave humanitarian situation of the refugees,
internally displaced persons and migrants who are the
product of the tragedy of war, political destabilization,
poverty, terrorism and the generalized violence that is
lashing so many regions of Africa and the Middle East
makes them potential victims of human trafficking.
Another aspect that, in our view, furthers the activities
of criminal groups that profit from human trafficking,
concerns increasingly restrictive and exclusive
immigration policies and the lack of channels for
regulated migration and family reunification, as well
as the lack of regulated access to the labour markets for
asylum seekers, refugees and migrants. As Nadia asked
the international community: please do not close the
doors to migrants fleeing the the wars besetting various
countries in Africa and the Middle East. Migrants
fleeing violence are not the cause of terrorism, as some
politicians think, but rather the result of this despicable
political and military practice.

While we welcome the initiative of convening
this debate in the Security Council, we nonetheless
believe that efforts aimed at the effective prevention
and eradication of this crime require broad, democratic
spaces that ensure the full participation of all Member
States, in order to achieve coordination and synergy
across all the relevant United Nations agencies with
expertise in this area, along with the various regional
and subregional mechanisms.

We consider it of particular importance to help
States in situations of conflict and post-conflict to
strengthen their institutional capacities in order to fulfil
their legal commitments and obligations to prevent and
combat human trafficking. In that regard, we recognize
the important role ofthe United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and the Inter-agency Coordinating Group
against Trafficking Persons in fostering coordination
and cooperation in the global fight to combat human
trafficking, as well as that of other entities in the
United Nations system and other intergovernmental
organizations in line with their respective mandates.

Finally, Venezuela reiterates its commitment to meet
its obligations under the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime, the Protocol
to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons
and other international legal instruments concerning
this issue.

