Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I have the honour
to address the Security Council on behalf of the States
members of the Southern African Development
Community (SADC), namely, Botswana, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Lesotho, Malawi,
Mauritius, Mozambique, Namibia, Seychelles, South
Africa, Swaziland, the United Republic of Tanzania,
Zambia, Zimbabwe and my own country, Angola.

Allow me at the outset to commend you, Madam
President, for including this very important topic in
your agenda and highlighting it through this debate.

We thank the Under-Secretary-General and
Executive Director of the United Nations Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women), Ms. Bachelet; the representative of the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security;
the representative of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations; and Ambassador Kapambwe, President of
the Economic and Social Council, for their briefings to
the Council this morning. We also take this opportunity
to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2011/598*).

SADC is encouraged by the progress achieved so
far in the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
We feel that important groundwork has been laid for a
long-term effort by the United Nations system towards
the full implementation of that resolution. We welcome
the increased political commitment to gender equality
and women's empowerment in peace processes. It is
important that we maintain the momentum to sustain
the gains made to date. It is also necessary that we all
make concerted efforts to fully realize the objectives of
resolution 1325 (2000).

Achieving gender equality and empowering
women are two of the key principles that propelled the
founding of SADC, as reflected in the SADC Treaty.
The SADC Protocol on Gender and Development of
2008 put measures in place to ensure that women
obtain equal representation and participation in all key
decision-making positions by 2015.

SADC is concerned about the widespread and
systematic sexual violence to which women and girls
continue to be subjected in conflict situations, and it
condemns the use of sexual and gender-based violence
against women and children. It is our collective view
that all parties to armed conflict should respect the
regional mechanisms and international laws applicable
to the rights and protection of women and children.

SADC has developed a strategy to address sexual
violence against women and girls, particularly in
conflict and post-conflict situations, as well as a
framework for mainstreaming gender within the SADC
peace and security architecture. SADC member States
have made progress in mainstreaming gender
initiatives, especially with regard to the training of
trainers on gender-mainstreaming. In addition to that,
SADC has initiated an advocacy strategy on informal
cross-border trade, which provides a clear policy on
areas of legislative action necessary for creating a
favourable and enabling environment for women in
trade, especially informal cross-border trade. We are
now witnessing positive results, especially in the
creation of new business opportunities, expanded
markets, new business connections and capacity-
building for business women.

SADC remains committed to efforts to promote
the empowerment and advancement of women.
However, despite some great steps towards that goal,
women remain largely underrepresented in key
decision-making structures and in peacemaking and
peacebuilding processes. The region believes that,
when given the opportunity, women will become active
agents of change and play a critical role in the recovery
and reintegration of families after conflict. Women are
also instrumental in bringing about reconciliation and
democracy in post-conflict societies. The recent award
of the Nobel Peace Prize is a good example of that.

I would like to take this opportunity to stress that
SADC attaches great importance to the creation of the
new United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women, UN-Women. We express our
complete availability to work towards the success of
that new entity. SADC believes that UN-Women can
play a vital role in helping developing countries
acquire the skills required to enhance meaningful
participation in decision-making and peacebuilding
processes. Support of women's education in that
respect will be an important prerequisite to achieving
that objective.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate SADC's
solid commitment to the full and effective
implementation of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000). The international community as a whole has an
obligation to women the world over, to ensure that
their rights are protected and that their place in all
aspects of the peace process is assured. It is their equal
participation and their full involvement that will
contribute to the effective maintenance and promotion
of sustainable peace and security.
While progress has been registered in the
implementation of the resolution, greater coordinated
efforts are required to achieve the goal of its full
implementation. In that connection, SADC welcomes
the Council's adoption this morning of the presidential
statement (S/PRST/2011/20).

