Mr. Alghabra (Canada): It is my distinct pleasure
to participate in this open debate on sexual violence
in conflict. Let me begin by expressing my gratitude
to Deputy Secretary-General Mohammed and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila Patten, for
their briefings, and to our Peruvian counterparts for the
work they have put into the organization of this year's
debate. I also want to sincerely thank Ms. Sultana for her
courageous work and her powerful testimony. Canada
is supportive of her activism and stands with her.

Today I am pleased to speak on behalf of the Group
of Friends of Women, Peace and Security, an informal
network of 54 interested Member States chaired by
Canada and representing all five regional groups of
the United Nations. We are outraged by the persistent
and widespread occurrence of sexual violence in armed
conflict by State and non-State actors. Sexual violence
is being used as a tactic of warfare and a tactic of
terrorism and is a flagrant and unacceptable violation
of international humanitarian law and of international
human rights law.

Among the many concerning country situations
documented in the latest report of the Secretary-
General (S/2018/250), the sexual violence inflicted
against the Rohingya is especially appalling. It
demands a swift and concerted response from the
international community, including in meeting the
needs of the survivors of such violations and bringing
those responsible to justice. Above all, we must do more
to prevent sexual violence in conflict from occurring
in the first place. We encourage the Security Council
to give due consideration to the early warning signs of
sexual violence in its monitoring of conflict situations.

Indeed, preventing sexual Violence is part of
conflict prevention and sustaining peace. We must
ensure that related expertise, including gender advisers
and women protection advisers, are provided with the
access and resources needed to fulfil their critical
tasks in peacekeeping operations. Cooperation with
local civil society organizations can also help identify
precursors, risks and prevention and protection
strategies for sexual violence in conflict. Furthermore,
the implementation ofjoint communiques, action plans
and national policies to curb conflict-related sexual
violence play an essential role and we are encouraged
by the progress of a number of States in this regard.

Justice and accountability are means of prevention.
Indeed, a climate of impunity discourages reporting,
undermines assistance and abets further violations. We
therefore call for accountability for crimes of sexual
violence in armed conflict. This in turn requires effective
investigation and documentation, legal assistance for
the victims of sexual violence, and adequate legal and
evidentiary frameworks to prosecute such crimes.

Moreover, accountability for and the prevention of
sexual violence should be included in peace agreements,
including, where appropriate, in transitional justice
mechanisms promoting justice, truth, reparations and
measures to prevent their recurrence. Amnesties should
not be granted to perpetrators of sexual violence, and
sexual violence should be explicitly prohibited by the
terms ofceasefires and peace agreements. We recognize
the invaluable contribution of the Team of Experts on
the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict to
building national capacities to enhance accountability
for conflict-related sexual violence. We welcome the
landmark ruling of the International Criminal Court
in the case of Prosecutor v. Bosco Ntaganda, and note
the recent surrendering of Al Hassan Ag Abdoul Aziz
Ag Mohamed Ag Mahmoud, wanted for crimes against
humanity and war crimes in Mali, including rape and
sexual slavery.

In contrast, it is disconcerting that not a single
member of Da'esh or Boko Haram has been prosecuted
for sexual Violence crimes to date. We emphatically
call on the Security Council to explicitly include sexual
violence as a designation criterion within United Nations
sanctions regimes where such crimes are persistently
perpetrated. Relevant sanctions committees should also
be supported by dedicated gender and sexual violence
expertise and draw on information from the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict.

In all our efforts to ensure accountability, we must
not lose sight of the needs and rights of survivors of
sexual violence in conflict. Greater efforts are needed
at all levels to ensure that survivors have access to the
full range of livelihood, social, legal, psychosocial and
non-discriminatory medical services to promote their
rehabilitation and reintegration into their communities.

Fundamentally, we are of the View that systemic
gender-based discrimination, such as the exclusion of
women from political life, economic marginalization
and discriminatory systems ofboth formal and informal
law, is conducive to sexual violence in conflict. Any
serious effort to address sexual violence in conflict
must confront this fact.

Lastly, we condemn in the strongest terms cases
of sexual exploitation and abuse in peacekeeping
operations and in international assistance, as well
as sexual harassment within the United Nations.
We encourage the Secretary-General to ensure that
common standards are developed and implemented
across all United Nations entities to better prevent and
respond to all cases of sexual exploitation and abuse.
Please allow me to make some additional points as
Canada's representative.

We meet at a time of great uncertainty in the
world, where an astounding proportion of the global
population is living with conflict every day. These
people are not living at the outer edges of conflict,
but are fully immersed in the ugliness of war. The
year 2017 was an alarming reminder of how the rise
in conflict and violent extremism continues to trigger
patterns of sexual violence. The disproportionate effect
of violent extremism on women and girls is evident in
many conflicts. It was especially brought to the fore
of Canadians' minds when we heard of the terrible
atrocities carried out by Da'esh, including against
Yazidis, who suffered a particularly high level of
violence. As a result, Canada made a commitment last
year to providing assistance to over 1,200 vulnerable
Yazidi women and children and other survivors of
Da'esh by resettling them in Canada. This was an
important decision that we can be proud of.

But sexual violence in conflict continues around
the world. As the Secretary-General highlights in his
report, "[w]ars are still being fought on and over the
bodies of women" (S/2018/250, para. 9). Women in
conflict stand as courageous survivors of violence,
not victims. We must harness their resilience, their
determination and their innovative solutions to find
ways to end conflict. We commend the courageous
women who lead us out of conflict, but we must resolve
collectively to ensure that these crimes stop.

Canada is particularly alarmed by the plight of
Rohingya women and girls in Myanmar and Bangladesh.
For the first time this year, the Secretary-General's
report specifically names the Myanmar Armed Forces
for engaging in patterns of sexual violence in conflict.
Women there have talked about suffering sexual
trauma at the hands of both the Myanmar military and

those who support it. Canada has already sanctioned
Major General Maung Maung Soe under the Justice for
Victims of Corrupt Foreign Officials Act for his role
in the oppression, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity committed against the Rohingya minority
in Myanmar.

Even after fleeing Myanmar, many women and
girls continue to face gender-based violence. Their
movements within refugee camps are often restricted
for fear of being abducted for trafficking or forced
marriage, harassment and sexual violence. As
Ms. Patten reported to the Council in December 2017,
every woman or girl she spoke with during her visit to
the camps and settlements in Bangladesh

"reported having either endured or witnessed
sexual violence... rape, gang-rape by multiple
soldiers, forced public nudity and humiliation,
and sexual slavery in military captivity... There
are indications that this pattern of widespread and
systematic sexual violence has been used as a tool
of dehumanization and collective punishment"
(S/PV8133, p. 4).

I thank Ms. Patten and the rest of today's briefers
for being a voice for survivors and for their courage
and leadership. I cannot emphasize enough that these
horrific actions must be addressed directly by the
international community, for there can be no impunity
for those who inflict such callous and indiscriminate
violence against a civilian population.

Rape has been used as a weapon of war against the
Rohingya. Our briefers have spoken of this heinous
violence and Canada's Special Envoy, Mr. Bob Rae, also
spoke of this tragic reality in the report he published
earlier this month. All United Nations and international
institutions must be mobilized to bring the perpetrators
to justice. Today's debate is of critical importance. We
are hopeful that together we can find a way to ease the
suffering of all those affected by this crisis.

Through its feminist international assistance policy,
Canada is supporting UN-Women to rapidly deploy
experts to ensure that international organizations and
transitional justice processes are able to investigate and
prosecute incidents of sexual and gender-based violence
in conflict-affected States. This includes deploying
a sexual and gender-based violence investigator to
the Independent International Fact-finding Mission
on Myanmar.

Accountability for crimes of this nature must be our
priority. That is why we urge the Security Council to
systematically incorporate sexual violence as a specific
designation criterion in United Nations sanctions
regimes where such crimes are persistently perpetrated.
It is why we call on the Council to ensure that the issues
of women's rights and sexual violence are consistently
and adequately addressed when establishing and
renewing the mandates of United Nations peacekeeping
and political missions.

Among its five objectives, Canada's national
action plan on women and peace and security focuses
on preventing, responding to and ending impunity
for sexual and gender-based violence and sexual
exploitation and abuse. It seeks to meet the specific
needs of women and girls in humanitarian settings,
including the upholding oftheir sexual rights and access
to sexual and reproductive health services. Through
our action plan, we want to empower women and girls
economically, socially and politically so that their voice
can be amplified. We know they are powerful agents of
change. Our duty is to remove the barriers of oppression
and discrimination. Societies in which women and girls
have an equal voice and equal rights benefit from equal
opportunities and live in equal safety and security are
far more likely to reject sexual violence.

Canada is grateful to Special Representative Patten
for her efforts to raise alarm about sexual violence
trends globally. We appreciate the work done by the
United Nations Team of Experts on the Rule of Law
and Sexual Violence in Conflict. We also thank civil
society organizations - many of which are represented
here today - for the ongoing good work they are doing
to stop sexual violence and hold its perpetrators to
account. Civil society and the women's movement are
the backbone of our societies.

Canada calls for justice for the survivors of such
horrific crimes. Our response ought to be holistic and
centred on the survivors. We must support communities
in Myanmar and in Bangladesh, but most importantly
we must ensure that reproductive health, psychosocial
and legal services are available to these communities, as
well as the sensitive and coordinated documentation of
cases. We must act together within the United Nations
and other institutions to defend the rights of all people
to live free of sexual violence and abuse.

