The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Secretary-General, Ministers and other distinguished
representatives present in the Security Council
Chamber. Their presence today underscores the
importance of the subject matter under discussion.

In accordance with rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Afghanistan, Albania, Argentina,
Australia, Bangladesh, Botswana, Brazil, Cambodia,
Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Cyprus, Djibouti, Ecuador,
Egypt, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Georgia,
Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, India, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Morocco,
Myanmar, Namibia, the Netherlands, Nigeria, Norway,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Portugal, Qatar, the Republic of
Korea, Romania, Rwanda, Serbia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sri Lanka, the Sudan, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine,
the United Arab Emirates, Uruguay and Viet Nam to
participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Pramila
Patten, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict; Dr. Denis Mukwege,
Nobel Peace Prize laureate; Ms. Nadia Murad, Nobel
Peace Prize laureate; Ms. Amal Clooney, barrister;
and Ms. Inas Miloud, Co-Founder and Director of the
Tamazight Women's Movement.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following to participate in this meeting: Mr. Robert
Mardini, Permanent Observer of the International
Committee of the Red Cross to the United Nations;
Her Excellency Ms. Mara Marinaki, Principle Adviser
on Gender and the Implementation of United Nations
Security Council Resolution 1325 (2000) on Women
and Peace and Security of the European External Action
Service; Ms. Clare Hutchinson, Special Representative
of the NATO Secretary-General for Women, Peace and
Security; Her Excellency Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed,
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the United
Nations; and Her Excellency Mrs. Jeanne d'Arc Byaje,
Permanent Observer of the Economic Community of
Central African States to the United Nations.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/20l9/280, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual violence.

Iwish to also draw the attention ofCouncil members
to document S/20l9/313, which contains a letter dated
ll April 2019 from the Permanent Representative
of Germany to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.

I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Anto'nio Guterres.

