Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French):
First of all, we would like to congratulate you, Sir, for
taking the initiative of holding a thematic debate on
this important subject. Until recently, the role of
women in peace and security has been virtually absent
from the Council's discussions.

I also would like to express the appreciation of
the Government of Canada to the Secretary-General for
his ongoing efforts to integrate a gender perspective
into the work of the United Nations. I would also like
to say how much we appreciate the participation today
by Assistant Secretary-General Angela King. Ms.
King, we hope that your presence here will become a
more regular occurrence. Finally, we are also very
pleased to welcome to the Council Ms. Noeleen
Heyser, Executive Director of the United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM).

(spoke in English)

The subject of today's meeting is an important
element of the Security Council's ongoing work on the
protection of civilians in situations of armed conflict.
Canada advanced this theme as a central component of
its Council membership because of the disproportionate
toll contemporary armed conflict takes on civilians -
the majority of these being women and children. As the
Secretary-General himself noted a little earlier, modern
conflict no longer respects the line between the military
and the civilian. Civilians - particularly woman and
children - are not the incidental casualties of war;
they are now the specific and deliberate targets. This
was also a theme of the recently concluded first
International Conference on War-affected Children,
which was hosted by Canada in Winnipeg last month.

War does have differentiated impacts on men and
women and on boys and girls, and it is good that this is
finally being recognized. With resolutions 1265 (1999)
and 1296 (2000) on the protection of civilians,
resolutions 1261 (1999) and 1314 (2000) on children
and armed conflict, and the press statement made by
the Council President earlier this year on International
Women's Day, the Security Council has begun to make
progress in acknowledging these differentials.

We increasingly recognize the need to craft
gender-sensitive measures to ensure that women and
men alike benefit fully from efforts to build peace, but
we need to go further. We must also ensure that our
focus is not restricted to issues of the victimization of
women, vital as it is to grapple with them. We must
address ourselves as well to the positive contribution
that women - irrespective of their age, class,
ethnicity, race or any other status - can and do make
to conflict prevention and to post-conflict peace-
building.

In resolution 1265 (1999), the Security Council
requested the Secretary-General to ensure that United
Nations peace support personnel have appropriate
training, including in gender-related issues. As my
colleague from the United Kingdom noted earlier, in
support of this effort, the Governments of Canada and
the United Kingdom have developed gender training
material for military and civilian personnel. By seeking
to heighten gender sensitivity across a range of issues,
from mine-action programming to the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to the drafting of new laws and
constitutions, this practical initiative complements
normative efforts to ensure equitable representation of
women in peace support operations, codes of conduct
and so on. This initiative gives guidance on how to
respond to the different experiences and needs of
women in armed conflict, including respect for and
promotion of women's human rights. Canada looks
forward to working with other Member States in
advancing this work.

Peace support operations need new skills, new
attitudes and new ways of working to create the
environment in which such training finds fertile
ground. The deployment of women in the field -
including as peacekeeping and civilian police
personnel, and as special representatives of the
Secretary-General and special envoys, as a number of
us have said - will deliver such innovative thinking
and methods of work.

Missions should also include experts to serve as
focal points on gender issues or, where possible, be
equipped with full units to ensure that gender
perspectives are integrated into mission activities.
Gender considerations must likewise be central to
decisions about the design and delivery of
humanitarian assistance.

Women and girls are profoundly affected by
conflict, whether they be caught up in its midst, in
flight or in camps, dealing with its aftermath or
reconstructing homes and societies. Conflict routinely
imposes new burdens and changes women's roles, as
Executive Director Heyzer said so eloquently.

Women also experience personal insecurity
differently than men. For example, women in refugee
camps are more vulnerable to violence if the camps are
not designed with their particular needs in mind, as was
so graphically evident in that powerful video we saw at
the beginning of this meeting. Gender-sensitive
humanitarian assistance can mitigate the different and
negative effects conflicts have on women, especially
when it takes into account changes wrought by crises,
for example by recognizing new responsibilities of
women as heads of households.

We welcome recent initiatives, such as the Inter-
Agency Standing Committee's policy statement for the
integration of a gender perspective in humanitarian
assistance, the International Committee of the Red
Cross's project on women and war, and the decision to
mainstream a gender perspective into the Sphere
standards. We look forward to the implementation of
recent initiatives in this area, in particular with respect
to the field and at headquarters, and to their evaluation.
More globally, important steps are being taken to
address human rights and humanitarian law violations,
including women's human rights, and to end the culture
of impunity.

The Statutes of the International Criminal
Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, both
of which list rape as a crime against humanity,
establish key precedents. In addition, the Rwanda
Tribunal listed rape as a war crime in internal armed
conflict and its first decision was precedent-setting, as
it recognized rape as a tool of genocide.

The International Criminal Court will be a
particularly important new tool for addressing abuses
against women, having as it does a mandate to
prosecute not only rape, but also sexual slavery, forced
pregnancy, enforced sterilization and persecution on
the basis of gender. In addition, the Court's staff will
include judges with expertise in violence against
women. I am pleased to announce that Canadian
legislation to allow for the full implementation of the
Rome Statute came into effect yesterday. We urge
others that have not done so to sign and ratify the
Statute so that this new instrument can come into force
as soon as possible.

The continuing work of civil society on the issue
of women and peace and security deserves special
attention. Earlier this year, Canada and Norway
commissioned Mrs. Graca Machel to conduct a
comprehensive review of her study on children. In the
Machel Review 1996-2000, she makes a poignant call
for more protection for women and girls. We echo the
support expressed by others around the table for a
study of the impact on armed conflict on women.

As Ambassador Durrant and others have
mentioned, yesterday we benefited from a very useful
exchange of ideas with leading women's organizations.
The Security Council should continue to collaborate
with such organizations, whose work on the ground
contributes directly to protecting women, promoting
their human rights and providing for their active
participation in peace processes.

Any attempt to rebuild democracy and
governance in the wake of violent conflict must include
gender considerations. Women's full and free
participation at all levels in all phases, from relief to
development, must be promoted. Without it, the long-
term sustainability of peace settlements will suffer
because vital voices will not have been heard;
opportunities for the constructive participation of
women will have been lost; and 50 per cent of the
talent available for that task will have been squandered.

In Burundi, Canada financed the participation of
women in the early stages of the peace process. We
warmly welcomed UNIFEM's efforts as well to sustain
women's participation in spite of the resistance to it by
some. While this was an improvement, it was not
enough. Women's participation is vital at the pre-
negotiation, negotiation and implementation phases.
Let us heed the request of Burundian women that they
be fully involved in the implementation of the peace
agreement, at all levels in all post-conflict institutions.

Canada believes that gender perspectives should
be integral elements of the Security Council's work,
including in the future reporting to the Council on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. As we
proceed with the implementation of the Brahimi report
on United Nations peace operations, we should also
ensure that gender perspectives are fully integrated. In
addition, Canada is pleased that the Lessons Learned
Unit of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
has completed its report on gender and peacekeeping.
As Ms. King rightly and wryly observed, we hope that
we are really going to learn the lessons of the lessons
learned exercise. We strongly encourage the Security
Council to consider doing so. We draw particular
attention to recommendations on monitoring,
evaluation and accountability.

(spoke in French)

The issue of women and peace and security
requires the Security Council's sustained attention. The
Security Council has all the authority and tools
necessary to make a difference. Other interlocutors
within and outside the United Nations system will be
vital to this endeavour and must be engaged. Canada is
committed to working with others who share this
interest to advance this agenda and ensure the full
mainstreaming of women in the pursuit of peace and
security.

