Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the Rwandan presidency for convening
this important open debate. It is particularly relevant
that our debate is being chaired by Minister Louise
Mushikiwabo, to whom we convey our thanks. We
also thank the Secretary-General for the presentation
of his report (S/2013/149). We are very aware of his
commitment to combating sexual violence in armed
conflict.

We also welcome Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura and
commend her on the great work she is carrying out in
her role. We thank her for the compelling presentation
of her report on her recent visit to Somalia and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It demonstrates how
extensive and serious, at least in those two countries,
sexual crimes, including rape as a weapon of war, are.

We also thank Ms. Saran Keita Diakite for her
moving statement.

We recognize the importance of mediators and
envoys in mediation, ceasefire, peace and preventive
diplomacy processes engaging with the parties to a
conflict in dialogue on sexual violence, and for such
violence to be addressed in peace agreements. We
agree with the recommendation of the Secretary-
General that sexual violence should be included among
prohibited acts and reflected as specific provisions in
peace agreements related to security arrangements and
transitional justice. It should be recalled, in that regard,
that the Organization has developed guidelines for
mediators on how to address sexual violence in armed
conflicts. Those should be included in the training and
orientation of teams that negotiate ceasefires and peace
agreements.

We have participated in several informative
events conducted by agencies of the system and
non-governmental organizations that work in areas of
armed conflict. The stories they tell are frightening and
reinforce the urgent need for victims and survivors of
sexual Violence to have access to medical services and
HIV-related treatment and care. It is also necessary to
address the difficult situations faced by survivors who
have children and by the children born as a result of
rape, who then become victims of stigma and social
exclusion.

We are highly aware of the priority that must
be given to developing and building the capacity of
national institutions, in particular the health, judicial
and social welfare systems, as well as local civil society
networks. That is certainly an area where public-private
partnerships are of particular relevance.

It is also worth mentioning the critical role of
women's civil society organizations in supporting
the prevention and resolution of armed conflicts and
in peacebuilding. That was precisely the approach
taken in the presidential statement (S/PRST/2012/23)
adopted under our presidency of the Security Council
in October 2012. In that statement, as part of the fight
against impunity for perpetrators of sexual and gender-
based crimes, the Council categorically condemned
all violations of international law committed against
women and girls in armed conflict and post-conflict
situations.

Guatemala has supported without reservation the
work that the Security Council has been carrying out
for several years now aimed at strengthening collective
action to combat sexual Violence in armed conflict,
in particular through the adoption of resolutions 1820
(2008), 1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010). Now, as elected
members of the Council, we find that our commitment
has been further deepened.

In that regard, we are encouraged by the important
change in how sexual violence is being dealt with by
the International Criminal Court, in particular with
respect to the charges against Bosco Ntaganda of
crimes against humanity, rape, sexual slavery and war
crimes. The same could be said about the prosecution
of Jean-Pierre Bemba. Both cases set a precedent
concerning the principle of officers' responsibility
for sexual violence as a war crime and crime against
humanity. That constitutes an important complement
to the work of national courts and mixed tribunals in
the fight against deeply rooted discriminatory practices
that are embedded in a culture of impunity.

In addition, it helps us to combat the perception
that it is useless to denounce the crimes of sexual
violence and contributes to the strengthening of the
administration of justice, whether civil or military,
by holding perpetrators accountable before the law.
Moreover, it also helps to realize specific commitments
on prohibiting sexual violence committed by senior-
ranking officials of armed forces and armed groups,
and promotes the adoption of codes of conduct that
prohibit sexual violence.

We believe that another step in the right direction
is the judgment in the case of Thomas Lubanga Dyilo.
Although he was not charged with crimes of sexual
slavery and rape, the judgment against him includes
specific guidance on the reparations to be made to the
victims ofsexual violence, thus making possible specific
reparation for the immediate and long-term harm
experienced by the Victims. That act of international
justice affords hope, dignity and compensation to the
victims and enforces accountability for the perpetrators.

What I have referred to leads us to conclude that
the annex to the report of the Secretary-General, which
lists the parties and individuals credibly suspected of
committing or being responsible for systematic rape
and other forms of sexual violence during conflict and
post-conflict situations, is useful, and that we must
increase the pressure on those responsible for those
acts and, when appropriate, submit their names to the
relevant committees.

