Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka: Today marks the first
time - and a welcome opportunity - that a Head of
Government is presiding over the Council's meeting on
women and peace and security. I thank His Excellency
the President of Spain for presiding over this debate
today, for the priority Spain has given to this issue since
joining the Council, and for Spain's championing of
gender equality for many years. I also thank the United
Kingdom for its leadership on women and peace and
security in the Council.

I would like to recognize our three civil society
briefers, Julienne Lusenge from the Democratic
Republic of Congo, Yanar Mohammad from Iraq, and
Alaa Murabit from Libya. The voices of women leaders
and front-line activists for peace are rare in this forum,
but I suggest they are the most important voices that will
be heard today. Our work with human rights defenders
has taught us that they are the true unsung heroes.

Friday's announcement of the awarding of this year's
Nobel Peace Prize to the Tunisian National Dialogue
Quartet underlined civil society's vital contribution
to promoting reconciliation and human rights, and we
celebrate this recognition. Such peacemakers include
the vibrant women's movement, which continues to
work tirelessly to safeguard some of the gains made
in the context of the Arab Spring and elsewhere, and
realize justice and reconciliation through their active
engagement in civic life.
In my first two years as Executive Director of
UN-Women, I have travelled and followed our work
in displacement camps in Central Africa, Syrian
refugee camps in Jordan, and in South Sudan, where
women peace activists shoulder the unseen burden of
keeping communities together in the worst oftimes and
under the worst of circumstances. I have seen both the
relevance of resolution 1325 (2000) and, conversely,
the many missed opportunities where it has not been
put into effect, with dire costs. More recently, I have
been to the Philippines and to Colombia, where women
continue to make extraordinary efforts to secure
peace. Their presence at the table contributed to
positive outcomes. The agreements reached represent
the interests of women and of society as a whole.
UN-Women is honoured to continue to support the
formidable Colombian women.

Where women are at the peace table, they are able
to make compromises that allow for faster progress,
but not at the expense of core aspects of long-term
sustainability. In Colombia, where the talks are still
ongoing, in the most recent agreement on justice,
women have secured an agreement that states that there
would be no amnesty for sexual-violence crimes.

We face new challenges. Extremist groups are
targeting women's rights as a deliberate, devastating
method of subjugation and control. We have to take this
very seriously and we continue to focus on it. We therefore
welcome the Secretary-General's commitment, in his
upcoming plan of action to prevent violent extremism,
to addressing women's participation, leadership, and
empowerment as keys to addressing the drivers of
extremist violence. We welcome also his call to extend
the 15-per cent financing goal on peacebuilding within
the United Nations to cover funds addressing violent
extremism. I would like to pay tribute to the work of the
Secretary-General's Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Zainab Bangura, who has done
much to raise the profile of this issue and ensure that it
is taken as seriously as it warrants.

A growing body of evidence shows that perhaps
the greatest and most underutilized tool we have for
successfully building peace is the meaningful inclusion
of women. This is the highlight finding of the global
study that informs this high-level review. The study
found that women's leadership and participation ensure
the inclusion of community needs to achieve deeper
peace benefits, improve our humanitarian assistance,
strengthen the protection efforts of our peacekeepers,
contribute to the conclusion of peace talks and the
sustainability of peace agreements, enhance economic
recovery after conflict, and help counter violent
extremism. It is backed by extensive evaluations,
statistical databases and academic research.

This is an area in which the whole United Nations
family, including the Security Council and regional
bodies, are now confronted by the need to make
irreversible change. That change is to ensure that women
are not the missing, yet vital factor to make the lasting
peace for which we all long and strive. I am grateful
to the study's author, Radhika Coomaraswamy, and the
members of the high-level advisory group for the global
study, for their time and dedication, which often went
beyond the call of duty. I also thank the Department
of Political Affairs, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and all other United Nations partners for
their increased efforts to support gender equality.

Let us now turn to some of the detail of the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2015/716) that I have the
privilege to present to the Security Council today on
his behalf. It recognizes several markers of progress.
Between 1990 and 2010, only 11 per cent of peace
agreements even mentioned women or gender issues. In
recent years, this has climbed to half of all agreements,
and the percentage is higher when the United Nations is
involved. There are more women in mediation support
teams and more regular consultations with civil society
leaders. Countries and regional organizations are
beginning to take more robust action against sexual
violence. Courts and commissions of inquiry are
paying more attention to gender-based crimes, even
though this has not yet translated into higher levels of
prosecution. All three reviews on international peace
and security - peace operations, peacebuilding,
and women and peace and security - have made
important commitments to strengthening our capacity
and stepping up our actions in this area. I welcome the
Secretary-General's invitation to review the gender-
related implications of all three reviews before the end
of the year.

But the report also notes many areas of concern
and stagnation. Fifteen years after the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), it finds that political will,
financing, accountability, attitudinal and institutional
barriers, and a lack of expertise and awareness continue
to be obstacles. Women's participation is still symbolic
or low at peace tables. This is as unreasonable as peace
tables that would exclude men. The large investments
in rebuilding countries typically neglect women's
economic activities or confine women to the informal
economy.

Donors do not go far enough to target women's
organizations for support, yet it is the latter's dedication
to peace that has proven to be the only way that women's
needs are noticed and serviced. In fact, only 10 per cent
of aid to peace and security interventions in fragile
States targets gender equality as a principal objective.
Gender equality is almost completely ignored in
reforms of the security sector even in the most gender-
aware nations.

This is a space that is in need of role models. We
need many more women in police forces, military
forces and our peacekeeping operations to enhance our
operations and peace efforts. Currently, 97 per cent
of peacekeepers and 90 per cent of police officers are
men. Further, alarmingly, the percentage of girls in
secondary education in conflict countries has dropped,
and rates of maternal mortality in these settings are
more than double the global average. In the midst of the
biggest wave of displacement on record, with countless
families torn apart or separated, 27 countries still have
nationality laws that discriminate against women,
thereby contributing to render children stateless.

The United Nations itself has not yet met its targets
in gender equality, including gender balance or having
gender equality as a focus for spending. For example, we
spend more than $9 billion a year on our peacekeeping
and special political missions, but we are currently
unable to track how much of it is invested in advancing
gender equality. And there are still cases of sexual
exploitation and abuse in our missions. We are thankful
that the Secretary-General has again been raising the
alarm over the unacceptable price of inaction on this
issue.

On a positive note, I am pleased to announce the
establishment of the Global Acceleration Instrument
for Women, Peace and Security and Humanitarian
Action. This new fund will channel more resources to
women's organizations building peace and responding
to humanitarian emergencies. I invite all countries to
support it as one concrete way to respond to the study.

As part of the paradigm shift that can be associated
with the study's findings, let us note that the study
shows the benefit of investing in preventive action and
early warning, rather than retaliatory action. Military
spending has a direct impact on the increased suffering
of women for generations. Militarization is on the rise
and the global cost of violence is estimated at over
$14 trillion. We must have faith in our original Vision
for resolution 1325 (2000) not to make armed conflict
safer for women and girls, but to prevent war in the
first place. Our challenge now will be taking steps
toward proper funding and execution of the study's
ambitious targets. Many of the much-needed changes
are in the hands of the Member States represented in
this Chamber.

As I close, let me remind the Council of the
inescapable logic of the study's findings, reflected
in the Secretary-General's report, and which should
galvanize us to action. These are some key areas.
Every peace process we wish to be sustainable must
include women. We must incentivize countries to
transform the security forces in all United Nations
Member States, increasing the numbers of women
in leadership positions; we must also learn to value
the voice of civilians in peacemaking. We must take
strong action against violators, working as a group to
ensure that individual countries are not able to shield
perpetrators of crimes from justice. We must take steps
to build the status of women's human rights defenders,
and we must act and invest to prevent conflict. Where
conflict is entrenched, we must move away from a View
of peacekeeping as a series of short-term projects and
treat peacebuilding as a long-term action, with long-
term funding, and women as core partners. Preventing
conflict and peacebuilding is an institution we need to
build and invest in, as we do for the health or education
institutions that we cannot do without.

As we look forward now to implementing the new
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1), we should recall the strong
interdependence between all the goals. Goal 16, on
just, peaceful and inclusive societies, is intrinsically
linked to Goal 5, on achieving gender equality and
empowering all women and girls.

