Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The date 31 October 2003 marks the third
anniversary of the Security Council's adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000). During those years it has been
possible to achieve a great deal in resolving an
important range of issues linked to women's
contribution to maintaining and strengthening
international peace and security, to the situation of
women during conflicts and to their participation in
peacekeeping and post-conflict settlement.

We would like to thank Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno
and Ms. Amy Smythe for the detailed information they
gave us about how the implementation of the
provisions of resolution 1325 (2000) is being carried
out. We note with satisfaction the progress made in the
work to enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of
measures in this area in the light of changing trends
and new conditions for introducing gender issues into
all aspects of United Nations activities.

The problem of the protection of women in armed
conflict continues to remain a focus of attention of the
United Nations and its Security Council. However,
despite such focused attention to these problems, and
the acknowledgement of their existence, we are obliged
to note that overcoming their negative consequences
requires that considerable effort still be made.
Unfortunately, many recommendations still remain on
paper and others are not being fully implemented.

Here, we place great hope in the continuing inter-
agency activity to formulate concrete practical
measures for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), in particular to improve the protection of
women and girls during conflict, strengthen their
participation in peace-building and ensure the
mainstreaming of gender perspectives into the various
components of peacekeeping operations. The most
important thing here is to avoid excessively broad and
cliched conclusions and recommendations. But
drawing up wide-ranging and comprehensive
approaches should not work to the detriment of a
solution to specific and concrete problems in a given
situation.

At the same time, we cannot forget that measures
undertaken solely through the United Nations are
insufficient. There is a need for real, and not merely
stated action, taking into account the specific needs of
women and girls in actual conflict situations and their
real participation at all stages of the prevention and
settlement of conflicts and in post-conflict peace-
building.

An important contribution to resolving the entire
range of problems can be played by civil society,
including non-governmental organizations, many of
which have considerable experience regarding gender
issues.

In conclusion, we would like once again to
reaffirm our conviction that the problems of combating
all manifestations of discrimination or violence against
women, of the situation of women during conflict, and
of their participation in peacekeeping and post-conflict
settlement must be considered in a comprehensive
manner and must remain on the agenda not only of the
Security Council, but also of the other most important
universal and regional international forums.

