Ms. Jaquez Huacuja (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Bolivia for convening this important open debate
to review a topic that undoubtedly has a definitive
impact on the peace and security agenda. Eighteen
years after the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), it
is clear that the role of women in the prevention and
settlement of conflicts and in ensuring sustaining
peace, in line with other efforts carried out by the United
Nations for gender equality and the empowerment of
women, is a sine qua non to fulfil the objectives of the
United Nations.

Mexico has been an active promoter of that
agenda, which marked a milestone in the history of the
international community, in establishing, for the first
time, a comprehensive gender-based approach and the
active role of women at all stages of peace processes.
Although the Security Council gave decisive impetus
to that agenda and vision, which was supported by
Member States, society and the Secretariat, much
remains to be done for its effective, coherent and cross-
cutting implementation.

In terms of women's equity and participation, for
instance, women still represent only 4 per cent of the
military personnel deployed in peacekeeping operations
and 9 per cent ofthe police personnel. Only 2 per cent of
mediators are women, 8 per cent of the participants in
negotiations are women and 5 per cent of the witnesses
or signatories of peace processes have been female.
Those numbers indicate the great challenges facing the
international community in achieving gender equality
in this area.

That is why we commend the actions of Secretary-
General Antenio Guterres to implement the gender
parity strategy throughout the entire system. We call
on Member States - particularly those that contribute
personnel to peacekeeping operations i to increase
activities to that end. Mexico has made great efforts
since the resumption in 2015 of its participation as a
police- and troop-contributing country to peacekeeping
operations, while taking advantage of its outstanding
female staff in international activities. As of today,
Mexico has deployed a total of eight women belonging
to its armed forces in the peace missions in Colombia,
Western Sahara and Mali. Although we have managed to
comply with the 15 per cent offemale personnel required
by the United Nations of contributing countries, Mexico
reaffirms its commitment to continuing to expand the
participation of female personnel. As part of the Women,
Peace and Security National Focal Points Network, we
recognize the importance of that interregional forum
in sharing experiences and good practices, in order to
advance the implementation of this agenda and identify
opportunities and shortcomings.

The women and peace and security agenda and the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development are faces of
the same coin. The former cannot be understood without
the implementation of the Sustainable Development
Goals, which incorporate fundamental elements to
improve the social situation of women. For example,
to address the root causes of conflicts and sustain
peace is to understand that women must have economic
autonomy and the full enjoyment of their human
rights. That includes receiving sufficient economic
resources and employment opportunities, eradicating
the feminization of poverty and guaranteeing a balance
between work and personal life and the freedom to
participate in decision-making within the communities
in which women live and coexist, as well as other
areas. States must do much more in order for our public
policies to grant those circumstances to women.

The effective participation of women in all sectors
of public life is fundamental. In plural, diverse and
democratic societies, such as that of Mexico, the
involvement of civil society organizations in matters of
general interest allows for the defence of human rights
and the improvement of Government policies, as well
as ensuring accountability. Ensuring that organizations
that safeguard women's rights participate in public
institutions and processes, including in dialogue in
peace processes, not only ensures the rights of women
and girls, but also contributes to the goal of having a
more just and peaceful society.

Without political participation, women will never
achieve their considerable potential. Gender relations
are often marked by an unequal distribution and
exercise of power. For Mexico, reversing decades of
shortcomings in terms of women's participation has
been a priority objective. The results are clear: during
the current legislative period, in Mexico approximately
48.8 per cent of the Chamber of Deputies will be made
up of women. For its part, 49.22 per cent of the Senate
of the Republic will be made up of women, going from
ninth to fourth place in the world in that area.

We reaffirm our support for the Council continuing
to strengthen the mandates of peace operations with
provisions related to the gender perspective, including
gender advisers, as well as to foster gender awareness
in the analysis and review of conflicts on its agenda.
We also reaffirm the importance of promoting and
integrating the participation of young women and
adolescents in peace processes, whereby we recognize
the increasingly close link ofthe agenda item that we are
discussing today with its counterpart for young people.

We must recall once and for all that a fair, just,
calm, safe and peaceful world cannot exist without
the inclusion of half of the world's population in
decision-making processes. It is the responsibility of
the United Nations to ensure that the women and peace
and security agenda is fully implemented with a sense
of urgency.

