Ms. Gonzalez Lopez (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish): El Salvador is grateful for the organization
of this open debate on sexual violence in conflict,
and we are pleased that a woman is presiding over
this debate. We thank the Secretary-General for his
annual report (S/2015/203) on this important theme.
We recognize the tireless work and leadership of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, and we urge her to keep
up her efforts, in which she will undoubtedly require
the support of the whole international community.

El Salvador expresses its satisfaction with the
achievements of certain countries seeking to confront
sexual violence in conflict through the implementation
of specific laws, the prosecution of perpetrators and
the provision of compensation to victims. We agree
with the Secretary-General that the countries that
have shown such good progress should share their best
practices with other countries affected by conflict.
However, we would like to voice our concern about the
documented trends of the use of sexual violence as a
form of persecution involving the forced displacement
of populations, sexual violence against adolescents,
the ideological opposition of certain groups to the
education of girls and attacks against persons on the
basis of their sexual orientation, real or perceived, as a
form of social control and the continuation by various
groups of the practice of repression by using women
and girls as arms of war.

Allow me to indicate that the Government of
El Salvador recognizes the important role played by
women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts and
in peacebuilding, pursuant to resolution 1325 (2000).
We think, therefore, that it is Vital to focus on the
situation of violence experienced by women, identifying
it as an important aspect in our public policies. Permit
me to point out that in 2013 the El Salvador Institute
for Female Development carried out a project called
"The memory of the fireflies" with female survivors
and family members of the Victims of the massacres
that occurred in my country in December 1981. As part
of the project, an anthropological study was carried
out to compile testimony from women and to provide
them with psychosocial assistance in safe environments
where they could talk about their experiences. At the
same time, we intend to highlight the knowledge of
those events based on their vital experiences in order
to preserve a memory in the form of an oral history.
Through it we want to promote a process of reparation,
focusing not just on civil redress and compensation, but
also on highlighting the experiences of the women. We
have also defined as one of our priorities for a five-year
development plan for 2014-2019 institution-building
and specialized strategies for guaranteeing the rights
of women.

I am pleased to announce that El Salvador has
made efforts at the governmental level, with the help
of friendly countries and international organizations, to
create a State national committee for the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions
adopted on the topic of women and peace and
security. Members of the committee were sworn in
on 12 November 2014, and the committee includes
representatives of 19 governmental organizations,
public ministries, academia and civil society. Their
main goal is to propose policies and standards aimed at
ensuring compliance with the resolutions on the subject
and to ensure the greater representation of women at
all levels of decision-making within national, regional
and international institutions and mechanisms with the
goal of strengthening the prevention and resolution of
conflict.
Finally, in August, El Salvador will hold, with other
members of the secretariat of the Central American
Integration System, the first regional training workshop
on resolution 1325 (2000) in order to ensure that as
many countries as possible in the region can commit
to drawing up national action plans leading to the true
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), adapting its
substance to the various security contexts that countries
are currently experiencing. It is in our interest to share
our experiences, since thus far we are the only country
in the region that has a national follow-up committee on
that theme at the highest level.

