Mr. Hannesson (Iceland): Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, continues to need full and effective
implementation. It is well known that women and girls
constitute the largest and most vulnerable groups of
victims in armed conflicts. Iceland welcomes the
adoption of Security Council resolution 1820 (2008),
recognizing sexual violence as a security problem
requiring a systematic security response by stressing
that sexual violence, when used or commissioned as a
tactic of war, can significantly exacerbate situations of
armed conflict and may impede the restoration of
international peace.

Impunity continues to be a major problem. A
climate of impunity for sexual violence continues to
exist. We all have to join forces to end impunity for
such crimes.

There is a need to make full use of available
expertise, including from human rights mechanisms.
Therefore Iceland encourages strengthened
partnerships with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights. Iceland fully
endorses strengthening the human rights monitoring
capacity of the Office within peacekeeping operations
and country missions.

Although some progress has been made in
advancing the fight against violence against women in
conflict situations as well as in incorporating aspects of
resolution 1325 (2000) in peace operations, when it
comes to women's access to peace negotiations and
political participation in post-conflict situations we
have seen less success. Here, the obstacles are harder
to overcome. Women's inclusion means power-sharing
in structures and political contexts where this has often
not happened before.

At the same time, resolution 1325 (2000) has
considerable potential. It already provides a conceptual
framework for women around the world to cooperate
on bringing about their proper participation. There are
also other commitments made by the international
community, such as the Beijing Platform for Action,
which calls for a 30 per cent minimum representation
of women in decision-making bodies.

Iceland is of the view that equal participation of
women in peace processes is fundamental for
achieving, maintaining and promoting sustainable
peace and security. In that context, I would like to pay
tribute to the work of the International Women's
Commission for a just and sustainable Palestinian-
Israeli peace. The work of that group of eminent
women from both sides of the community has stood out
as a beacon. At this very difficult time in the peace
process, that group deserves our continued support.

The Icelandic Ministry for Foreign Affairs, in
cooperation with the University of Iceland, will host an
international conference in Reykjavik in June 2009,
with the focus on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000): how to ensure that women are included in
formal and informal peace processes.

Iceland introduced a national plan of action for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on
8March this year. In relation to the plan, several
projects have been funded that directly relate to the
goals set out in the action plan, such as research by the
Institute for Security Studies on the access of women
to peace processes.

Gender equality and women's empowerment have
been a driving force in the development of Iceland's
society, contributing to the advancement of women in
political decision-making, participation in the formal
labour market and progressive legislation on parental
leave. I am proud to announce that on 19 June 2008,
the Ministry for Foreign Affairs signed a memorandum
of understanding with the University of Iceland on
setting up an International Research Centre for Gender
Equality and a training programme, which will be
launched in December this year. The objective of the
Centre and the programme is to contribute to research,
promote information and provide training on gender
equality and gender perspectives, in particular in
peacebuilding, post-conflict reconstruction and
development.

I would like to emphasize that, like my colleague
from Germany did earlier this afternoon, that Iceland
believes that a strong and effective United Nations
gender entity is essential and hopes that it will soon be
agreed. We are looking forward to the requested
detailed modalities paper from the Secretariat so that
the membership can take substantive action before the
end of the ongoing sixty-third session of the General
Assembly.

The United Nations as a whole should redouble
its efforts to recruit more women at all levels. The
same appeal goes to all Member States. It is our
responsibility to ensure that the United Nations has a
solid basis to recruit from.

