Mr. Srivihok (Thailand): Thailand welcomes the
timely focus of this open debate, which reflects on the
achievements and challenges in the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and its subsequent resolutions
in preparation for next year's commemoration of the
twentieth anniversary of its adoption. The 2015 global
study by UN-Women on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) pointed out that there remains a crippling
gap between the ambition of our commitments to the
resolutions and actual political and financial support.
Our firm belief is that we can and must narrow that
gap by implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the women and peace and security
agenda in a holistic manner.

In order to take meaningful action on women and
peace and security, we must recognize the interrelated,
inseparable and mutually reinforcing nature of all
the elements of gender equality in the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs). We need to address, among
other things, the discriminatory laws, attitudinal and
institutional obstacles and gender stereotyping that
continue to hinder the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) and the 2030 Agenda. Thailand recognizes
that SDG 5, on gender equality, and SDG 16, on peace,
justice and strong institutions, are closely linked
and that their implementation is required in order to
advance the women and peace and security agenda. A
society can achieve sustainable peace only when it has
an integrated an inclusive approach that incorporates
development and human rights for all, including
women. The empowerment of women and girls and
gender equality are elements that are key to conflict
prevention and the promotion of international peace
and security.

At the national level, Thailand has adopted and is
now in the stage of implementing its national measures
and guidelines on women and peace and security for
2016 to 2021. Those measures also serve as an action
plan that has both an internal and external outlook and
aspires to enhance the role of women in addressing
conflict and political and social unrest in the world.

On the international front, Thailand has been
an ardent Supporter of women's participation in
peacekeeping missions. Seven of the 27 Thai
peacekeepers serving in the three peacekeeping
missions to which we contribute are women,
accounting for 20 per cent of the total number of Thai
peacekeepers. Thai women peacekeepers are also at
the forefront of community engagement efforts to
promote sustainable development during their service
in peacekeeping missions.
As we prepare to commemorate the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000)
and the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action next year, and in
our efforts to implement the 2030 Agenda, Thailand
is committed to continuing to do its part at home and
abroad to genuinely advance gender equality and the
empowerment of women in all contexts, including in
maintaining international peace and security.

