Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
It is a genuine pleasure to see Uganda presiding over
the Security Council in this month of October, and I
congratulate the delegation on the excellent way in
which it has carried out that responsibility. The
contribution of Uganda to the work of the Security
Council is greatly appreciated, and, as the end of the
Ugandan presidency approaches, I would like to
express our great satisfaction.

Before embarking on the subject at hand, I would
like to say that we take note of the statement just made
by the representative of the African Union.

The choice of the subject for this debate is
extremely relevant to our time. Moreover, if any
country is qualified to summon us to this debate, it is
Uganda, which has experienced this topic's terrible
realities in a concrete way on the ground through the
depredations of the Lord's Resistance Army and by
virtue of belonging to a region where every day the
drama of women in armed conflict is played out.

I need remind no one here of the hopes raised by
the Security Council's adoption in October 2000 of
resolution 1325 (2000), and subsequently of
resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1889 (2009),
which provide clear proof of the special attention the
Council gives to the lot of women and girls who live in
life-threatening conditions in armed conflict zones and
daily pay a heavy toll. Ten years after the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), what account can we give?

First of all, we can legitimately welcome some
achievements, notably at the institutional level, with the
appointment of Ms. Margot Wallstrom as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict. Another gain is the identification
by the Secretary-General of 26 indicators for the
monitoring and revitalization of the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) (reports of the Secretary- General S/2010/173 and S/2010/498). We should also
mention the adoption of resolution 1882 (2009), which
allows the specific consideration of the case of girls, by
extending the monitoring and reporting mechanism on
sexual violence against children and the killing and
maiming of children. We also note the initiatives taken
by States, the United Nations system, regional
organizations and civil society in particular, in the
realms of the prevention of sexual violence, the
promotion of gender equality, the training of mediators,
the strengthening of the capacity for women and others.

Unfortunately, that progress and all of those
efforts and the regular consideration of the issue of
women and peace and security by the Security Council
have not ensured the protection of women and girls
during conflicts, nor their full involvement and
participation at all stages of the peace process, not to
mention the fact that the issue of the inequalities and
disparities between men and women continues to be a
challenge.

With respect to sexual violence, the situation is
the more terrible for its unequalled scale and the
unspeakable suffering of its victims. Even some
refugee camps and displaced persons camps have
become unsafe places for women and girls, instead of
being islands of peace. We note, among other
obstacles, the low degree of access of women and girls
to basic social services and legal mechanisms and the
meagre participation of women in peace negotiation
processes. With such a record, what should be our
response and what actions should be taken?

On the occasion of the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000), we think that it is necessary to
step up our commitment to a complete implementation
of its noble objectives in a number of ways. That
includes making the protection of women and girls an
absolute priority at the legislative, judicial, regulatory
and operational levels; strengthening the participation
of women in the process of settling and mediating
conflicts, including during decision-making processes;
and consciousness raising among the different parties
so that they realize that they must carry out their
respective obligations and fully assume their
responsibilities. Other important steps are the
economic reintegration of women, including former
combatants, and taking into account gender issues in
security sector and judicial reform; wide publication of
resolution 1325 (2000) to combat wide-spread
ignorance of the resolution; dialogue with non-State
actors in cooperation with States, so as to inform them
of and sensitize them to the content of the fundamental
texts and their responsibilities; and calling on States to
adopt plans of action featuring clear objectives and
deadlines, with the involvement of women's groups in
the conception, formulation and implementation of
those policies.

One of the challenges for an ideal implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) remains coordination. Given
the multisectoral nature of the issue, every entity and
agency of the United Nations should play its role, in
the framework of a common, coherent effort
capitalizing on individual strengths. From that point of
View, we hope that the appointment of the
Under-Secretary-General for UN Women, Michelle
Bachelet - whom we congratulate - will help fulfil
the need for rationality, coherence and coordination.

To conclude, I would like to recall that my
country, Burkina Faso, adopted in 2009 a national
gender policy, which was drawn up in a participatory
and inclusive way. For its implementation a three-year
plan of action - 2011 to 2013 - was drafted and
adopted. In terms of gender equality, the adoption of a
law setting quotas of 30 per cent in the legislative and
municipal elections is an important step forward. Its
implementation will certainly contribute to better
representation of women in politics.

On 15 December 2009, Burkina Faso also
launched a programme to combat violence against
women. This year it commemorated the International
Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women
with the clear motto: "The consequences of violence
against women on victims, families and communities".
Our national women's forum, set up in 2008, is a
high-level forum exclusively focused on the specific
concerns of women and presided over by the head of
State personally. The latest of these was held last
month and was an opportunity for the Government to
launch the African Women's Decade: 2010-2020.

The issue of women and peace and security will
not find a definitive solution without the complete
empowerment of women and their full participation in
the lives of their communities and countries. That is
why Burkina Faso again welcomes the establishment of
UN Women in this year marking the tenth anniversary
of resolution 1325 (2000). We hope that that entity will
enjoy all the support necessary for the success of its
mandate. As with all of the bodies responsible for
protecting women, Burkina Faso will also provide for
its support.

