Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today's meeting on a very important
subject that impacts the lives of too many people, in
particular women and children, in conflicts that are
already horrendous in so many ways.

Estonia aligns itself with the statements delivered
on behalf of the European Union and the Group of
Friends of Women and Peace and Security.

This is not just another debate or another issue on
our agenda. The urgency of tackling conflict-related
sexual violence cannot be emphasized enough. It is
the responsibility of all States to combat impunity and
enforce accountability by prosecuting those responsible
for such dreadful crimes against civilians. There must
be no room for impunity for sexual or gender-based
crimes. However, today only a limited number of the
perpetrators of sexual violence have been brought
to justice. A lack of accountability for these crimes
undermines international peace and security and
hampers post-conflict peacebuilding. We therefore
welcome the recommendation of the Secretary-General
in his latest report (S/2017/249) that the Security
Council should influence State and non-State actors
in conflict zones to comply with international law,
including by referring matters to the International
Criminal Court (ICC).
Furthermore, it is important to take full advantage
of the existing tools and mechanisms and to continue
to include sexual violence as a part of the designation
criteria for sanctions. In addition, we urge the countries
experiencing conflict-related sexual violence to reach
out and learn from the cases where the issue has been
tackled successfully, such as in Cote d'Ivoire. Those
examples show that, with a strong will and the support
of the United Nations and the international community,
good results can be achieved in a timely manner.

However, in order to bring perpetrators to justice,
it is crucial that the victims of conflict-related sexual
violence report such cases and not be held back by fear,
shame or stigma. That once more serves to emphasize
the importance of awareness-raising and changing
social norms and mindsets. Victims of sexual violence
must be assisted with legal, medical and other relevant
services to avoid their expulsion from communities and
to prevent double victimization.

Every country can make a difference in the fight
against sexual and gender-based violence. Estonia has
taken steps at both the national and international levels.
At the global level, we have supported the Special
Representative of the Secretary General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and made regular contributions
to the ICC Trust Fund for Victims. Likewise, Estonia
has supported the fight against conflict-related sexual
violence through the Team of Experts on the Rule of
Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict.

At the national level, Estonia has made important
progress with regard to the fight against violence
against women and sexual abuse of children. For
example, victims of human trafficking, unaccompanied
under-age foreigners and sexually abused minors
have the right to receive counselling services and
psychological help. Furthermore, Estonia considers
it important to address sexual Violence in conflict as
a part of the broader women and peace and security
agenda. We have therefore incorporated the subject of
human trafficking and gender-based violence into all
our pre-mission trainings.

Regardless of our common efforts and
achievements, much work remains to be done in the
fight against conflict-related sexual violence. Estonia
hopes that the topic will remain high on our agenda
and calls for comprehensive cooperation by all Member
States to combat crimes against humanity.

