Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me, first of all, to thank the Secretary-General
for his report of 29 September (S/2011/598*) and his
briefing this morning to the Council. We would also
thank Ms. Michelle Bachelet, Mr. Lazarous Kapambwe
and Ms. Orzala Ashraf Nemat for their briefings, which
provided a serious and complete framework for our
debate.

Colombia appreciates the important role that is
given in this report to promoting cooperation
mechanisms, constructive dialogue and effective
support for efforts being made in different countries, as
well as the contributions from the General Assembly
aimed at strengthening the national capacities of States
in preventing and addressing all forms of violence
against women.

We thank Ms. Michelle Bachelet, Under-
Secretary-General for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women, for her briefing and for the
contributions of UN-Women, which help to strengthen
coordination and cooperation in the implementation of
mandates relevant to women, peace and security. I
assure Ms. Bachelet of our support as she fulflls her
important mandate.

We also recognize the importance of the concept
note (S/2011/654, annex) prepared by the delegation of
Nigeria, where proper emphasis is placed on the
participation and role of women in conflict prevention
and mediation.

We agree with the Secretary-General that
UN-Women constitutes the cornerstone for articulating
the mandates of the United Nations system in
promoting gender equality and the empowerment of
women. In this context, we emphasize the role that
broad and inclusive intergovernmental consultations
have in evaluating the gender architecture and the
advancement of women, as well as the agreements
between States on models and practices adopted in that
area. All of that is an essential element for progress in
improving national capacity to generate greater
participation of women in conflict prevention and
mediation.

The appointment of Ms. Margot Wallstrom as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict has contributed to
monitoring the implementation of respective
resolutions within their scope of competence as
established by the Security Council.

We also emphasize the importance of the
reference in the Secretary-General's report to relief and
recovery, as well as the actions being taken with regard
to gender mainstreaming in the post-conflict phase,
including job creation, education policies, life skills
training, opportunities and support for children, access
to basic services in health, education and legal support,
and the provision of basic public services, such as
water and sanitation. We emphasize that this represents
an enormous challenge for States.

I would like to highlight the fact that the report of
the Secretary-General notes progress made in
Colombia in connection with the four aspects of
resolution 1325 (2000), namely, prevention,
participation, protection and relief and recovery. I think
that it is also important to highlight other important
actions that are being pursued in these areas in my
country on the basis of our conviction that the
phenomenon of violence against women includes
domestic violence, violence committed in the context
of the community and violence caused by illegal armed
groups.

In terms of prevention, Colombia's armed forces
have incorporated into their training programmes
courses in the prevention of gender-based violence,
sexual violence, sexual and reproductive health, sexual
and reproductive rights and gender equality.

With regard to participation, I should also like to
mention initiatives such as the creation of women's
community councils, indigenous women's regional
laboratories and community radio programming
boards. These are tools designed to promote the
involvement of women in public policies, support
leaders to advance the implementation of such policies,
sustain a dialogue with this sector and with women's
social organizations, and promote participatory
processes at regional, departmental and municipal
levels.

There has been legislation in place in this area
since 1992, recently updated by a law in 2011 that
provides for and promotes the participation of women
in the exercise of legislative policy work in the
Congress, as well as in the executive and judicial
branches. There are now 37 women in the Colombian
parliament. The highest positions in the country's
public prosecutors' and comptrollers' offices are held
by women. In the Ministry for Foreign Affairs, the
Minister and two deputy ministers are women, from
whom I receive orders - I mean, instructions - every
day.

All of that reflects the efforts being made by the
Government of Colombia to adopt policies designed to
include women at all stages of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding while eliminating discrimination against
women and promoting their economic, political and
social empowerment, as well as their more active
participation in development, both in decision-making
and in enjoying the benefits that development brings.

Our priority is the incorporation of gender
perspectives into our major national policies, including
development plans, strategies for poverty eradication
and the promotion of employment and entrepreneurial
culture, among others. We place particular emphasis on
action related to protecting women against all forms of
violence, as well as for protecting those in particularly
vulnerable situations, such as indigenous women,
migrant women, trafficked women and girls, and
women in rural areas, among others.

As a member of the Commission on the Status of
Women and of the Group of Friends of 1325, Colombia
reaffirms its support for full implementation of that
resolution. We stress the importance of coordinated and
consistent support of the United Nations system for
national initiatives aimed at building the capacity to
address the security needs, recovery and development
of women and girls in conflict and post-conflict.

Finally, we would like to reiterate that approaches
to human rights that focus exclusively on monitoring
mechanisms do not contribute to achieving sustainable
solutions, unlike mechanisms for cooperation,
constructive dialogue and effective support for
countries, which do indeed genuinely contribute to
effective solutions.

