Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I wish first to thank
the presidency for convening this timely meeting,
which comes roughly one year after the completion
of the review of resolution 1325 (2000). I also wish
to thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon;
the Executive Director of UN-Women, Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka; and Ms. Rita Lopidia of South Sudan,
representing civil society, for their respective briefings.
My delegation greatly appreciates their tireless
commitment to women's rights and empowerment in
the pursuit of peace and security, and we pay tribute to
their continued efforts in that regard.

Malaysia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Thailand on behalf of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, and I wish
to add the following remarks to further contribute to
the discussion.

The high-level review and its accompanying
global study of the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) successfully renewed international momentum
towards fully actualizing the involvement of women
and leveraged their influence on matters of peace and
security. Similarly, the adoption of resolution 2242
(2015) provided additional impetus for the Security
Council to explore issues of women and peace and
security more deeply, including in country-specific
contexts through the Informal Expert Group on Women
and Peace and Security. 1 take this opportunity to
acknowledge and commend Spain and the United
Kingdom for their able leadership of the Informal
Expert Group, which has enriched broader Council
discussions. We commend the steps taken by Member
States to adopt or review national action plans on women
and peace and security and encourage their continued
implementation. The establishment of a women and
peace and security national focal point network is
another useful platform for sharing information and
experiences among Member States, including on
national action plans.

While there has been some progress, we stress that
much more can and must be done to fully utilize the
women and peace and security agenda to resolve and
prevent armed conflict. In our assessment, three key
areas require more focus and attention, namely, peace
processes, peacekeeping and policymaking.

We fully support efforts to increase and prioritize
the participation of women at all levels in peace
processes and mediation efforts. The peace process in
Colombia showed us how the significant involvement
of women, both at the main peace talks in Havana and
in regional and national consultations, was critical in
supporting the successful conclusion ofthe initial peace
agreement between the Government and the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia - Ejercito
del Pueblo. Increased access to gender expertise by
international mediators and negotiating parties in the
drafting of peace agreements, resulting in the inclusion
of gender-specific provisions in a greater number of
agreements, is another positive development that should
be sustained.

We also share the assessment that the presence of
women peacekeepers in conflict zones can facilitate
interaction and confidence-building with local
communities and affected populations, particularly
women and children. In addition to endorsing the
three P's - planning, pledges and performance - the
London communique adopted by the United Nations
peacekeeping defence ministerial meeting held last
month also affirmed the commitment to increase
women's participation in uniformed roles. In that
regard, I am pleased to share that, as of 16 September,
Malaysia has increased from 26 to 40 the number
of women military personnel deployed within our
contingent under the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon.

Additionally, in implementing pledges on capacity-
building made during the 2015 peacekeeping summit,
the Malaysian Peacekeeping Centre conducted three
training courses in the first half of this year on the
issues of gender, cultural diversity and the protection
of civilians, the latter with the cooperation of the
Government of Japan. The courses benefitted more
than 40 military and civilian personnel. We hope to
maintain and expand such training in the coming years.

Resolution 1325 (2000) recognized the need
for gender perspective to be taken into account in
political, security and humanitarian action. While
there has been some progress in mainstreaming gender
considerations in the work of the United Nations,
notably the recent adoption of the Peacebuilding
Commission's gender strategy, there is still a long
way to go in fully implementing such policies. In that
regard, Malaysia believes that increasing the number
of women in decision-making positions contributes to
the development and implementation of holistic and
gender-inclusive policies that benefit the community,
the State and the Organization as a whole.

The call made in resolution 1325 (2000) forincreased
representation of women at all decision-making levels
remains as acute and relevant now as it was then,
including within the United Nations. We continue to
support the Secretary-General's efforts to achieve
gender parity within the United Nations, especially at
senior decision-making levels.

In conclusion, the women and peace and security
agenda aspires to restore the role of women and
girls i one halfofhumankind - as effective actors with
an equal stake in peace and security efforts. Our task
will be complete only when women's representation and
participation in conflict prevention, management and
resolution is axiomatic. Until then, my delegation offers
its steadfast commitment and support to furthering the
Secretary-General's agenda. We hope that Secretary-
General-designate Guterres will continue to build on
the women and peace and security initiative begun
under Mr. Ban Ki-moon.

