Ms. Skare: Thank you, Mr. President, for letting
NATO participate in this important debate. I would
also like to thank the briefers for their excellent
presentations.

Civil society organizations have been instrumental
in promoting women's rights and gender equality.
To a large degree, it was thanks to civil society that
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and security
saw the light of day 12 years ago. As much as States
and intergovernmental organizations show leadership
in advancing that agenda, we have to recognize the
important role that members of civil society play as
opinion leaders and sources of information, as well as
in keeping us accountable.

While States have the primary responsibility
for ensuring the implementation of the resolutions
on women and peace and security, NATO, as a
political-military organization, is playing its part within
NATO-led operations and within our partnerships. We
have a policy, we have an action plan and, together with
partners, we are turning words into deeds.

On the political level, NATO is actively encouraging
all its partners to adopt specific goals related to the
promotion of women, peace and security issues in the
various partnership programmes they develop with
our organization. The overall aim is to raise awareness
and to work towards greater female participation in
the areas of defence and security. Women are still
underrepresented in peace and reconciliation processes,
and we encourage States and our partners to ensure
women's participation in the prevention, management
and resolution of conflicts.

At the operational level, NATO and its operational
partners in the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF) and Kosovo Force have demonstrated a
strong commitment to promoting the important role
that women can play, and have engaged with women
leaders and activists to understand their views and
perspectives. The Alliance has gender advisers and
focal points at its various headquarters, as well as in
operational theatres in Afghanistan and Kosovo. I work
with these dedicated people and see the significant
efforts they are making to mainstream resolution 1325
(2000) and related resolutions and to integrate the
gender perspective into operations.

Experience to date has shown that having gender
expertise, as well as having more female soldiers in
theatre, improves our ability to conduct operations
more effectively. For example, we have learned that
female soldiers in Afghanistan are at times able to better
connect with members of the population otherwise
closed off from their male colleagues. This has led to
greater awareness of the specific situation and area,
and led to better dialogue and understanding between
NATO forces and the local community. Our experience
has also shown that training and education are strategic
tools for security forces and for defence and security
sector reform. Ifused correctly, they can be major force
multipliers, as the attitudes of those trained can spread
to walks of life beyond the security sphere.

As Council members are aware, the mandate of
the ISAF mission was recently renewed, and the plans
to hand over full security responsibility from ISAF
forces to their Afghan counterparts are on course, as
reaffirmed at the Chicago Summit. Throughout the
transition process and beyond, we will continue to
focus on gender-related training and to support the
recruitment and retention of women in the security
forces.

NATO works shoulder to shoulder with other
international organizations maintaining international
peace and security, and we seek to strengthen further
our cooperation with the United Nations and others to
make sure we learn from each other's experiences and
pave the way for greater efficiency and more results.

Since my appointment as the NATO Secretary
General's Special Representative for Women,
Peace and Security, I have had the great pleasure of
engaging in dialogue with women's associations in
the security sector, womens' rights activists, female
parliamentarians and other representatives of civil
society. I intend to deepen this dialogue.

NATO and its member States remain committed
to upholding human rights and the rule of law. As
we face up to the security challenges of the twenty-
first century, we will continue to work with partners
and other members of the international community to
achieve better security and the greater empowerment
of women.

