Ms. Carfagna (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of the
European Union.

First, allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on organizing this open debate of the Security Council
on an issue of the utmost importance to the international
community. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General and all previous speakers for their insightful
presentations. I take this opportunity to express Italy's
strong support for Under-Secretary-General Michelle
Bachelet as she undertakes her new, important
endeavour.

The anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000)
provides a unique opportunity for Member States and
the United Nations system to take concrete steps to
enhance its implementation. In this regard, allow me to
express my appreciation for the Council's decision to
take forward the set of indicators developed by the
Secretary-General to track the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). We consider this to be a first
step, and we now call on the Council to ensure the
indicators' swift operationalization. In this spirit, I will
focus my statement on one of the most effective tools
for strengthening the resolution: the adoption of
national action plans by Member States.

Let me start by reiterating Italy's full commitment
to adopting a national action plan. An inter-ministerial
committee of committed administrations and departments
has been working on a draft action plan, which is now at
an advanced stage, and I am pleased to announce that it is
expected to be finalized and adopted by the end of this
year.

One of the main objectives of the Italian action
plan is to strengthen the participation of women in
peacekeeping missions and their decision-making
bodies. Italy has long honoured its pledge to avoid
gender discrimination, enrolling women in all its
national armed forces. This has resulted in an increase
in the number of women in that field and in their
participation at all levels and stages of peacekeeping
operations. In 1999, a consultative committee of the
Defence Chief of Staff and the Financial Police
General Command on voluntary military service for
women was set up to monitor the correct
implementation of the law in this regard. According to
the data provided by the committee, women have been
recruited in all segments of the military. However, their
presence is still sparse and almost non-existent in top
positions. This is mainly due to the fact that Italy is
new to the conscription of women, compared to other
countries where female participation is a long-standing
tradition and thus significantly higher.

Adopting a gender perspective for all
peacebuilding activities is another essential priority of
the action plan. In my capacity as Minister of Equal
Opportunities, 1 can only stress the importance of
adopting a gender-oriented approach to all
peacebuilding operations, conducting gender-sensitive
surveys, collecting statistics with gender-disaggregated
data and carrying out specific studies on other
discriminatory factors. Moreover, the plan focuses on
the protection of human rights in post-conflict areas,
particularly women's rights. The staff of peacekeeping
missions should be trained to deal with these
situations, where women are the most affected and
most vulnerable. Specific training is required in the
following areas: equal opportunities, international
humanitarian law, resolution 1325 (2000) and human
rights, with particular reference to issues relating to
gender-based violence, sexual violence and human
trafficking.

Another priority of the plan is cooperation with
countries beset by conflict and with their institutional
stakeholders, non-governmental organizations and civil
society to enhance their invaluable work. One possible
example of such cooperation would be opening ad hoc
local facilities to accommodate and rehabilitate women
who fall victim to violence and sexual abuse.

Lastly, the plan addresses the issue of providing
women with greater opportunities to voice their views
and show their capabilities. It seeks to strengthen their
presence in post-conflict processes, where they are
often at a disadvantage in competing for resources,
such as access to microcredit.

These are the most significant elements of Italy's
national action plan. We are convinced that it will
enhance our efforts to promote peace and strengthen
human rights in conflict areas.

