Mr. Grant (Canada): I would like to thank
the delegation of Azerbaijan for convening today's
important debate. Canada welcomes the opportunity
to participate in the Security Council's open debate on
the role of women in international peace and security.
Canada also welcomes the participation for the first
time of Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka in her important
new role as Executive Director of UN Women.

(spoke in French)

Canada firmly believes that the participation of
women in all decision-making processes, particularly
those related to the prevention and resolution of
conflict and the transition to democracy, is a necessary
precondition to securing sustainable peace, as is their
access to justice and their inclusion in the economic
and social lives of their countries and communities. As
the Honourable John Baird, Minister of Foreign Affairs
of Canada, said in his address to the General Assembly
last month:

"We must invest in opportunities for women and
young girls. We must ensure that women participate
fully in all parts of our society and in all the
countries of the United Nations. That will help us
build a stronger, more secure, more prosperous and
more peaceful world" (A/68/PV21, p. 2)

(spoke in English)

Particularly egregious is the practice of child, early
and forced marriage, which puts the very lives of young
girls at risk. That practice denies girls' rights, disrupts
their access to education, severely jeopardizes their
health and limits the development of their community
as a whole. Conflict situations exacerbate that practice
among displaced and refugee populations, such as
we know to be the case in Syria. Canada encourages
the Security Council to continue to provide political
leadership and to take action to ensure the meaningful
participation of women in conflict prevention,
mediation and resolution processes.

Much work is being done by Member States,
including by Canada, to advance the empowerment of
women and girls. For example, Canada played an active
role in the development of resolution 24/23, addressing
child, early and forced marriage at the twenty-fourth
session of the Human Rights Council, and co-hosted
a side event at the General Assembly in September.
Canada is leading the first stand-alone draft resolution
on the important issue at the General Assembly later
this year.

Prime Minister Harper and other leaders in New
York recently reviewed progress on the 2010 Muskoka
summit of the Group of Eight and the United Nations
initiatives to improve to improve global maternal
and child health. Under Canada's leadership, the
Human Rights Council adopted the robust resolution
23/25 this past June on the elimination of violence
against women. The resolution lays out actions to be
undertaken by Member States and the United Nations
to prevent sexual violence, including in conflict-related
situations, and calls on States to ensure that women are
active participants in decision-making processes.

Canada joined 112 other Member States in
September in launching the Declaration of Commitment
to End Sexual Violence in Conflict. Endorsements of
the Declaration have now grown to an impressive 134
States. Canada and others are working with partners
in the field to assist in the empowerment of women in
conflict-related situations, to prevent and respond to
sexual violence and to hold perpetrators to account.
For example, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Canada assists survivors of sexual violence in bringing
those responsible to justice.

Canada looks forward to working with others to
strengthen our collective efforts to empower women
and girls as active decision-makers. We look forward
to the Security Council high-level review in 2015 to
assess what progress we are making in enhancing the
role of women in international peace and security.

