Mrs. Chowdhary (India): At the outset, I would
like to thank you, Madam President, for organizing this
open debate on the important theme of "Women's
participation and role in conflict prevention and
mediation" as part of our ongoing deliberations on
women and peace and security.

We have before us the report of the Secretary-General
(S/201l/598*), and have been briefed by Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon, Executive Director of
UN-Women Ms. Michelle Bachelet, President of the
Economic and Social Council Ambassador Lazarous
Kapambwe, and non-governmental organization
representative Ms. Orzala Ashraf Nemat. I would like
to thank them for their comprehensive briefings.

It also needs to be recognized that the issue of
women and peace and security has several cross-
cutting and multidimensional implications. Therefore,
the need for discussing such issues in the universal
forum, the General Assembly, cannot be
overemphasized.

Gender equality and the empowerment of women
remain the key focus area of social development and
distributive justice globally. Empowering women
politically, economically, educationally and legally has
been a major objective of the Government of India. We
are proud of the fact that India gave women equal
voting rights more than 60 years ago, at the time of our
independence. In 1992, we amended our Constitution
and reserved 33 per cent of the seats for women in
local- and district-level governance institutions and
bodies. That was subsequently raised to 50 per cent in
2009. Currently, we have more than 1.5 million elected
women representatives in local bodies. That is the
biggest mobilization of women worldwide in politics at
the local Government and the rural and district levels.

The five-year plans formulated by the
Government of India for economic development
recognize the important role of women as agents of
sustained socio-economic growth and change by
incorporating proposals on gender empowerment.
Women's empowerment is essential to promote overall
sustainable development. That is also true in conflict
situations. We believe that the participation of women
in all stages of the peace process - conflict
prevention, peace negotiations, peacekeeping and
post-conflict reconstruction - is essential for lasting
peace and security.

Key aspects of post-conflict reconstruction, such
as economic recovery, social cohesion and political
legitimacy, all require the active engagement of
women. Resolution 1325 (2000) was a seminal piece of
international legislation in our efforts on women and
peace and security. The United Nations, Member States
and civil society have made steady and noticeable
efforts in implementing the resolution. However, the
results remain mixed, with important gaps remaining in
fully realizing its provisions.

The United Nations system has come up with a
comprehensive set of indicators to assess progress in
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We have
certainly taken note of those indicators. We believe that
such indicators and benchmarks need to be further
discussed and conceptually developed as part of
broader intergovernmental consultations before their
eventual adoption. One must also be cognizant of the
difficulty in obtaining credible and verifiable data, in
particular from conflict situations.

The United Nations is being asked to do more
with regard to women and peace and security,
including through the mainstreaming of the gender
perspective in the United Nations system and United
Nations peacekeeping missions. We commend the work
of the Secretary-General in mainstreaming the gender
perspective in the United Nations recruitment process.
The number of women at the senior decision-making
level and the participation of women in mission
planning, peacekeeping operations and peacebuilding
efforts have increased. Nonetheless, the numbers still
remain very low.

As the Secretary-General's report itself points
out, the United Nations presence in conflict and post-
conflict situations ~ field missions and country
teams- must achieve greater coherence and
coordination in addressing women and peace and
security issues, including through the timely provision
of targeted gender expertise.

The appointments of a Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
and a number of women special envoys are also
positive developments. It is important that special
representatives work in a coordinated manner among
themselves and with other United Nations bodies. That
is not only to ensure optimal utilization of resources
and avoidance of duplication but also to promote
greater coherence.

We welcome the efforts of UN-Women to
significantly boost United Nations action on the
empowerment of women and gender equality, including
in the area of women and peace and security. Its efforts
need to be supported by all in the United Nations
system and by the Member States. The Council, for its
part, must make available the resources that are
required to implement those mandates.

We agree with all those who support increased
deployment of female military and police personnel in
United Nations peacekeeping operations and the
provision to all military and police personnel of
appropriate training to effectively discharge their
responsibilities. India was the first country to deploy
an all-female peacekeeping unit, 100 troops in Liberia
in 2007. We have offered to contribute more such units.
India is the largest contributor of troops in United
Nations history. We are very proud of the exemplary
record of our peacekeepers, both men and women, in
the protection of women, children and the needy in
conflict situations.

The promotion and protection of the human rights
of women and girls in armed conflict continue to pose
a pressing challenge. The Council has in previous
resolutions recognized the specific vulnerability of
women during conflicts and that they bear a
disproportionate brunt of armed conflict, even though
they are in most cases not directly engaged in combat.
There should be zero tolerance for gender-based
violence, and incidents of gender-based violence must
be unequivocally condemned. All cases of gender-
based violence in an armed conflict, whether
perpetrated by parties to the conflict, peacekeeping
personnel or humanitarian actors, must be promptly
investigated and the perpetrators prosecuted.

The international community must take all
necessary steps to ensure the security of women and
children. We also see civil society and local
communities as valued partners in this endeavour, and
we look forward to working with them to take this
agenda forward.

In conclusion, let me reaffirm India's
commitment to positively contributing to United
Nations efforts in protecting vulnerable sectors,
including women and children, in conflict and
post-conflict situations. I also call upon the
international community to enhance cooperation by
providing resources and sharing experience and
expertise to build capacity in this area.

