Mr. Mawe (Ireland): Ireland commends you,
Madam President, for your initiative in scheduling
today's debate. We thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, whose work we highly
appreciate, and Ms. Hamsatu Allamin, speaking on
behalf of civil society, for their insightful briefings on
this topic.

Ireland associates itself with the statement made on
behalf of the European Union.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2015/203) makes
for difficult reading. It details horrible and systematic
violations of the rights of women and girls and, to a
lesser but discernibly growing extent, boys and men.
The confluence of crises in 2014 wrought by violent
extremism has brought home once again how sexual
Violence, rape, forced marriage and kidnapping are
employed as tactics of terror by radical groups in Iraq,
Somalia, Syria and Nigeria in order to dehumanize and
repress their victims.

Nevertheless, 2014 saw some positive developments
that are noteworthy. One highlight was the entry into
force in December of the Arms Trade Treaty - the first
treaty to recognize the links between the international
arms trade and gender-based violence. We look forward
to its effective implementation.

While the progress made must be commended,
we cannot shy away from the reality that 2014 saw
a resurgence of sexual violence in conflict. Faced
with such horrors, how can we translate the concern
voiced around this table into meaningful action on
the ground? Today, I would like to focus on just three
points: the deployment of women protection advisers,
the better participation and empowerment of women
in peacebuilding, and greater accountability for sexual
Violence in conflict.

The Secretary-General's report notes the real
difference being made by the deployment of women
protection advisers to United Nations missions. They
have improved the quality of information and analysis
received and have had a catalytic effect on the ground.
However, of the 170,000 personnel deployed by the
United Nations, just 20 are women protection advisers.
Ireland supports the accelerated deployment of such
advisers, as well as gender advisers, to facilitate the
full implementation of all women, peace and security
resolutions. The number and roles of those positions
must be systematically assessed during the planning
and review of each United Nations mission, and the
costs should be reflected in the regular budgets of
United Nations missions.

As Ms. Allamin stressed earlier today, the full and
equal participation of women in conflict prevention
and peacebuilding is fundamental to any prevention
and protection response, including to threats posed by
violent extremism.

In line with Council resolution 2122 (2013), we
must step up efforts to support women's leadership and
participation. We must listen to, invest in and build up
the capacity of women-led civil-society organizations.
We need to eliminate legal and other barriers and
proactively support the participation of women on
an equal footing with men in economic and political
decision-making, from the household to the national
and international levels, in order to transform the social
norms underlying gender inequality.

We know that peace agreements are more likely
to succeed where civil society is included. And yet, in
disregarding the role of women, we manage to omit a
large segment of civil society. Women represent only
9 per cent of delegates to peace talks and 2 per cent of
mediators, and this is in a context where more than half
of peace efforts fail to sustain peace. There must be a
better way.

Ireland also calls for the inclusion of the issue of
conflict-related sexual violence in mediation efforts and
in ceasefire and peace agreements. We are encouraged
by the Havana peace talks on the Colombian situation,
where a group of 60 survivors of sexual violence
directly addressed the negotiations. As a result, the
issue of conflict-related sexual violence has been raised
in the negotiations by the stakeholders.

The Council has stressed on many occasions the
importance of holding perpetrators of conflict-related
sexual Violence accountable, not only as an end in itself
but to address the culture of impunity which threatens
peace and security and post-conflict recovery. We
encourage the Council to use all means at its disposal to
bring perpetrators into the spotlight, including through
referrals to the International Criminal Court and

mandating commissions of inquiry, and by explicitly
condemning such violations where they occur. Targeted
sanctions are another tool at the disposal ofthe Council,
and the Council needs to be more ambitious in their use.

Ireland strongly supports the recommendation
contained in the Secretary-General's report, as echoed
by Ms. Bangura today, to fully integrate the issue of
conflict-related sexual violence into the work of the
Security Council sanctions Committees, including the
Al-Qaida sanctions list, as part of designation criteria.

Sexual violence in conflict can no longer be
considered collateral damage or something that is
"unfortunate". It is the direct result of decisions taken
by parties to conflict. The history of denial must end.
We must incentivize national leaders to adopt the issue
of women and peace and security as their own agenda.
We must tackle the root causes of sexual violence. We
must not stop until the barriers that exist for women
are dismantled, so that they can claim their rights as
equal citizens and contribute to peace and security on
an equal basis.

