Mr. Barro (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to express my gratitude for the very
informative briefings by Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed and Mr. Adama Dieng, Acting
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict and Special Adviser on
the Prevention of Genocide. I would also especially
like to thank Ms. Mina Jaf for her touching briefing,
by which we have gained knowledge of the situation
on the ground. I would also like to thank the delegation
of Uruguay for organizing this open debate, as well
as for its concept note (S/2017/402, annex) on such an
important issue as sexual violence in armed conflicts.

As Ms. Zainab Bangura stated here in the Council,

"[s]exual violence destroys the individual human
person, undermines the prospects for peace
and development and casts a shadow over our
collective humanity".

Allow me to pay well-deserved tribute to Ms. Bangura
for the valuable support she has always provided to
victims of sexual violence in the performance of her
duties as Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict over the past
five years. We wish her successor, Ms. Pramila Patten,
every success in her new role and assure her of our full
support in eradicating this crime, which sees women
only as war booty or a means of altering the ethnic
nature of peoples.

Given the psychological impact that sexual
violence has on the victims as well as its harmful
consequences on security, we believe that success in
the fight against sexual violence necessarily requires
that we prevent conflicts in the first place. It also
means protecting civilians, extending assistance to the
many survivors of this phenomenon and, finally, the
necessary accountability.

For decades, even centuries, victims of sexual
violence in conflict have often been deprived of the
mere right to justice, and societies have been slow to
criminalize such acts or to provide victims with the
necessary psychological and/or medical care. Today,
however, we are pleased to note that the Security Council
has taken on this issue head-on, including over the past
decade by adopting standards aimed specifically at
enforcing international human rights law with regard
to women's rights. Nevertheless, as the Secretary-
General's latest report (S/2017/249) highlights, our
collective conscious is ever-more alarmed by disturbing
phenomena such as the increase in violent extremism
and terrorism, mass migration, trafficking in human
beings for sexual exploitation and making women part
of the economy in situations of armed conflict. Taking
into account those new scourges, I would like to focus
my statement today on three points that seem to me to
be very relevant in our common struggle against the
consequences of this crime.

First, with regard to preventing crimes of sexual
violence, we all agree that preventing sexual violence
is an integral part of conflict prevention in the broader
sense. It is not simply a priority, it is the priority, as
clearly stated by the Secretary-General General in his
very first speech in this Chamber. Preventing sexual
violence must begin with implementing the relevant
legal provisions set out in international legal instruments
and by including prevention mechanisms for this crime
in peace agreements and ceasefire arrangements. There
is also a need to strengthen the capacity of national
institutions to ensure the prevention of sexual violence,
including through training, awareness-raising and
appropriate legal measures. In the context of prevention,
it is also essential that we work with women's groups
and with traditional and religious leaders, who can
play an important role in putting in place strategic
communications. However, we must bear in mind that
suppression is equally essential to prevention, in that it
discourages potential aggressors from actually carrying
out such acts, helps to restore confidence in the rule of
law and shows that no political or military leader and
no man, woman or child is above the law.

The second point I would like to highlight is the
need to improve protection for civilians and support
for victims of sexual violence. In that connection,
I welcome the increasing number of protection-of-
civilians mandates included in United Nations missions.
From the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone in
1999 to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali in 2013 - to mention
only that period - United Nations peacekeepers have
committed themselves, even at the cost of their lives,
to an undertaking that is as perilous as it is necessary.
I would like here to pay a resounding tribute to them
for their service to humankind as a whole. We must
safeguard their considerable achievements by making
sure that the actions carried out by a small number do
not tarnish the reputation of generations of courageous
and principled men and women. In that connection,
my delegation welcomes and fully supports zero-
tolerance policy of the Secretary-General to combat
this phenomenon in the ranks of Blue Helmets. In the
same spirit, we must appropriately address incidents
committed by non-State actors, who are often
responsible for such crimes in situations where there
are wide-scale attacks of sexual violence. They, too,
must not escape the full extent of the law.

Above and beyond the security afforded by
peacekeeping operations, women victims also need
assistance - in particular psychological assistance.
In that regard, we agree that cases of sexual violence
must first and foremost be treated with the strictest
confidence, given that fear of reprisal or further
violence can impede victims from coming forward.
Moreover, given that sexual violence also constitutes
a medical emergency, it is essential that victims
have swift and unimpeded access to quality health
services. In addition to those psychological and
medical considerations, however, human and financial
resources commensurate with the scope of the task at
hand will be needed to undertake a coherent response
aimed at bolstering quick-response measures in the
face ofa crime that has long been the subject of silence.
It is also necessary to put in place a strategic framework
aimed at prioritizing the rights and dignity of victims,
end impunity and ensure that monitoring, control
and prevention measures are in place against sexual
exploitation and abuse. Nevertheless, greater efforts
are needed at all levels to make sure that survivors have
access to the full range of subsistence, medical and
legal services without discrimination.

Thirdly, and lastly, I would like to address the
need to hold the perpetrators of these acts accountable
and to make sure that victims have access to justice.
The first concern to take into consideration in that
regard is to ensure that peace agreements and ceasefire
arrangements explicitly reflect the concerns associated
with sexual violence. That is crucial if we want to
make sure that survivors have access to the necessary
services and reparations in post-conflict situations, as
well to remove the perpetrators of this violence from
their positions and ensure that they are held accountable
for their actions. As a subsequent step, we will have
to work to further the fight against stigmatization and
marginalization of survivors, the consequences of which
are often fatal. Besides, such stigmatization serves only
to worsen their marginalization while hindering their
full acceptance and reintegration. Society, including
traditional and religious leaders, must also help
survivors. We must convey the unequivocal message
that it is the perpetrators who should be shamed, not
the victims.

I cannot conclude without stressing the importance
of certain prerequisites in support of the whole process
of combating sexual violence in a context of armed
conflict and the restoration of lasting peace. The first
is expanding the inclusion of women at every level of
peace and mediation negotiations. Their experience as
the main victims of such crimes is far too valuable to
ignore. Their participation in peacekeeping missions, as
well as in our countries' armed forces and police, should
therefore be increased. Lastly, my delegation believes
firmly that the effective and transparent investigation
and documentation of reported cases of sexual violence
in armed conflict would help to ensure victims' access
to impartial justice, and we must persist in affirming
our determination in that regard. For Senegal, all of
that means that we will never defeat sexual violence
until our will to combat it, the will of the members of
the international community, overcomes the will of
warlords to use it.

