Mr. Yaremenko (Ukraine): If I am not mistaken,
the topic of today's debate is women and peace and
security. With all due respect, I am quite sure that
Ukrainian women, including the female peacekeeper,
Nadiya Savchenko, are included in today's discussion.

Moreover, for more than a year now, Russian
diplomats have stayed true to their own words:

"According to Goebbels, 'The more improbable the
lie, the faster people believe it." And it worked out;
he was a talented man."

Those words were spoken by none other than Vladimir
Putin, President of the Russian Federation, on 9 July
2014, when he received a delegation ofrabbis from Israel,
Austria, Belgium, the United Kingdom, Germany, Italy,
the Netherlands and France. Incidentally, the quotation
is still on the presidential website. I checked it an hour
ago.

Ukraine is fully committed to the provisions of
the Minsk agreements. Nevertheless, I must stress
that Ukrainian forces ceased fire as of midnight
on 5 February 2015 and that they have consistently
abided by the ceasefire since then. At the same time,
in clear and flagrant breach of the Minsk agreements
of September 2014 and February 2015, illegal armed
groups, with direct support from Russian regular forces,
did not cease fire as of 15 February. They undertook a
massive assault on Debaltseve. On 18 and 19 February,
some 2,500 Ukrainian troops retreated from the town.
That blatant violation of the Minsk agreements cost
the lives of 19 Ukrainian servicemen, with more than
135 wounded and 159 captured, while 12 went missing.
Yet the militants continued to shell the positions of
the Ukrainian forces, as well as civilian locations, and
undertook infantry and tank attacks aimed at squeezing
the Ukrainian forces from certain positions. Overall,
since 15 February, Russian-backed militants have
shelled Ukrainian positions more than 1,970 times,
killing 86 Ukrainian soldiers and wounding 460.

Russia and Russian-backed militants must
immediately cease fire and take all the necessary
measures to ensure that the ceasefire is sustainable.
Russia must stop manipulating and deliberately
distorting the facts based on false information.

