The Deputy Secretary-General: I thank you,
Madam President, for the invitation to brief the Security
Council on my recent joint mission with the African
Union (AU) to Ethiopia, Djibouti, Eritrea and Somalia.
This is the fourth visit I have undertaken focused on
women, peace and security and development, and the
thirdjoint solidarity mission with the African Union. I
am pleased that Ambassador Fatima Kyari Mohammed
is here to brief alongside me.

At the request of the Prime Minister, I also travelled
with senior United Nations officials to the Sudan,
to focus on support for the transition, the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) and women's leadership. Those missions
are an opportunity to strengthen implementation of our
shared United Nations-AU frameworks on peace and
security, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
Agenda 2063 of the African Union and the Silencing
the Guns in Africa by 2020 initiative.

I would like to commend the leadership of
Chairperson Moussa Faki Mahamat as well as that of
Ms. Bineta Diop, AU Special Envoy on Women, Peace
and Security, who led the AU delegation.

In each country, we met Heads of State, ministers,
senior women Government officials, civil society
members, the international community and our United
Nations country teams and peacekeeping missions. I
left all five countries with a sense ofhope and optimism.
The chance for peace in this region is very real. The
international community, together with these countries,
can find lasting solutions to the complex challenges of
the region.

Each country is moving at its own pace through
a process of reform and transformation. And in all
countries, women are playing a critical leadership role
in social cohesion, economic revival and peace. The
leaders of these countries are making concrete efforts
to place gender equality and greater representation
of women at the heart of reforms in order to reap the
benefits of the links between inclusion, stability and
peace, and to give substance to prevention efforts
during these complex transitions.

Ethiopia now has its first woman President, and
half its Government ministers are women. Together
they hold some of the most significant decision-making
portfolios in the country. The President is leading
efforts towards social cohesion. Women serve as the
Ministers of Peace, Labour and Infrastructure and are at
the helm of the National Electoral Commission and the
Supreme Court. The Government programme includes
far-reaching legal reforms for greater gender equality.
All of this was cited by the Nobel Committee when
it awarded Prime Minister Ahmed the Nobel Peace
Prize last month. I also met with the Mothers for Peace
initiative, which is working across communities to
repair the social fabric of the country, and with women
who have served as United Nations peacekeepers. I note
that Ethiopia is our largest troop-contributing country.

In Somalia, we met the Prime Minister and
dynamic female ministers who are introducing reforms
to address the challenges of women's low representation
in political life. We heard from women in civil society
who are on the front lines of preventing the spread of
violent extremism. We also met with the head of the
National Independent Electoral Commission, who has
a challenging task ahead of her. Our efforts in Somalia
must prioritize financial support to free, fair and
inclusive elections next year, as well as to the national
development priorities of the Government, including
debt relief. There are islands of stability in the country
that can be built upon, but that will require more
central Government cooperation with federal member
states, as well as a road map for transitionaljustice and
social reintegration.

In Eritrea, one of the few countries in the world
where women fought in significant numbers on the front
lines of the independence movement, gender equality
and women's leadership are seen as an unquestioned
reality. We met with young women entrepreneurs and
saw the investments in critical infrastructure - from
multipurpose dams to solar power to roads that will
reintegrate the country with the region. Relations
between Eritrea and its neighbours are nascent, but they
are making strides. There is a unique opportunity at
this moment for the international community to support
greater integration and sustainable peace.

In Djibouti, we met with local women who have
built community centres to care for children with
disabilities and to support refugee and migrant women,
in a context where many young women are fleeing
conflict or migrating in search of a better life, only to
become victims of human trafficking and horrendous
abuse. The country has recently passed legislation
that increases maternity leave and provides for greater
protection from violence, gender parity in the civil
service and the private sector and a quota for women
in Parliament.

In the Sudan, I met some of the women who were
the engine of the revolution and are now demanding
equality and social inclusion across all strata of society.

All ofthat reinforces the need for us to question our
own narrative and mindsets. The region I saw has some
of the fastest-growing economies on the continent,
with rich natural resources, extraordinary capacity,
particularly among their youth, and genuine reforms.
Those are the elements that we need to support and the
narrative that we need to share.

The road ahead for the Horn of Africa will not be
easy. The foundations have been laid for a transition
from peace to sustainable development. But building
on these fragile foundations will require unity and
cooperation across the region and common ground
internationally to accompany those transitions. That is
particularly true when it comes to the issue of refugees
and internally displaced persons, of which there are
tens of thousands, many of whom are vulnerable to
trafficking, as well as in finding regional solutions to
protection challenges, including sexual violence, in
areas where conflict is still going on.

It was clear from our travels that the whole region is
cut from the same fabric. Each country is its own shade,
but they are interwoven. What happens in one country
will impact the others, and therefore regional approach
and genuine collaboration are paramount. In that regard,
I am encouraged by the signs of the revitalization of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development. This
platform will be essential to providing the necessary
pathways we can all support.
That is also the reason that it was important that
it was a joint mission with the African Union. In
working together, we can achieve so much more. As
one Government official said to us, the joint mission
has changed the nature of the relationship with both
the United Nations and the AU, in terms of the quality
and content of the dialogue. What is needed now is to
maintain and deepen that dialogue and partnership, and
to use them to encourage regional solutions and unity.

Finally, I wish to turn to the Sudan. Last week, the
Council heard from an amazing young woman, Alaa
Salah, whose image became synonymous with the
protests in Khartoum (see S/PV.8649). I met Alaa, along
with three other women civil society activists - Huda
Shafig, Safaa Adam and Samah Mohamed - in New
York, after talking to their compatriots in Khartoum
and El Fasher. Thanks to the efforts of these amazing
women and thousands more like them, the Sudan
is seeing a new dawn. We must be ready to support
the people and the Government through a successful
transition that lays the foundations for truly inclusive
elections and sustained peace.

I welcome the recent unanimous extension by the
Council of UNAMID's mandate for one more year and
its decision to include in that mandate support for the
peace process and peacebuilding activities. During my
visit to El Fasher and in meetings with women from
local communities, they made it clear that a premature
drawdown could leave a security vacuum, thereby
exposing them to greater violence and putting at risk
progress towards economic stability.

We have just taken part in a whole-of-system
Visioning exercise with the Sudanese Government that
will enable us to respond to the changing context and
support the Sudan's priorities over the next three years
of the transition. The exercise establishes a vision for
our partnership with the Sudanese people, our support
to those leading the transition - the Forces for Freedom
and Change, the Sovereign Council and the transitional
Government - and the national development plan
that they have jointly developed. Our responses will
sequence immediate and longer-term activities, in
alignment with the priorities set by the Government.
Those priorities include the peace process, economic
and social development, economic reforms, the
reintegration of internally displaced persons and
comprehensive transitional justice and reconciliation.

These are tall orders and, while they need to be
delivered urgently, expectations must also be managed.
I urge the Council, and the international community
more broadly, to assist in identifying concrete actions
that can be delivered in the short term over the next
three months, while maintaining momentum and
addressing the medium- and long-term opportunities
necessary for lasting peace.

At the same time, the Government is committed to
addressing root causes. I cannot put it better than the
Sudanese Minister who told me:

"It is not peace documents that are missing in [the]
Sudan. We have shelves of beautifully worded
peace agreements since independence. We need
to address the root causes - exclusion, human
rights, marginalization and underdevelopment.
We need a Marshall Plan for areas of our country
and the support of the international community to
deliver this."

Responding to the opportunity in the Sudan will
require putting aside our usual ways of working.
Investment in development must accompany the
transition if it is to take root and flourish. Continuous
efforts in a wide range of critical areas, such as
delisting and debt relief, will be urgently needed to give
the Sudan a fresh start, as will creative solutions for
domestic resources and external investments, including
tax reforms and the recovery of stolen assets.

While they are moving at different speeds, each
country in the region is heading in the right direction.
We must seize this opportunity to invest and support
peace and promote women's participation and
leadership, education, peace dividends, free and fair
elections and the short-term, high-impact projects that
reach those who are farthest behind.

Having met with our United Nations staff in
each country, I can attest to their courage, sacrifice,
commitment, motivation, and willingness to walk
this road together in support of the collective goals
of national counterparts. That includes everything
from the United Nations Office to the African Union
personnel, who are leading our partnership with the
African Union on peace and security, to the innovative
efforts ofthe United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
on trafficking in the region, the UN-Women's work
towards mobilizing and supporting women's demands,
the United Nations Development Programme's role in
sustainable development, the Economic Commission
for Africa's efforts at strengthening economies, and all
those who serve in our country team under the leadership
of our Resident Coordinators, alongside the critical work
of our peacekeeping and political missions. With the
solidarity and support of the international community,
those countries can overcome their challenges and
become an anchor for growth and stability within the
broader region and the African continent.

Finally, I would like to pay tribute to our
peacekeepers and specifically mention our women
in peacekeeping. In each of the countries that we
visited, the critical importance of women serving
in security forces, the police, the military and in
peacekeeping was starkly clear. Those women, against
all odds, strengthen our protection efforts, increase
the credibility of our endeavours, engage in local-level
mediation and make communities feel much more at
ease. And yet we continue to deploy less than four per
cent female peacekeepers. Much more can and should
be done. Women shared their practical challenges
with us. Even where they are enrolled in their national
security services, they are often not provided with the
opportunities needed to be deployed - from map-
reading to specific driving and computer skills. When
they are deployed, they often contend with harassment
or are asked to serve tea and coffee rather than patrol
communities. The kits we provide do not fit the needs
of women. In contexts such as that of Somalia, where
head-covering is needed, that is left to the individual
women to secure. And while this may be the first time
that these words have been said in the Security Council,
sanitary pads are a basic necessity for women and yet
do not form part of their deployment kits.

As the Security Council returns to the open debate
on women and peace and security this afternoon, I
hope that these issues will be among those discussed. I
humbly urge the Council to heed the winds of change,
so that we may continue to strive towards peace in all
hearts and in all nations.

