Mr. Grauls (Belgium): Belgium aligns itself with
the statement that will be made later on behalf of the
European Union (EU).

We thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting on the occasion of the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000).

Women's participation in peace processes
increases the likelihood that women's needs will be
met, that their status in society will be enhanced and
that their well-being will improve. It is disconcerting,
in that regard, that 10 years after the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), we are still excluding half of
the world's population when we are discussing
sustainable peace and trying to build democracy.

If the ideals to which we committed ourselves in
resolution 1325 (2000) are to become a reality, it is
clear that we need to increase accountability and
monitor our commitments. We therefore call on the
Security Council to endorse the indicators developed
by the Secretary-General and to establish an
accountability and reporting mechanism in order to
monitor the implementation of the resolution on the
basis of those indicators.

Belgium also welcomes the creation of UN
Women and the appointment of Under-Secretary-
General Michelle Bachelet as its first head.

In the fight against impunity, Belgium further
asks the members of the Security Council to use, and
effectively impose, targeted and graduated measures
against all parties to conflicts who violate women's
rights, including perpetrators of sexual violence and
commanders who commission or condone the use of
sexual violence. We believe that the Council should
include sexual violence in resolutions mandating its
sanctions committees, and those resolutions should
include sexual violence as a criterion for the
designation of political and military leaders for
targeted measures.

Belgium attaches great importance to the full and
thorough implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), as
well as of the follow-up resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888
(2009) and 1889 (2009).

In the run-up to this debate, and in order to raise
awareness and come to real and concrete commitments
around the celebration of the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000), Belgium, together with the
European Union, organized three events at different
levels. We organized a high-level conference in
Brussels on women's participation, an experts' seminar
in Geneva on protection and a ministerial-level lunch
here in New York last month.

In 2009 and 2010, Belgium has supported
activities related to resolution 1325 (2000) and
women's rights in 14 countries, not only politically, by
raising the issue in relevant dialogues and by
facilitating meetings with women's groups, but also
financially. In the past two years, more than €30
million has been spent on gender-related projects in
fragile States.

Two years ago, Belgium also adopted a national
action plan for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). Without a doubt, the plan has contributed to
increased ownership at different levels of public
administration and civil society. For example, our
Ministry of Defence has assigned clear duties within its
staff and adopted specific budgetary lines for the
implementation of all activities relating to the
implementation of the national plan of action that fall
within its responsibilities.

We commit today to revise our national action
plan by 2012, in full cooperation with civil society and
taking into account EU indicators, as well as the
indicators that we hope to see adopted by the Council
today. We further declare ourselves ready to consider
assisting the development of such a plan by any
country that would welcome our support.

Finally, let me add, as Chair of a country-specific
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, that
that Commission is a very appropriate framework in
which to include the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) among its activities.

