Ms. Flores Herrera (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, allow me to thank the delegation of Spain,
Sir, for convening this open Council debate on the topic
"Women and peace and security".

I would like to reiterate the message of the President
of the Republic of Panama, His Excellency Mr. Juan
Carlos Varela Rodriguez, during the general debate:

"In today's world, women are the ones
who suffer most from the effects of inequality,
poverty, war, forced displacement due to conflicts,
trafficking in human beings and inequality in terms
of opportunities. Consequently, the role that we,
Heads of State, and the United Nations are called
upon to play to defend and promote the rights and
freedoms of women is of paramount importance."
(A/70/PVJ9)

We reiterate the appeal made at the Global
Leaders' Meeting on Gender Equality and Women's
Empowerment, held on 6 March 2015, for more
resources to be given to address femicide and all human
trafficking, especially violence against women.

Panama aligns itself with the statement made
earlier today by the representative of Thailand on behalf
of the Human Security Network. Panama is a sponsor
of resolution 2242 (2015), adopted by the Security
Council today, which reflects the complexity and scale
of the issue. The numerous armed conflicts we see at
the global level unfortunately have demonstrated that
women have available to them few resolutionesources
to protect themselves, yet, together with their sons and
daughters, they represent the majority of the displaced
and refugee population. Women have also claimed
space and, in some cases, led peace movements that
promoted the recovery of their communities following
conflicts. Yet, women have remained invisible, which
is a historical failure we must overcome. That exclusion
has limited women's access to opportunities for
recovery, their ability to obtainjustice for violations of
their human rights and their participation in legal and
institutional reforms.

It is up to the States, therefore, to continue to
work to promote the greater participation of women at
all stages of peace and security processes. Similarly,
resolution 1325 (2000), which brings us together today,
on the occasion of its fifteenth anniversary, is the
first resolution to establish a connection between the
experiences of women in conflicts and the international
agenda for peace and security and to highlight the
fact that conflicts have a disproportionate impact on
women. This resolution becomes even more relevant
today, as we see the violence levelled against women by
extremist groups that violate their rights, their dignity,
their integrity and their very lives. Consequently,
it is essential that the Security Council call upon all
parties to armed conflict to take special measures to
protect women and girls from gender-based violence,
particularly rape and sexual abuse, and all other forms
of violence in situations of armed conflict.

Fifteen years have passed, and women's
contributions are still undervalued and underutilized.
The claims and spaces created through women's
participation in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts should be enhanced to guarantee them the
primary role they have been called on to play. The post-
2015 development agenda (General Assembly resolution 70/1), recently adopted by our Heads of State, follows
that path. It is an important step towards achieving the
goal of women's broad and equal participation, without
discrimination. The world needs such a fundamental
transformation. We cannot continue to do what we have
been accustomed to doing; that is no longer an option.
The issues of peace and security are a commitment
that is intrinsically related to the promotion of human
development, seen as people-centred sustainable
development, in the context of governance, into which
women's presence and actions must be interwoven.
From the home to public life, the State must ensure the
empowerment of women and men alike so as to build
better citizens, better fathers, better mothers, promoting
a platform of education that helps to raise children who
are peaceful and non-aggressive.

Today, the Administration of our country depends
on a significant number of women who work for the
Panamanian Government, including the Vice-President
and Foreign Minister of the Republic, other ministers,
deputy ministers, agency director and heads of
diplomatic missions. Similarly, the creation of a gender
unit in the police force under the law on prevention
of femicide is another example of the integration of
women into the security agenda of Panama.

A couple of days ago on 11 October, we celebrate
the International Day of the Girl Child, a generation
that must empower so as to effectively break the circle
of poverty, violence, inequality and exclusion. The girls
of today will inherit the world of tomorrow, and we
must deliver them a safe and peaceful environment. In
the same vein, Panama favours the election of a woman
as Secretary-General because we support and will
continue to support all efforts of that organ to ensure
that a woman occupies that position of world leadership
and guidance.
In conclusion, if we are to achieve the development
we desire, we need a more feminine vision of the world.
Yes, such a vision will come mainly from women, but
also from engaged and informed men. The participation
of 100 per cent of our people in every last phase of
the search for lasting peace and security will finally
release the human potential to resolve the most pressing
issues we face. Perhaps the most important reference
in the resolution adopted today is its last line - the
Security Council "decides to remain actively seized of
the matter".

