Ms. Nemat: I would like to thank the
representative of Nigeria, the President of the Security
Council, for the invitation to speak here today. I have
the honour of speaking on behalf of the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security, a coalition of
international civil society organizations that advocates
for the equal and full participation of women in all
efforts to maintain international peace and security.
Personally, as a long-time advocate for the rights of
women in Afghanistan, I am delighted to sit at this
high-level table.

As the Secretary-General has reported, we have
seen some progress in the implementation of the
women, peace and security agenda, particularly within
the United Nations system. The establishment of the
United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), once
adequately funded, and with advice from women's
human rights defenders, offers Governments and civil
society new possibilities for effectively advancing
gender equality and the empowerment of women. The
increased number of references to women, peace and
security in United Nations reports and mandate
renewals by the Security Council are also most
welcome. So, too, is the Security Council's adoption in
December 2010 of resolution 1960 (2010) on women,
peace and security, which focuses on strengthening the
prevention of, and the response to, conflict-related
sexual violence.

However, we also agree with the Secretary-
General that implementation remains far from even.
This is particularly true with respect to the
implementation of the provisions contained in
paragraph 1 of resolution 1325 (2000) on women,
peace and security, namely, the

"increased representation of women at all
decision-making levels in national, regional and
international institutions and mechanisms for the
prevention, management, and resolution of
conflict".

The theme of this open debate is therefore
particularly timely. As I know from experience in
Afghanistan, women are crucial to all efforts to create
and maintain peace and security, and there are
examples from around the world - in Liberia, Kenya,
Sierra Leone, Nepal, Yemen, Guatemala, Northern
Ireland and in many others - that demonstrate that
women can be effective leaders in conflict prevention

and in all aspects of peacebuilding. Nevertheless, we
continue to face political and practical barriers to
exercising our right to full and meaningful
participation in every peace process. It is particularly
frustrating that we are repeatedly marginalized, despite
the many national and international commitments
already made to including us at the decision-making
table.

There are three urgent steps that the United
Nations and its Member States must take: increasing
women's role in the prevention of conflict; fulfilling
women's right to participate fully in decisions
regarding the future of their countries, including in
peace processes; and ensuring that women's equal
rights are fundamental to peace accords and all
political settlements.

As to the first step - increasing women's role in
the prevention of conflict - the most effective way to
ensure peace and security for all is, of course, by
preventing conflict. Too often, however, national and
international efforts to do so ignore or, worse,
undermine the important work women are already
doing in their communities to address the root causes
of conflict.

In looking for ways to effectively prevent
conflict, national and international authorities should
ask us women what lessons we have already learned
and what recommendations we have for addressing the
root causes of conflict. And if we are to continue and
increase our work in conflict prevention, we need the
Council's support in ensuring our safety and in
guaranteeing independent investigations into any
attacks on us, the effective control of arms transfers
and sustained funding for the development of our
programmes.

Secondly, in fulfilling women's right to
participate fully in decisions regarding the future of
our countries, including in peace processes, it is vital
that women in conflict-affected areas be fully able to
exercise their equal right to shape their country's
future. The United Nations and its Member States have
repeatedly expressed a commitment to that principle.
However, there has been little or no sense of urgency in
seeing that through. A commitment to women's equal
and full participation requires our immediate
involvement in the drafting and negotiating of all peace
agreements and in the reform of relevant political,
security and justice institutions.

The next 12 months will see, for example, new
elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
continuing political transition in the Middle East and
North Africa, and ongoing efforts to bring peace to
Afghanistan. In all such situations, we strongly urge
the Council to support the full participation of women
in constitutional and legislative reform, to support
women political candidates and to provide safe
environments for women to fully exercise their rights
in electoral processes.

The development of women's leadership in peace
processes must be promoted at the local, national and
international levels. To ensure that the voices of the
most marginalized are heard in those processes, the
efforts of women's groups to strengthen the links
between communities and negotiations at the national
level require greater investment and protection.

There is an important connection between high-
level political commitment and its translation to the
field or local level. For example, in Afghanistan, when
we asked for protection for women provincial
candidates, central authorities immediately agreed to
provide that protection. However, when the provincial
women candidates approached the local authorities, the
women and their security concerns were dismissed or
mocked, and they were told that such protection would
be a waste of resources.

Thirdly, as to ensuring that women's equal rights
are fundamental to peace accords and all political
settlements, it has been frustrating to see that the full
recognition of all rights is still not consistently
included in peace talks and accords, and there appears
to be little sense of urgency to improve that. In too
many cases, as was the case in the Sudan in 2005, even
when women have been included in peace talks, their
rights have been neglected in the accords.

Today's open debate is focused on the matter of
women's security. When Afghan women are asked for
their definition of security, we use the expression
"amnyat wamasuniat", by which we mean a
comprehensive feeling of safety in daily public and
social life. The success of peace agreements must be
gauged not just by the fact of their having been signed,
but by real, measurable security improvements for
women and for all members of the community.

Peace is a process, not an event. We look to
Member States, including members of the Security
Council, to ensure that women are consistently

appointed as mediators and negotiators and to ensure
that our rights are fundamental to peace processes and
outcomes. We have seen the difference women make
when they are involved in conflict prevention and
resolution, highlighted most recently in the awarding
of this year's Nobel Peace Prize to women from
Liberia and Yemen for that work.

In conclusion, I would like emphasize that
women, especially in conflict-affected situations,
should not be considered victims; rather, we should be
duly recognized as powerful agents of change.

