Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): I thank the presidency
of Nigeria for organizing this important event. I also
commend Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, Under-
Secretary-General Michelle Bachelet, Executive
Director of the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women, and other
speakers on women and peace and security on their
insightful statements.

Eleven years ago, the Security Council adopted
the landmark resolution 1325 (2000) on women and
peace and security. Bangladesh, a member of the
Council at that time and one of the core sponsors of the
resolution, was closely associated with the adoption of
that historic document, which endeavours to ensure
women's rights and roles in peace and security. The
decisions adopted in the document apply not only to
States, but also to actors involved in the post-conflict
peace process. We take a modicum of pride in what we
did a decade ago.

Thereafter, several resolutions, such as
resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009), 1889 (2009) and
1960 (2010), have been adopted to buttress the process
initiated in resolution 1325 (2000). We are, however,
disappointed to note that violence against women and
girls continues, as detailed in various reports. As we
have mentioned in the past, women and girls suffer
most as victims of conflict, while in the peace process
they are mostly deprived of the dividends. Therefore,
the onus lies on us to ensure that the oppression of
women and girls, particularly that based on gender, is
stopped forever.

We are well aware that poverty, the struggle for
scarce resources, and socio-economic injustice and
unfairness lie at the heart of conflicts, and that all of
them sadly create breeding grounds for social blights,
including violence against women and girls. The
resulting impact not only leads to insecurity for women
and girls, but also impairs political and economic
stability, as well as national security. Therefore,
protecting women's rights is not an option, but an

obligation that requires coordinated action from all of
us.

We recognize that empowering women will lead
to their taking command of resources and acquiring
adequate leadership capabilities for the efficient
management of those resources. Therefore, we
emphasize the fulfilment of women's economic needs
and the necessity of their engagement internationally at
all levels and in all forms of decision-making.

While the former could be achieved by ensuring
women's access to and participation in income-
generating and entrepreneurial activities, such as
micro-credit, education, vocational training and public
health, the latter could be ensured through the
recruitment of women, particularly to senior positions.
In order to more clearly understand the needs of the
women of the South, we must ensure that women from
the global South get due recognition in the
consideration of such recruitment. For proper
coordination with the field, the fair representation of
troop- and police-contributing countries must be
ensured, as decided previously by the General
Assembly and the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations of the United Nations.

We believe that women's participation can be
ensured through an inclusive process. At the policy
level, this requires the creation of a mechanism to
integrate women into decision-making processes,
which should be supported by the necessary capacity-
building initiatives at the community level that would
enable women to effectively participate. We strongly
believe that our debates and discussions, instead of
being confined to our respective capitals, should
transcend borders and reach women at the grass-roots
level, women who may sometimes be unable even to
find the words to express their agony. This has to be
done by empowering the people, especially women, at
the grass-roots level. If we fail to do so, our progress
will be slow.

In Bangladesh, through our experience of nation-
building and women's empowerment, we have
embraced that view and developed what our Prime
Minister, Her Excellency Sheikh Hasina, calls a peace
model. The central message of the model is to
empower people, including women and vulnerable
groups, by providing them with an education and
helping them to build their skills, by ensuring that they
exercise their right to vote and participate in
governance, by raising their income level, by ending
poverty and hunger and by eliminating all forms of
discrimination and terrorism. In her address to the
General Assembly (see A/66/PV.22), the Prime
Minister of Bangladesh presented her model to the
world community, as she is convinced that if peace is
attained, development and prosperity will follow. We
would be happy to share our experiences with
interested delegates.

In Bangladesh, women occupy the top political
leadership posts in the country. The Constitution of
Bangladesh guarantees the equality of men and women
within the broad framework of non-discrimination on
the grounds of religion, race or gender. The
Government has adopted a national policy for women's
advancement and a national plan of action. A women's
development implementation committee, headed by the
Minister for Women's and Children's Affairs, monitors
the implementation of policies for women's
empowerment. It has also introduced gender-based
budgeting. The results have been highly positive. To
cite just one example, the enrolment of girls in both
primary and secondary level schools exceeds that of
boys, helped by tuition waivers and the provision of
stipends for girls in secondary schools.

The Government has enacted laws to protect
women against domestic violence and is currently
implementing a number of projects to develop the
capabilities of women. Many affirmative actions have
been taken that help women in distress and elderly
women. In order to involve women in decision-making
processes, the Government has adopted a quota system
for women in the national Parliament and in the
recruitment of our civil service officers, in addition to
direct elections and open competitions.

In the maintenance of international peace and
security, we take pride in our modest contribution of
troops and police forces to United Nations
peacekeeping missions. The recruitment of women to
the police forces and the military amply demonstrates
our commitment to women's empowerment in both the
national and the international arenas. We are pleased
that we were able to deploy a full contingent - an all-
female formed police unit - to the friendly country of
Haiti following the devastating earthquake there.

I am pleased to report that our all-male troop
contingents are fully briefed on gender issues. We
provide the necessary on-the-job training to reinforce

their understanding and sensitivity in that regard. We
are aware that we need to mainstream a gender
perspective into all conflict prevention activities and
strategies, develop effective gender-sensitive early
warning mechanisms and institutions and strengthen
efforts to prevent violence against women, including
various forms of gender-based violence.

In conclusion, I would reiterate that we in
Bangladesh have been making our best efforts to
ensure women's empowerment and participation in all
spheres of life, as we believe that educating a boy
means educating a person, while in contrast, educating
a girl means educating a family. We are willing to
replicate any good practices that we come across
globally in our national policy and are similarly ready
to share our relevant experience with others for the
good of humankind.

