Ms. Mohammed: First allow me to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for this month and to commend
you for convening this important open debate. I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his report on
conflict-related sexual violence (S/2018/250). I would
like to further commend Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed and Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
Pramila Patten for their insightful briefings. I wish to
further thank Ms. Razia Sultana, of the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security, for sharing her
experience and some strategic approaches to preventing
sexual violence from being used as a destructive
weapon of war, particularly against women and girls.

The African Union (AU) member States have
undertaken with determination, together with the
AU Commission, to make the women and peace and
security agenda a concrete instrument of the AU Peace
and Security Council and of the international agenda.
The African Union Commission is fully committed to
ensuring that women's empowerment, gender equality
and access to justice are strong components of its peace
and security architecture and are fully implemented at
local, national and continental levels.

Today's open debate is all the more relevant as
it places a sharp focus on concrete strategies and
practical implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda. Over the years, the African
Union has developed strategies to answer the call by
operationalizing, monitoring and evaluating reporting
systems to better ensure the protection of civilians.

The AU stands firmly with regard to its position
of zero tolerance for sexual violence. In that context,
I would like to put forward three specific strategies
the African Union has developed to accelerate the
implementation the resolution 1325 (2000) agenda and
to address sexual and gender-based violence.

First, within the African context, protocols,
declarations, laws, policies and strategies for
addressing sexual and gender-based violence, and,
more specifically, conflict-related sexual violence,
are in place. For instance, as of December 2017, 22
African countries had adopted national action plans
on resolution 1325 (2000) and related resolutions,
including those that specifically address conflict-
related sexual violence.

Secondly, while we recognize the weak
implementation of those normative frameworks, the
African Union's Office ofthe Special Envoy on Women,
Peace and Security has undertaken initiatives towards
bridging the gap between policy and implementation.
Specifically, the Office of the Special Envoy has
embarked on the development of a continental results
framework for monitoring and reporting on the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda in Africa. The framework was validated in
March 2018 by African Union member States and
national action plans were adopted. The framework
provides a unique opportunity to address conflict-
related sexual violence by ensuring that AU member
States are held accountable for their commitments
to preventing sexual and gender-based violence in
conflict, as well as to enhancing women's participation
in peace processes and ensuring that women's needs
are met in post-conflict reconstruction processes, in
line with the provisions of resolution 1325 (2000) and
related resolutions.

Thirdly, building on earlier actions to move

forward the implementation of commitments on
the women and peace and security agenda, the AU
Commission continues its efforts to enhance the
agency of women in peace processes through support
to women's networks that strengthen the role and
leadership of women in key paths to peace, security
and development. Those include two major initiatives
that I would like to mention. The first is the creation of
the Network of African Women Mediators, FemWise,
facilitated by the Panel ofthe Wise and the Office ofthe
Special Envoy on Women, Peace and Security, and the
African Women Leaders Network. That was initiated
in partnership with the United Nations through the
Offices of the AU Special Envoy on Women, Peace
and Security and UN-Women with the support of the
Federal Republic of Germany. The African Women
Leaders Network has recorded important milestones
for women on the ground, including the joint AU-
United Nations high-level solidarity mission to Nigeria
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which took
place in July 2017 and was led by the Deputy Secretary-
General to revitalize women's participation in peace,
security and development in Africa. Women leaders,
from top leadership to those affiliated with grassroots
organizations, monitored and reported to the Security
Council and the General Assembly sexual and gender-
based violence committed against women and girls
in fragile and conflict zones. National chapters of the
Network have been launched in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and in C6te d'Ivoire, demonstrating the
action-oriented and national ownership of perspectives
of that inclusive platform. It is a Network of and for
women and for action.

We wish to commend the Permanent Missions of
Germany and Ghana for taking the leadership of the
Group of Friends of the African Women's Leaders
Network to the United Nations as a concrete way to
support and promote that initiative with a guiding vision
to support women's participation in peace, security and
political processes on the continent through the work of
the United Nations. We thank the 51 cross-regional and
dynamic Member States that have joined the Group and
invite others to join it in order to bolster this agenda on
the international scene.

Let me conclude by saying that the United Nations
agenda on women and peace and security remains a
key priority for the African Union Commission and
its Chairperson. The Council can fully count on the
AU's support to ensure its concrete implementation, in
line with the Joint United Nations-AU Framework for
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, signed,
respectively, by the two institutions in April 2017 and
January 2018.

