Mrs. Kafanabo (United Republic of Tanzania):
Mr. President, allow me to congratulate you for
organizing this open debate on women and peace and
security. By focusing our discussion on sexual violence
in situations of armed conflict, the Security Council
will be sending an authoritative message of
condemnation to those parties that are perpetrating or
condoning such acts in conflict situations as well as a
message of hope to the victims. This debate is also
contributing to defining an international code against
sexual violence in conflict situations.

I thank the President of the General Assembly,
the Deputy Secretary-General and all the presenters for
their informative presentations on this subject earlier
today.

The concern for the protection of women and
girls against sexual and gender-based Violence has
been reflected in various Security Council documents.
It is unfortunate that, despite the numerous calls made
to protect women and girls, there has been an
escalation of systematic and brutal acts of sexual
violence and abuses as calculated instruments of war
against civilians, especially women and girls. The
Security Council, with the support of Member States,
needs to take bold measures to stop this trend. It is our
expectation, therefore, that this open debate will lead
to recommendations that will enable the Security
Council to respond effectively to the use of sexual and
gender-based violence in conflict situations and to
galvanize concerted international action against such
crimes.

It is high time that we recognized sexual violence
in conflict situations as a pervasive criminal act with
global repercussions. Such acts of targeted violence
add new dimensions to regional and international peace
and security. We call upon all parties to conflict to end
these barbarous acts and to take measures to protect
civilians, including women and girls.

The Security Council needs to send a clear
message to parties in armed conflicts that sexual
violence in any manifestation is not condoned and that
stern measures will be taken against the perpetrators so
as to end impunity. We thus call upon Member States to
comply with their obligations to prosecute perpetrators
and to support the work of the International Criminal
Court in that regard.

It is unfortunate that civilians, and in particular
women and girls, are increasingly being targeted in
current warfare. Humanitarian law is being blatantly
violated and perpetrators escape with impunity. There

08-3908]
is thus an enormous challenge to the international
community as a whole and to peacekeeping missions in
particular to ensure that civilians are protected.

We are encouraged that sexual violence is
included in some peacekeeping protection of civilian
mandates. These mandates, however, need to be
matched with political resolve and resources, doctrine
and guidance. In the same vein, the national defence
policies of troop-contributing countries need to be
explicit and emphatic on protection of civilians,
including women and girls, in the training of troops for
peacekeeping missions. Equally, national laws must be
robust in dealing with those responsible for such acts
of violence.

Sexual violence in conflict situations needs to be
addressed holistically. In that regard, efforts to
encourage women to report it when they are attacked,
as well as mechanisms to assist the victims, need to be
in place. In addition, programmes to strengthen the rule
of law need to be implemented so as to end impunity
and provide justice for the victims. In the longer term,
community-based interventions to address the health,
psychosocial and educational needs of children and
adults, including men and boys, affected by and
implicated in the violence need also to be in place. This
means that interventions need to be carried out during
and after a conflict.

While we believe that national Governments have
the primary responsibility for the protection of their
nationals, the support of the international community,
as appropriate, is critical in addressing sexual violence
in conflict situations.

Let me conclude by reiterating that the
Government of the United Republic of Tanzania
strongly condemns all acts of sexual and gender-based
Violence in all their manifestations. It is in this regard
that Tanzania joined in sponsoring last year's General
Assembly resolution 62/ 134, entitled "Eliminating rape
and other forms of sexual violence in all their
manifestations, including in conflict and related
situations", and is among the sponsors of the draft
resolution to be adopted today. We are willing to work
with the international community to end sexual and
gender-based violence as well as to end impunity.

