Mr. Minami (Japan): To begin, I would like to
express my gratitude to the President for convening
this important meeting. I also directly extend my
sincere appreciation to the Secretary-General;
his Special Representative on Sexual Violence in
Conflict, Ms. Bangura; the Special Rapporteur
on trafficking in persons, especially women and
children, Ms. Giammarinaro; Ms. Davis for their very
informative briefings.

We appreciate the Secretary-General's report
(S/2016/36l), which is very strong and comprehensive.
The most significant element of the report is that it
brings to light new dimensions of sexual violence
employed as a tactic of terrorism by extremist groups
to advance their core objectives.

We find it useful, therefore, that the French
presidency has decided to focus on the nexus between
trafficking in persons and conflict-related sexual
violence, as trafficking in persons for sexual purposes
is being used more and more systematically by such
groups as a tool for recruitment, fundraising and other
strategic objectives. These atrocities not only defame
humanitarian values and violate human rights law and
norms, but also pose a serious threat to international
peace and security. Now is the time for the Security
Council to reflect on how to counter them and what
tools are at our disposal.

In this regard, the Security Council debate of
December 2015 (see S/PV.7585) was a historic occasion,
in that trafficking in persons was discussed for the first
time among the Council members, and it led to the
adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2015/25. We
commend the efforts of the United States to initiate this
process, and fully support the statement. We hope that
the Council continues to deal with this agenda.

Today, I would like to touch upon two points:
first, building up national and international normative
frameworks; and secondly addressing the issue of
non-State actors.

On the first point, it is essential to support
and strengthen national ownership, leadership and
responsibility to counter sexual violence. In this regard,
the reform of national military, police and judiciary
sectors should be emphasized to enforce their capacities
to prosecute and punish perpetrators. We strongly
support the critical work of the Team of Experts on the
Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, which
Japan continues to assist as its top donor. We value the
tangible outcomes of their activities in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and other countries.

In the international arena, the Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children are the most important
and universal normative frameworks. We must also not
forget the role of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime. Additionally, the International Criminal
Court (ICC) can serve as a tool to hold perpetrators
accountable, while at the same time providing the
victims with psychological and physical support through
its Trust Fund for Victims, to which Japan makes both
personnel and financial contributions. Achieving the
universality of the ICC is necessary to put an end to
impunity and to alleviate the suffering of victims.

Touching upon my second point, we face the cruel
reality that, out of 49 criminal parties named in the
Secretary-General's report, the majority is comprised of
non-State actors. We therefore cannot put off addressing
the fundamental question of how to bring such parties to
comply with international norms, including subsequent
Security Council resolutions. On this point, we find a
ray of hope in the work of Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Bangura, who has achieved
a breakthrough in the strenuous negotiations with
non-State actors in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, South Sudan and other countries. This is an
important step towards finally making progress against
these challenges. In order to make effective use of these
tangible outcomes in the future, the Security Council
should give its utmost support to the mandate of the
Office of Special Representative Bangura, including
through increased technical and financial assistance.
The era of silence should be replaced by
international recognition and concrete actions to turn
resolutions into solutions on the ground. Japan stands
ready to work actively towards this cause together with
the United Nations bodies and other Member States.

