Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for taking the initiative to organize
today's open debate on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). I also wish to thank the
Secretary-General for submitting a very comprehensive
report (S/2005/636) along with a detailed system-wide
action plan for the implementation of that resolution.
Naturally, our thanks go as well to all those who
contributed to that report, among others, Mr. Jean-
Marie Guehenno, Ms. Rachel Mayanja and
Ms. Noeleen Heyzer.

The issue of women, peace and security is of
great interest and of paramount importance across the
globe, especially for the many countries in conflict or
post-conflict situations, and also for the United
Nations.

Greece fully aligns itself with the statement to be
made on this topic by the Permanent Representative of
the United Kingdom on behalf of the European Union.

Five years ago, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1325 (2000). It is a landmark. It called for
women's equal participation and their full involvement
in conflict-prevention efforts, peace negotiations,
peacekeeping operations, humanitarian assistance,
post-conflict reconstruction and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration initiatives, as well as
for their protection from human rights abuses in
conflict situations.
Since then Member States, United Nations
entities and civil society actors have made significant
efforts to implement the resolution. Despite significant
achievements, however, major challenges remain in all
areas.

Resolution 1325 (2000) stresses the role of
women in the prevention of conflict and the need to
increase their role in decision-making in conflict
prevention. There is no doubt women's contributions to
preventing conflicts are particularly important in
people-to-people diplomacy. Women can play a critical
role in building the capacity of communities to prevent
new or recurrent violence. We should assist them more
effectively in that direction.

We welcome the various initiatives taken by
Member States, the United Nations and civil society to
support and increase the representation of women in
peace negotiations and to mainstream a gender
perspective in peace agreements. Developing and
implementing post-conflict strategies and programmes
that take into account women's needs is also very
important. We must encourage and strengthen all those
initiatives.

The principle is as old as our world. In that
connection, I would recall the anti-war masterpiece
that Aristophanes wrote in 411 BC, the Lysistrata.
That comedy focuses on the effects of the
Peloponnesian war and the efforts of an Athenian
woman named Lysistrata to stop the war and secure
peace through negotiations with and the support of
other women from the enemy cities of Sparta and
Corinth.

A major element for the full implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) is the incorporation of a gender
perspective in post-conflict reconstruction efforts. All
relevant actors should do more to ensure the inclusion
of the gender aspect in their reconstruction strategies
and programmes.

Building and sustaining peace in a coherent and
holistic manner and guaranteeing a smooth and
enduring transition to peace was one of the great
concerns in the recent High-level Plenary Meeting. The
creation of a Peacebuilding Commission, and the
Peacebuilding Support Office to pave the way for that
transition, gathered extensive support in the meeting.
In that context, we must ensure that the Peacebuilding
Commission will contribute meaningfully to the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We strongly
believe that the Peacebuilding Commission offers the
international community a major opportunity to
guarantee that a gender perspective becomes a regular
part of any peacebuilding process.

Gender-based violence in armed conflict is
another key target of resolution 1325 (2000).
Preventing and responding to that kind of violence
remains one of our greatest priorities. Despite
improved prevention and protection mechanisms, the
response of the international community remains
inadequate. In our view we should increase pressure on
the parties to armed conflict to halt sexual and gender-
based violence - including trafficking in persons -
and to put an end to impunity for such crimes.
Compliance with international humanitarian and
human rights law must be ensured.

Having to prevent and respond to the sexual
exploitation and abuse of local populations by
humanitarian and peacekeeping personnel seriously
impedes our ability to achieve the goals of resolution
1325 (2000) and remains one of our greatest priorities.
Nevertheless, we must express our satisfaction at the
significant progress made in implementing the
resolution through the measures undertaken by the
Secretary-General. Here I would recall that the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations has paid
increasing attention to issues concerning women, peace
and security and that gender concerns are being raised
in all new peacekeeping operations.

Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes remain primarily focused on male ex-
combatants, even though women and girls are also
involved in armed groups. The establishment of the
Peacebuilding Commission should contribute to the
full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and pay
increased attention to the needs and contributions of
women and girls in post-conflict peacebuilding.

In our View, the key issue remains the better
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We need
more systematic gender mainstreaming into all policies
and programmes at the international and national level.
We should emphasize the need for the development of
national plans, building alliances, inventing new
monitoring devices, and ensuring access of all those
concerned to United Nations organs. Enhanced
cooperation with the countries in conflict areas and
awareness of key players are prerequisites.

National initiatives and national plans are very
significant. In that context, I would like to recall that
Greece, while holding the European Union presidency,
produced a paper on the integration of a gender
dimension into the EU's external relations policies. At
the same time, we organized the Athens Forum on
"Gender, Peace and Foreign Policy: The EU
Perspective". In that respect, we must stress the
existing cooperation between the European Union and
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and the readiness to continue such cooperation
with other international organizations and non-
governmental organizations.

In closing, I re-emphasize that what is required
for the full achievement of the goals set out in
resolution 1325 (2000) is continuous and strong
political will, translated into action and accountability
on the part of all players, national or international,
Member States, the United Nations and civil society
organizations.

