Mrs. Pucarinho (Portugal): I would like to thank
you, Madam President, for convening this open debate,
and Ms. Zainab Bangura, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
and Ms. Hamsatu Allamin of Nigeria for their very
comprehensive presentations.

We welcome the Secretary-General's report
(S/2015/203), which provides us with important
information on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions on monitoring and reporting arrangements
designed to collect more consistent information on
conflict-related violence, and which also contains very
substantive recommendations on thematic and country-
specific situations.

In recent years, the Council's resolutions have
recognized sexual violence as a tactic of war and its
potential for undermining peace and security. We know
that much has been accomplished. Monitoring, analysis
and reporting arrangements have been instituted in a
number of conflict or post-conflict situations in order to
collect more consistent information on conflict-related
sexual violence. A list of parties to conflicts who are
credibly suspected of committing sexual violence has
been created and updated. Portugal appreciates those
significant achievements. There can never be real
security if women are not secure. However, while we
recognize that with the adoption of various resolutions
significant progress has been achieved and a strong
normative framework established, enormous challenges
still lie ahead, particularly owing to the changing nature
of conflicts.

As several of the Council's resolutions have
underlined, ending conflict-related sexual Violence is
crucial to improving international peace and security.
Conflict-related sexual violence has been used as a tool
of warfare in many armed conflicts around the globe,
affecting women and men, girls and boys and societies
as a whole. We note with concern, as the Secretary-
General's report points out, that sexual Violence
continues to be used by extremist groups in several
countries as a tactic ofterror, forcing entire populations
into submission or displacement. Moreover, conflict-
related violence takes place against a backdrop of
structural gender-based discrimination. To be truly
effective, our fight against sexual Violence should start
by promoting gender equality and the empowerment of
women and girls, in order to tackle the root causes of
this frightful crime.

The Council should make full use of existing tools.
For instance, it should guarantee the deployment in
peacekeeping operations of women protection advisers
and gender advisers, so as to strengthen efforts to
prevent and respond to sexual violence, and it should
ensure that provisions on conflict-related violence are
integrated into peace and ceasefire agreements. Despite
the fact that women are the largest group of victims
of sexual violence, they should not be viewed merely
as victims. When it comes to conflict resolution and
peacebuilding efforts, they represent a powerful but still
largely neglected group. The increased participation and
empowerment of women in these areas are crucial to
sustainable peace and security, as set forth in resolution
1325 (2000) and other related resolutions.

Sexual violence in conflict remains prevalent, yet
it also remains widely underreported. Those who come
forward and report such crimes are often burdened
with threats and stigma. We underline the need to take
all necessary measures to ensure the protection of
survivors, witnesses, humanitarian workers, medical
staff, human rights defenders and journalists who
collect information on sexual violence and actually do
help survivors.

Conflict-related sexual violence is prohibited under
international law, under specific provisions of the Geneva
Conventions and their Additional Protocols, and under
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.
Yet too often, sexual Violence in conflicts is regarded
as an unavoidable consequence of the breakdown of
law and order. This culture of impunity must end. The
issue of impunity must be addressed, and Portugal, in
this regard, believes the International Criminal Court
plays a fundamental deterrent role, complementary to
the role of tribunals at national and international levels,
by holding perpetrators accountable and investigating
and prosecuting those responsible for sexual violence,
turning it into a liability for armed groups by exposing
their leaders to international scrutiny and pressure.

We must act to bring the perpetrators of sexual
Violence tojustice, but also to bringjustice and adequate
care to the survivors and victims of such a terrible
crime. We can do this by lifting barriers to women's
access to justice, establishing complaint and reporting
mechanisms, providing support to victims and making
health care accessible and affordable to them.

Sexual violence is simply not tolerable. To end
it, strong messages by the international community
are certainly important, but in practice only genuine
will and effective means can make a real difference in
ending this crime.

