Mr. Begec (Turkey): We too thank the Russian
presidency for organizing this open debate. We welcome
the continuing attention paid to the women and peace
and security agenda in the Chamber and thank the
Secretary-General for his recent report (S/2016/822).
We consider resolution 1325 (2000) to be an important
milestone in terms of addressing the impact of armed
conflict on women. Resolution 2242 (2015), adopted
last year, was also a timely step forward.

Unfortunately, today the severe effects of conflicts
in various regions on women and girls still constitute
a significant challenge that needs to be addressed by
the international community. Furthermore, our world
is now facing the largest humanitarian crisis since
the Second World War, with an increasing influx of
displaced populations due to protracted conflicts and
lack of security. That causes even further difficulties
to vulnerable groups, including women and girls.
Yet, it was promising to see that gender equality
and women and girls' empowerment emerged as an
overarching theme of the commitments made at the
World Humanitarian Summit in Istanbul in May. It will
be equally important to transform such commitments
into action.

The horrific acts perpetrated against women
and girls by terrorist organizations, such as Da'esh
and Boko Haram, require a comprehensive approach
to eliminating the root causes of the problem. That
approach should include women's equal and full
participation as active agents in the prevention and
resolution ofconflicts, peacebuilding and peacekeeping.
Member States should vigorously pursue and ensure
women's equal participation and full involvement in
all efforts for the maintenance and promotion of peace
and security. Our recent history om conflict settlement
includes success stories of women who have played a
crucial role to that end.

On the other hand, in accordance with resolution
1325 (2000), all actors should take special measures to
protect women and girls from gender-based violence,
particularly rape and other forms of sexual abuse,
in situations of armed conflict. Coordinated and
consolidated efforts are also necessary to prevent women
and girls from becoming victims of human trafficking.

Turkey actively promotes the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) in international platforms such
as the United Nations, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and NATO. Furthermore,
we support the empowerment and well-being of women
and girls in various emergency, conflict or post-conflict
situations through our comprehensive development
assistance programme. The projects we carry out in
Afghanistan and Somalia, particularly in the fields of
education and health care, are concrete examples of our
efforts to that end.

Turkey also exerts every effort to provide security
and safety to Syrian women and girls who have fled
the conflict in Syria. Today, Turkey hosts more than
2.7 million Syrians. We have provided Syrians with
temporary protection status and enabled their access to
the Turkish health system. So far, more than 170,000
Syrian babies have been born in medical facilities
inside the temporary protection centres in Turkey. In
those centres, we have taken steps to enable a gender-
sensitive sheltering mechanism.

Multiple initiatives and programmes have been
established to ensure prevention, participation,
protection and education for women and girls. As an
example, between 2013 and 2015 Turkey's humanitarian
aid programme on eliminating and responding to
gender-based violence for Syrian women and girls was
conducted by the Ministry ofFamily and Social Policies,
in cooperation with the United Nations Population
Fund. Similar programmes regarding Syrian women
and girls in Turkey will continue in the coming period.
We believe that women and girls will have an important
role to play in rebuilding Syria's future.

Lastly, I would like to mention that in Turkey,
deliberations and efforts are under way towards
drafting a national action plan for the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000).

