Mr. Duarte Lopes (Portugal): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today's debate.

Portugal fully aligns itself with the statement just
delivered by the observer of the European Union.

Portugal is strongly committed to gender equality,
human rights and international peace and security. As
stated in resolution 1325 (2000), a lack ofgender equality
adversely affects the maintenance of international
peace and security.

Portugal recently adopted its third national plan
for implementing resolution 1325 (2000), with clear
targets, timetables and indicators. The new action plan
fosters the participation of civil society and includes
measures on: first, integrating the women and peace
and security agenda and a gender-equality perspective
at the national, regional and international levels;
secondly, protecting the rights of women and girls
and punishing all forms of violence, including sexual
violence; and, thirdly, promoting the participation
of women and young girls in conflict prevention and
peacebuilding processes.

As became clear at the recent United Nations
Peacekeeping Ministerial on 29 March, there is broad
recognition of the important role that women play in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Despite the progress
achieved, almost two decades since the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), we are far from achieving the
full, effective and meaningful participation of female
peacekeepers and a sufficient level of integration of a
gender perspective in such operations.

We therefore fully support the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative and endorse the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations peacekeeping
operations. We also welcome the new uniformed
gender-parity strategy, launched by the Department of
Peace Operations (DPO), with clear goals to advance
female participation. Its timely implementation requires
very strong synergy between the United Nations and
Member States.

As stated during the Peacekeeping Ministerial,
Portugal has shown an interest in working with DPO
on the possibility of organizing mixed training courses
on capacity and leadership, with 50 per cent male and
50 per cent female participation. We hope that that will
enable meaningful progress in key areas where women
have traditionally been underrepresented.

With regard to our presence in United Nations
peace operations, I would like to highlight the fact that
Portugal is now, for the first time, deploying female
soldiers to combat missions. In that context, we would
like to reiterate our willingness expressed during the
Peacekeeping Ministerial to share lessons learned with
interested partners.

