Mr. Buffin (Belgium) (spoke in French): Belgium
would like to thank the Russian delegation for
convening today's debate. We would also like to thank
Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of UN-
Women, and Ms. Rita Lopidia, Executive Director of
EVE Organization for Women Development, for their
briefings and their presence today.

Belgium fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union. I
would like to add the following observations in my
national capacity.

At the outset, I would like to pay tribute to
Ms. Fatoumata Sire Diakite, late President and founder
of the Association for the Progress and Defence of
Women in Mali, who passed away on 14 October. She
was recognized as Woman of the Year in Mali in 2015
and was honoured by numerous awards. Ms. Diakite
opened the way for Mali to recognize the rights of
women in every domain - the fight against female
genital mutilation, child marriages and gender-based
violence. That woman serves as a model who can
inspire all of us.

An open debate (see S/PV.7533)was held a year
ago on the occasion of the fifteenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). It was the most
well-attended debate in the history of the Security
Council, with 113 speakers over a two-day period. The
vast majority ofMember States co-sponsored resolution
2242 (2015). That overwhelming participation clearly
shows the importance that Member States attach
to the women and peace and security agenda. It is
indeed a matter that concerns us all. Our priority can
now be summed up in three words: implementation,
implementation, implementation.

Today's debate focuses quite rightly on progress
achieved in implementing the commitments undertaken
by Member States, regional organizations and the
United Nations in the high-level review of women and
peace and security in October 2015. Since the outset,
Belgium has strongly endorsed the women and peace
and security agenda. Currently, at the national level,
all Belgian stakeholders are focusing their efforts on
implementing our second national plan of action for
the agenda. We are also in the process of drafting our
third plan, in which we will give particular attention
to women's key role in preventing violent extremism.
We are ready to share our experience in this field and
welcome with interest all the experiences and best
practices that our partners are willing to share.

At the international level, Belgium works closely
with multilateral organizations, such as UN-Women, to
strengthen national capacities for the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda. In our
current National Action Plan, we have identified
three priority partner countries - Afghanistan, the
Democratic Republic of Congo and Mali - to which
we provide financial assistance for the financing of
specific projects. In Mali, together with UN-Women,
Belgium co-chairs the donor group devoted to the issue
of gender equality and has contributed €1.5 million
to the programme to support the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) in the peace process. In
Afghanistan, Belgium has supported the UN-Women
country programme with a contribution of €3 million.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Belgium
has contributed €2 million for the implementation of
the UN-Women programme entitled "Support for the
law and the participation of Congolese women in the
context of resolution 1325 (2000)".

At the invitation of Spain, Belgium became a
founding member of the Women, Peace and Security
Focal Points Network. We thank that country for its
initiative in that regard. We also wish to salute Spain
and the United Kingdom as co-chairs of the Informal
Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security for
their invaluable contributions, and we are pleased
to see that group of experts pursue its work on a
consolidated basis.

The Russian presidency has also asked us to think
about next steps in promoting the women and peace
and security agenda. I would like to make three very
concrete recommendations:
First, we urgently need to increase the active
participation and representation of women in all
political, justice and peace processes. Indeed, many
studies have shown that women's participation increases
the effectiveness of humanitarian aid, the credibility
and quality of peacekeeping operations, the speed of
economic recovery in post-conflict situations and the
sustainability of peace agreements.

Secondly, in the fight against sexual violence
in conflict situations, the fight against impunity
is of paramount importance. This year is the tenth
anniversary of the Brussels Call to Action to Address
Sexual Violence in Conflict and Beyond. In the outcome
document of that international symposium, held in June
2006, participants committed themselves to

"intensify international, regional and
national efforts to end impunity for perpetrators
by strengthening the legal and judicial systems
and by enacting and enforcing legislation, and
provide national justice systems with the necessary
resources to prosecute cases of sexual and gender-
based violence".

Belgium supports that appeal with determination
and actively contributes to current efforts to pursue
the so-called Islamic State - also known as
Da'esh - for its crimes, especially those committed
against the Yazidi community.

Thirdly and finally, the women and peace and
security agenda should be integrated into the thematic
work of the Security Council on counter-terrorism,
even when it comes to countries where groups such as
Boko Haram or the so-called Islamic State are active,
and into country strategies in line with commitments
made in resolution 2242 (2015).

In conclusion, I would like to invite all participants to
attend an event tomorrow morning entitled "From Local
Action to Global Change - Bottom-up Approaches on
Resolution 1325 (2000) from Iraq, Libya and Kenya",
co-chaired by Costa Rica and my country, Belgium,
and organized by the WO=MEN, Women Peacemakers
Programme, PAX and Cordaid associations, It will
provide an important opportunity to illustrate the
important role of civil society in the implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda.

