Mr. Rose (Australia): There has been much
discussion about the importance of peacebuilding in
different forums throughout the course of this year.
Member States have been engaged in the review of the
Peacebuilding Commission, and we commend Ireland,
Mexico and South Africa on their leadership of our
efforts in that regard. The Peacebuilding Commission
has been actively engaged not only in consideration of
the peacebuilding challenges in the countries on its
agenda but also of broader, cross-cutting questions,
including its relationship with the international
financial institutions and regional organizations.

The g7+ group of fragile States and the
International Dialogue on Peacebuilding and State-
building have been active, including in the margins of
last month's General Assembly summit on the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), in
highlighting the negative impact that conflict, fragility
and armed violence have on the achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals - a point we expect
to be reiterated with the release of the World Bank's
World Development Report in 2011.

Importantly, the Security Council has also been
actively considering these issues, with its consideration
of transition and exit strategies from peacekeeping
operations in February (see S/PV.6270); the debate
convened by Japan on post-conflict peacebuilding in
April (see S/PV.6299); and most recently, in a more
holistic fashion, through the summit convened by the
Turkish presidency last month (see S/PV.6389).
Today's debate is a timely continuation of those
discussions. It brings together important strands of
work, which, collectively, should put the United
Nations in a better place to address the needs of
conflict-affected communities.
The first of these strands is the report of the
Secretary-General on peacebuilding in the immediate
aftermath of conflict (S/2010/386). We welcome the
progress that has been made in implementing the
ambitious agenda for action set out in the Secretary-
General's 2009 report (S/2009/304), and we appreciate
the honesty in this year's report in acknowledging that
there remain areas in which further work needs to be
done.

We urge the continuation of this work as a matter
of priority, especially in relation to clarifying the roles
and responsibilities of relevant actors in relation to
security sector reform and the rule of law, and in
strengthening the relationship with the World Bank.
The report's central message, as we read it, is that
peacebuilding is a collective effort that requires a
coherent, consistent and integrated approach not only
from the United Nations, but from the broader
international community. This is a message we
endorse.

The second strand of work under consideration
today is the recently released report of the Secretary-
General on women's participation in peacebuilding
(S/2010/466). Not only must women's rights be
protected in conflict-related situations; women must
also be able to fully and effectively participate in all
aspects of conflict prevention, resolution and
peacebuilding activities if we are to build a durable
peace. We welcome the detailed action plan set out in
the Secretary-General's report, which, if implemented,
will make a substantial contribution towards that end.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
discuss a related strand of work which is under
consideration by this Council, namely, the report of the
co-facilitators on the review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture (S/2010/393, annex). To
paraphrase the co-facilitators, the report proposes a
series of recommendations addressed to a range of
actors that, if implemented, would lead to a more
relevant, flexible, empowered and better understood
Peacebuilding Commission. Such an outcome is in the
interests of all Member States.

Of particular interest to the work of the Council,
the report notes, unsurprisingly, that peacebuilding
needs to be considered at the inception of a
peacekeeping mission. This point has been repeatedly
made by the Council, most recently at the end of its
summit-level meeting in September (see SPV/6389).
This demands a multitude of voices - political,
humanitarian, development and security - in the
mission mandating and review processes. A closer and
more organic relationship between the Security
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission throughout
the Council's consideration of a situation could provide
a forum within which these voices could be heard. It
could also help to affect the mind-shift that is called
for in the report, away from the current, predominately
peacekeeping one. Peacekeeping should be seen as a
part of a broader peacebuilding and stabilization effort
rather than as an end in itself.

These three reports demand our attention.
Together with the eagerly anticipated report on the
review of civilian capacities, they have the potential to
transform the way in which the United Nations
conducts peace operations. The Council is to be
commended for placing a spotlight on this issue and for
driving many of these processes forward. It is equally
beholden now on the Council to sustain its focus on
these issues in order to ensure that the good ideas
reflected in these reports are translated into action.

