The Secretary-General: I thank the United
Kingdom for convening this meeting, which builds
on last December's adoption of the far-reaching
resolution 2331 (2016), targeting human trafficking
in conflict situations. Allow me to start with a short
personal reflection.

I come from a country that, for centuries, engaged
in the cruel trade in human beings. It is part of our
history that we will never allowed to be forgotten. Of
course, Portugal ultimately outlawed slavery in the
nineteenth century, and a global norm against it has
now long been in place. Indeed, the very conscience
of the United Nations was shaped by that disgraceful
violation of human dignity.

I wish that I could say that human trafficking is a
thing of the past. Unfortunately, that is not the case.
Trafficking networks have gone global. According
to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC), victims can be found in 106 countries.
The International Labour Organization (ILO) reports
that 21 million people around the world are victims of
forced labour and extreme exploitation. Annual profits
are estimated to be $150 billion. Beyond these numbers
is the human toll: the lives cut short, the families and
societies torn apart, and the gross violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law.

Human trafficking takes many forms. Women and
girls in particular are targeted again and again and
again. We see brutal sexual exploitation, including
forced prostitution, forced marriage and sexual slavery.
We see the appalling trade in human organs. Let us also
remember that modern manifestations of servitude may
touch and even implicate us all. Global supply chains
have transformed many lives for the better, but not
always without cost. In some situations, clothes, food,
smartphones, jewelry and other consumer goods may
bear, wittingly or unwittingly, the traces of exploitation.
Gleaming new skyscrapers may owe some of their shine
to the sweat of bonded laborers.

Human trafficking thrives where the rule of law
is weak or non-existent. Situations of armed conflict
are especially virulent breeding grounds for human
trafficking. In some of today's conflicts, we are
confronted by armed groups that not only openly engage
in enslavement and forced labour, but actually argue that
it is legal. In Syria, Da'esh has organized slave markets
and even published manuals instructing its fighters on
how to capture, control and trade enslaved women and
girls. The leaders of Boko Haram have also argued that
slavery is legal. In other conflicts, other groups force
men, women and children under their control to labour
in unsafe mines, as porters and domestic servants, and
on the frontlines.

Fleeing these threats, refugees and displaced people

confront new ones. As people take to the road, predators
take advantage. Smugglers often coerce and manipulate
individuals for profit and make them victims of sex or
labour trafficking. Terrorists and violent extremists
use sexual enslavement as a tool for recruitment. Drug
traffickers use kidnapping and ransom to finance their
operations, and criminal gangs force unaccompanied
children into a life of petty crime.
Moreover, impunity prevails. According to the
UNODC December 2016 Global Report on Trafi'icking
in Persons, there are hardly any convictions for crimes
related to human trafficking in conflict situations
or elsewhere. The lack of aggressive investigations
and prosecutions only adds to the injustice, allows
perpetrators to function without fear, fuels corruption
and creates widespread disillusion. Allow me to make
another personal reflection in that regard.

I remember that when I worked in Government,
I never expected my two children to be victims of
trafficking, but I always was afraid of the impact
of drugs on their lives. I think that is the same with
most political leaders around the world. Most political
leaders around are afraid of the impact of drugs on
their families, but they do not think it likely that their
families will be impact by human trafficking. That
is probably why we have seen much greater priority
given to fighting drug traffickers than to fighting the
traffickers ofhuman beings. Ofcourse, drug trafficking
is an awful crime, but to traffic in human beings is, I
must, much worse. I believe that it is our duty to really
commit ourselves to doing everything we can to make
this a clear priority for all Governments and in all forms
of international cooperation.

There is much that we can do both to punish human
trafficking and to prevent it in the first place. A solid
legal and normative framework is in place, including
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its Protocol against Trafficking in
Persons, which includes the first internationally agreed
definition of the crime of trafficking in persons and
provides a framework for effectively preventing and
combatting it. ILO conventions and the Global Plan of
Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons complement
the Protocol, and are further key parts of the picture. All
of these build on the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. Under the under the Rome Statue, enslavement
can constitute a crime against humanity.

United Nations military and civilian personnel
must also be held accountable to these standards. I
continue to take steps to strengthen our efforts to
prevent and respond to sexual exploitation and abuse
committed under the United Nations flag. Since human
trafficking does not respect borders, Member States
need to strengthen cooperation on law enforcement,
investigations and intelligence-sharing. We also need
to strengthen coordination among Member States,
civil society, the business community and United
Nations entities, including through the Inter-Agency
Coordination Group Against Trafficking in Persons.
At the same time, we need to get at the underlying
vulnerabilities that fuel this phenomenon, for example
by empowering girls through education, by respecting
the rights of minorities and by establishing safe and
legal channels of migration.

The 2030 Agenda for sustainable Development can
also help us break the chains of exploitation. Three
of the goals explicitly address human trafficking,
including sex trafficking, forced labour, child labour
and the recruitment and use of child soldiers. As we
engage the private sector as a key partner in achieving
the Sustainable Development Goals, we need to ensure
it takes greater responsibility when sourcing from
conflict areas. Better data will be crucial. Funding
is critical. The United Nations is also committed
not only to supporting victims, but to incorporating
their voices and views as we develop and implement
anti-trafficking interventions.

Finally, at a time of divisions in so many areas,
this should be an issue that can unite us. Let us
come together around the key issues of prosecution,
protection and prevention, and thereby build a future
without human trafficking.

