Ms. Plepyte (Lithuania): Allow me to start by
commending South Africa as the President of the
Security Council for the month of October for convening
today's important debate. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2019/800), recommendations and encouragement.
Lithuania aligns itself with the statement delivered on
behalf of the European Union and delivered on behalf
of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security.

Resolution 1325 (2000) was a milestone in our
collective efforts to advance gender equality around
the globe. However, as we are preparing to mark the
twentieth anniversary of the resolution next year, we
still have miles to go on the uneven and challenging
road of implementation, which means that, despite
achievements over the past 19 years, the objectives
of the resolution have not been fully achieved, and
significant work remains to be done.

Violence against women and girls, attacks on
their human rights continue to occur in conflict and
post-conflict settings. Representation of women at
decision-making levels and inclusion of women in
prevention, management and resolution of conflicts
remain insufficient. It is equally worrying that political
will is not always consistent and that the international
community often falls short of its ambitions. We must
not allow for any regression and backtracking on this
important agenda. We must therefore consolidate all
political will to maintain course towards goals that
were set almost 20 years ago.

We were encouraged and welcomed recent
decisions made by the Security Council to expand
the designation criteria for sanctioning individuals
who perpetrate sexual and gender-based violence in
the context of armed conflict. We would like to see
this practice developed further so that sexual and
gender-based violence becomes a standard element of
sanctions regimes.

The protection and promotion of human rights for
all women and girls and their empowerment is a long-
standing priority for Lithuania. My country remains
firmly committed to the implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda. We are fully aware that
the scale and complexity of the implementation of the
agenda requires coherent and comprehensive efforts. In
this respect, the pivotal role of civil society, including
women's organizations, should be fully recognized. We
express our concerns for the increase in attacks and
threats against civil society, particularly against women
human rights defenders, whose safety and protection
are essential, as they are our key allies in moving the
women and peace and security agenda forward.

Lithuania is currently working on its second national
action plan, wherein the means and instruments for the
continuous implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda are foreseen. While drafting the
plan, we are working closely with the representatives
of the civil society. We do not merely consult; we are
drafting the plan together. We believe that it is Vital to
engage and cooperate with experts, many of whom we
find in civil society. Civil society can also help us look
for innovative ways to promote the women and peace
and security agenda and address numerous challenges.
Lithuania supports such high-impact initiatives aimed
at searching for innovative ways to move forward as the
Women's Peace and Humanitarian Fund. My country
supports the work of the Fund and has just allocated
another voluntary contribution to its important work.

Lithuania remains a strong advocate for the
integration of gender perspective in all aspects of
peacekeeping operations. Increased numbers of women
peacekeepers, deployment of women's protection
and gender advisers, and human rights and gender-
awareness training have all proven successful and should
be further advanced. Nationally, my country is striving
to deploy peacekeeping troops with greater gender
balance and continues to encourage female police and
military women to apply. Mandatory predeployment
trainings in Lithuania on gender sensitivity, preventing
sexual exploitation and identifying and responding
to indicators of conflict-related sexual violence have
moved beyond abstract concepts towards more practical,
scenario-based learning. We encourage all troop-
contributing countries to ensure that predeployment
and in-mission trainings meet the highest standards of
the United Nations guidelines on gender sensitivity and
sexual violence.

Despite some positive trends, the progress made
in the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda remains too slow, and further work
is needed to achieve our objectives. This debate is
an important contribution to this effort and serves
as an opportunity to share good practices, articulate
achievements, identify barriers and put forward bold
proposals. Ahead of the twentieth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000), we need to move forward in a
steadfast manner by leaving no one behind.

