Ms. Yanez Loza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation thanks France for convening today's
open debate on an issue of increasing importance to
the Organization. I believe it is important for all of us
here in the Security Council to draw the international
community's attention to the need to periodically
revisit the issue of the role of women in the area of
peace and security. They are simultaneously the victims
of conflicts, participants in fulfilling peacekeeping
operations' mandates and society's peacebuilders.

Ecuador welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2017/861), the concept note (S/2017/889, annex) provided to guide our work and the important
briefings we heard today. We agree on the ever-present
and genuine need to work to achieve gender equality,
the empowerment of women and the protection of their
rights, and to raise awareness about the risks they
face, including all forms of sexual and gender-based
violence. Conflict prevention and resolution, post-
conflict reconstruction and lasting peace can be fully
achieved only if those intrinsic goals are duly taken
into consideration.

In that regard, my delegation welcomes the
mechanisms that have been established to include a
gender perspective in peacekeeping and peacebuilding
processes. Gender-based violence and sexual violence in
conflict situations will always be unacceptable, which is
why it is important for those responsible for such crimes
to be held accountable. Support mechanisms must
therefore be established for victims, as well as ongoing
educational processes for societies. For many, the face
of the United Nations is its peacekeeping operations.
Every effort must be made to end the cases of sexual
abuse and exploitation in those operations for good, as
such abuses undermine the Organization's credibility.

The current national challenges in the area of
women's participation and leadership are not the result
ofa lack of legislation, public policies or administrative
structures, but rather of the lack of implementation of
such laws, policies and structures. That is because
mindsets still have to be changed, and that must be done
every day. If change is to be permanent, our inclusion
efforts must be ongoing and meaningful, but that is a
slow process in which we have to contend with glass
ceilings, broken ladders and sticky floors. Planning,
regularly submitting reports and disaggregating
statistics are therefore all-important. In addition, the
cross-cutting nature of gender equality increasingly
demonstrates the interrelated nature of the various
forums and the need to work assiduously to assess the
outcome of today's meeting.

In conclusion, I would like to underscore that,
starting this year, Ecuador has three women in its
infantry unit serving as peacekeeping operations
observers. We trust that that will be the start of an
ongoing and growing participation that can be extended
to other branches of our armed forces and police force,
as yet another sign that my country is committed to the
ideals of peace and security on which the Organization
is based.

