Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation welcomes Spain's initiative in
convening this open debate. We welcome Prime
Minister Rajoy Brey to preside over today's meeting. I
wish to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
briefing, and the Executive Director of UN-Women,
Ms. Mlambo-Ngucka, for hers as well. China has
also listened attentively to the briefings by the
representatives of civil society.

This year coincides with the twentieth anniversary
of the holding of the fourth World Conference on
Women, and also with the fifteenth anniversary of the
Security Council's adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).

On 27 September, China and the United Nations
jointly sponsored a global summit on women: the
Global Leaders' Meeting on Gender Equality and
Empowerment. The President of China Xi Jinping and
representatives from over 140 countries, including
more than 80 Heads of State and Government, attended
the meeting. The summit was the first of its kind in
which commitments on women were made at the
State leadership level. It is another milestone of the
international cause of women following the Beijing
Conference and is of trailblazing significance. The
leaders of countries committed to further implement
the outcome of the Beijing Conference. That is of great
and far-reaching significance for the development of
the global cause of women. Resolution 2242 (2015),
which was just adopted, also acknowledged the global
summit on women.

With the efforts of the broad membership, of
United Nations bodies and of regional and subregional
organizations, the international community in recent
years has made progress in implementing resolution
1325 (2000), with major achievements in promoting a
greater role for women in peace and security. On the
other hand, the present international security situation
remains complex and grave. Regional conflicts crop up
here and there. Women often bear the brunt of rampant
terrorism and violent extremism. The international
community has a long way to go in protecting women's
rights in conflict. In that regard, I would like to stress
the following points.

First, we need to step up efforts to find political
solutions to hotspot issues and foster an international
environment favourable to women's development. The
international community should stand firmly by the
values ofpeace, development and win-win cooperation;
vigourously take forward the political process of the
relevant conflict-affected countries to promote national
reconciliation and resolve differences through dialogue
and consultations; and provide security protection and
humanitarian assistance to conflict-affected women.
At the same time, effective measures must be taken
to ensure that women have full rights to participate in
every stage of peace processes and that their voice and
demands are heard.

Secondly, we need to tackle both symptoms and
root causes in order to promote the simultaneous
development of various issues in conflict-ridden
countries, including women's issues and economic
and social development. The international community
should help conflict-affected countries to actively carry
out post-conflict reconstruction, and in the affected
countries the focus should be on capacity-building
and socioeconomic development in order to remove
the root causes of conflict and ensure that women
and the population as a whole will have a fair share
of the dividends of development. The international
community should provide development assistance and
technical support to developing countries in their efforts
to achieve gender equality and women's empowerment,
and attention should be paid to providing guidance to
women's organizations and civil society in playing a
positive and constructive role.

Thirdly, efforts should be made to shape a
harmonious and inclusive social culture. In their
rebuilding efforts, post-conflict countries should
strengthen the rule of law, eliminate discrimination,
bias and acts of violence against women; to vigourously
promote gender equality; to remove the roots and
soil in people's mindsets that inhabit women's peace
and development; and to facilitate harmonious social
development in post-conflict countries so that society
will be more inclusive and dynamic.

Fourthly, the existing mechanisms of the United
Nations should be fully enabled to act so that each
can play its own role, creating synergy. The Security
Council should fully perform its primary role of
maintaining international peace and security, with a
focus on properly addressing women and peace and
security. It should strengthen coordination with the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and UN-Women, among others, in line with their
respective responsibilities. With respect to addressing
issues of women and peace and security, United
Nations agencies should give full play to the existing
mechanisms, tapping their potential to improve their
effectiveness. They should be cautious about setting up
new mechanisms.

At the Global Leaders' Meeting on Women
that was held on last month, President Xi Jinping
announced new commitments in support of the global
cause of women. First, with respect to funds, China
will donate $10 million to UN-Women to support
the implementation of the Beijing Declaration and
Programme of Action, as well as the relevant Goal
of the post-2015 Sustainable Development Agenda.
Secondly, as a project commitment, within the next
five years China will take a series of measures to help
developing countries address the challenges facing
women and girls in the areas of health and education
and will strengthen the training of local women. It
will jointly set up with the United Nations, under the
relevant fund, a project to support capacity-building for
women in developing countries.

Those commitments fully embody China's firm
determination and concrete action to promote the sound
development of the global cause of women. China
will fully implement the new commitments made by
President Xi Jinping at the Global Leaders' Meeting
on Women and is ready to work with all parties in
our continued, unremitting efforts to promote the
implementation of the goals of women and peace and
security and to push for greater development of the
global cause of women.

