Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with this
statement.

Fourteen years after the adoption of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000), we note an extraordinary
level of political commitment and activity in the field
of women and peace and security. That would merit a
longer statement than I am able to make here today,
and therefore I ask members to refer to the full, written
version that we are distributing.

We have been witnessing a series of deeply
troubling conflict-related developments leading to
mass displacements, humanitarian catastrophes and
serious violations of international humanitarian
and human rights law, from which women suffer
disproportionately. That challenge should strengthen
our resolve to implement the commitments we have
made in a systematic and sustainable way at the
national, regional and global levels. Neglecting the
rights and needs ofwomen and girls threatens our goals
with respect to peace and security, development and
human rights.

We welcome the focus of today's debate on refugee
and displaced women and girls, who often face multiple
discrimination and multiplied risks to their lives,
health, rights and livelihoods. Displacement frequently
threatens to reverse gains that have been made in terms
of gender equality and the empowerment of women in
general. In addition, we have recently experienced the
phenomenon of gender-specific displacement - women
and girls fleeing their homes to avoid violent extremist
groups that especially target and discriminate against
women and girls.

Women's limited access to resources, services,
financial independence and decision-making processes
in situations of displacement can have consequences
that last across generations. Nothing demonstrates this
more clearly than the lack of access of displaced women
and girls to education. The European Union continues
to focus on ensuring access for all children to education
and protection in crises as a cornerstone of its strategy,
including through the European Union's Children
of Peace initiative, which has reached over 100,000
children in situations of conflict worldwide.

We welcome the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2014/693), which provides continuous and
comparable information on the global implementation
of the Council's resolutions on women and peace
and security. We think that the availability of that
continuous and comparable information is an important
step forward. We also emphasize the importance of
regular briefings by UN-Women Executive Director
Mlambo-Ngcuka and Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Bangura to the Security Council on
specific country situations.

We share the Secretary-General's emphasis on
the need for enhanced engagement with civil society,
human rights defenders and women peacebuilders, as
well as support for their capacity-building, which is a
part of our action on women and peace and security.
We also strongly condemn the continuing attacks
and threats against women political leaders, media
personnel and human rights defenders.

In addition, the resilience of women and girls
in situations of conflict and displacement must be
acknowledged as well as their capacity to be active
agents in conflict resolution and in building lasting
peace harnessed.

We note with serious concern the continued sexual
violence - rape, forced marriage, forced prostitution,
trafficking and sexual slavery - that characterizes an
increasing number of conflicts and the continuing use
of sexual violence as a method of war. We welcome
the clear global, regional and national commitments
taken to tackle that, including those made at the Global
Summit to End Sexual Violence in Conflict and the
framework for cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union.

We must end impunity for crimes of sexual violence,
which must be properly investigated and prosecuted. In
that regard, we emphasize the significant advancement
in international law provided by the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court, as well as non-permanent
international criminal tribunals, in combating sexual
violence in conflict. We also welcome the increased
use of the criteria related to human rights and sexual
violence in the Security Council's sanctions regimes.

Attention to the protection of women and girls
and their participation in conflict resolution and post-
conflict peacebuilding must be transformed from an
exception to a standard practice through systematic
inclusion in policy guidelines, codes of conduct and
training. It should also receive the attention of senior
management in missions and other conflict resolution
and peacebuilding mechanisms. Gender advisers
must be deployed in all United Nations peacekeeping
operations and special political missions. We also call
for the further deployment of United Nations women
protection advisers.

We continue to implement a EU systematic plan on
women and peace and security. We have also defined
the EU priority areas for the next reporting period, 2013
to 2015, which include transitional justice, women's
political participation and economic empowerment,
women's involvement in peace processes and preventing
sexual violence in conflict. Seventeen of the 28
European Union member States have adopted national
action plans on resolution 1325 (2000).

To improve the situation of women and girls,
we need to make better use of the international legal
and policy instruments. General recommendation
No. 30 of the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women, on tackling challenges
to gender equality in situations of conflict, is a
landmark achievement and underlines the importance
of reviewing our progress on women and peace and
security in the context of the twentieth anniversary of
the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action. We
further welcome the upcoming entry into force of the
Arms Trade Treaty on 24 December.

We look forward to the global review of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) next year.
We hope that it provides an additional push to make
all commitments on women and peace and security a
reality - an overall effort, to which such a meeting as
you, Madam President, have organized today is making
a very important contribution.

