Mrs. Azucena (Philippines): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the 10 States members of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
namely, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia,
the Lao People's Democratic Republic, Malaysia,
Myanmar, Singapore, Thailand, Viet Nam and my own
country, the Philippines.

ASEAN Member States share the view that women's
equal, full, effective and meaningful participation is
of great importance at all stages of the peace process
given their indispensable role in the prevention and
resolution of conflict, peacebuilding and peacekeeping,
as embodied in resolution 1325 (2000) and many
subsequent resolutions. Pursuant to that conviction, in
November 2017 ASEAN leaders issued ajoint statement
on promoting women and peace and security in ASEAN
that encourages the inclusion of the women and peace
and security agenda in policies and programmes for the
protection of women and girls, among others.

In August, another ASEAN joint statement was
issued on the women and peace and security agenda

under the ASEAN Regional Forum. Last September
ASEAN held the Senior Officials Conference in Gender
Mainstreaming in the ASEAN Political-Security
Community. The conference is the third in a series of
conferences organized to mainstream gender across all
three ASEAN community pillars. The first conference
was held in June 2018 for the ASEAN Socio-Cultural
community, while the second was held in December
2018 for the ASEAN Economic Community. Among
the issues discussed at the latest conferences was the
promotion of women's empowerment and participation
in post-conflict situation and the implementation of
the joint statement in promoting women and peace and
security in ASEAN.

Also in 2018, in accordance with the purposes
and principles of the ASEAN Charter and pursuant to
the functions of the ASEAN Institute for Peace and
Reconciliation, ASEAN established the ASEAN Women
and Peace Registry. The Registry is a compendium
of women leaders in ASEAN with expertise in the
various aspects of peace processes and reconciliation,
including as negotiators, mediators, facilitators and
researchers. The establishment of the Registry is in
line with the objective of strengthening the capacity of
women as peacebuilders, encouraging a more gender-
balanced approach to peace and conflict and harnessing
the capacities of ASEAN women experts in the field of
peace and reconciliation.

ASEAN believes that increasing women's
participation in decision-making with respect to
conflict management and resolution will help to
overcome the societal divide while enabling women to
work in creating a sustained dialogue that builds links
to peace and stability.

ASEAN believes that peace and security are
essential to the achievement of sustainable development.
To that end, ASEAN recognizes and promotes the
indispensable role of women at all stages of the peace
process, including in peacebuilding efforts and conflict
prevention. ASEAN reiterates its commitment to the
women and peace and security agenda and will continue
to work closely with other Member States, the United
Nations and regional organizations to implement and
realize its goals.

