Ms. Chidiac (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank the United Kingdom presidency for
reconvening the open debate on women and peace and
security. and to take this opportunity to the adoption
of resolution 2493 (2019) last week. It is the latest in
a series of related resolutions, starting with resolution
1325 (2000) and resolution 2467 (2019), on conflict-
related sexual violence.

In that respect, we reiterate the importance of
all resolutions on women and peace and security
and emphasize Lebanon's commitment to the
implementation of all their provisions without selectivity
and in their entirety. Those resolutions consecrate the
concept of social equality and seek to establish more
just societies enjoying stability and the prospects
of peace and security, where rights are secured and
equal and women are ensured fair opportunities to
become partners to men at all levels. We see women
starting revolutions everywhere today, standing up for
their freedom and the security of their society, while
demanding their rights and dictating to Governments
their duty to ensure peace, stability and a decent life.

In September, the Lebanese Government adopted
the first national action plan on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). The plan was drawn up by
the National Commission for Lebanese Women, in
consultation with governmental and non-governmental
parties, including non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) and civil society, to ensure the broadest and
most effective participation in its implementation. We
note the constructive and effective role of civil society
in all its components, particularly with respect to
human rights defenders, both male and female, along
with NGOs.

The operationalization and integration of
partnerships between the Governments and civil society
are crucial and necessary to developing the plan's
mechanisms, as well as its implementation. Lebanon
reiterates through the national plan its commitment
to actively involving women in peacebuilding efforts,
conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction,
as well as maintaining security by encouraging their
participation and representation in local and national
governance structures.

In recent weeks, Lebanon has witnessed a peaceful
and democratic movement, led by women who have
taken to the streets to defend their living, social, civil,
political and personal rights. They have taken to the
streets to safeguard a democratic society that believes
in individual and social freedoms, gender equality,
pluralism and all human rights for all human beings.
They have taken to the streets to create a barrier
between security forces and protesters with a view
to maintaining peace and security. They have taken
to the streets because they believe in equal and fair
participation in decision-making. Theirs is the most
beautiful voice, reflecting with courage, care and
sincerity the concerns, aspirations and dreams of the
entire society. They have taken to the streets so as not
to miss their date with destiny.

Only women can determine their own future. Only
women can chart their own path. Only women can write
their own destiny. Only women can create their own
objectives. Only women can forge their own agendas in
all areas. Women are entrusted with ensuring peace and
security. They must be able to determine for themselves
what is possible and what is not. Women everywhere
will be granted their rights, not because of someone's
choice, but because no one should have that choice.

