Ms. Maira (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
Spain for convening this important debate. We also
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and the
testimony given by each of the briefers. Women and
peace and security is one of the priorities of Chile's
multilateral foreign policy. That was demonstrated
during our term as a non-permanent member of the
Security Council and within the Group of Friends of
Resolution 1325 (2000). In those forums, we renewed
our commitment to the implementation and promotion
of that resolution.

We welcome the adoption this morning of resolution
2242 (2015) in the context of the 2015 high-level review
of resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security. In particular, we emphasize the work done by
members of civil society over the past 15 years, and the
establishment of follow-up mechanisms to improve and
broaden the implementation of the agenda on women
and peace and security throughout the United Nations
system.

Chile was the first Latin American country to have
an action plan in 2009 on the safety and protection
of women in armed conflicts. That commitment
was reaffirmed in a second national plan of action
announced by the President of the Republic Michelle
Bachelet on International Women's Day on 8 March.
This second plan defines four areas and objectives that
we would like to share as good practice: prevention,
participation, protection and relief and recovery. We
have incorporated quantitative indicators and designated
institutions responsible for their implementation in
order to enhance transparency and accountability.

We firmly believe that improving the status of
women is a collective responsibility of our region. We
are aware that the intensification of armed conflicts
and violence in post-conflict situations have particular
repercussions. That is why we are working from a
global perspective and through regional cooperation
to broaden the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) by designing training and capacity-building
programmes to advance Latin American women in that
regard.

At the regional level, Chile participated in
the workshop on gender and security organized in
Asuncien by the Ministries for Foreign Affairs and
Defence of Paraguay. We also hosted the regional
training workshop on gender and security and the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), at which the
participanties shared their countries' experiences with
respect to gender mainstreaming and gender equality
policies.

In August, President Michelle Bachelet delivered
the closing statement at the regional training workshop
on gender and security and the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) that was organized for countries
members of the Central American Integration System
in El Salvador. Under the auspices of the Union of
South American Nations, we sponsored a seminar on
mainstreaming gender in military training and defence
institutions and a workshop on the adoption of gender
concepts in the South American Defence Council.

In New York last April, Chile co-sponsored
with the Netherlands an international workshop on
the integration and implementation of resolutions
1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008) in operations in the
security sectors, organized by the non-governmental
organization Global Network of Women Peacebuilders.
The workshop made recommendations as a contribution
to a global study on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), entitled "Preventing conflict, transforming
justice, securing peace", which will be officially
launched tomorrow.

At the national level, this year the Ministry of
National Defence of Chile has coordinated various
activities for Chilean troops deployed in the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti. They have been
trained in gender issues, the scope of resolution 1325
(2000), human rights and international humanitarian
law, the responsibility to prevent and protect against
gender violence and sexual abuse in peacekeeping
operations, sexual violence and the prevention of
sexually transmitted diseases. In addition, Chile's
National Academy of Political and Strategic Studies
will be launching ajoint academic programme with the
Inter-American Defence College that will mainstream
gender in academic activities and in the dissemination
and research conducted by the two institutions.

Today, the women and peace and security agenda
represents a substantive effort to promote inclusive
development as an overarching strategy for conflict
prevention, its resolution and for the maintenance of
peace and its consolidation in the world. The goal is
to make decisive progress in the implementation of the
spirit and substance of that resolution, incorporating
compliance indicators and expanding mechanisms for
action and dissemination of its contents. However, it is
not enough to abide by the principles of the resolution
and increase the female contingent and civilian
personnel deployed in peace operations in which our
countries are cooperating.

We must be able to translate those principles into
inclusive public policies that guarantee women the full
exercise of their rights in all areas of human endeavour.
Because, ultimately, how can we promote greater
participation by women in decision-making in peace
and security work if in our nations they are barely
represented in the halls of power, do not participate on
equal terms in the labour market and violence against
them is still a serious social problem?

Resolution 1325 (2000) recognizes and promotes
the participation of women in decision-making bodies
for conflict resolution advocating a profound cultural
change that recognizes women as subjects of law
and agents of reform for the rebuilding of peace and
security in conflict and post-conflict situations. Chile
is committed to strengthening the institutional policy of
Chile's Ministry ofNational Defence by mainstreaming
gender in all predeployment training for peacekeeping
operations in which Chile is involved.

We shall monitor accountability regarding gender
violence among staff serving in United Nations
peacekeeping operations within two years, and we
shall appoint gender advisers and a national focal point
for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in
relevant ministries and departments within one year,
as well as for receiving and sending information to and
from missions. We shall also establish an observatory,
consisting of representatives of civil society, to report
on progress in implementing resolution 1325 (2000) in
our country.

The implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
continues to be one of our national and collective
responsibilities, because it is becoming increasingly
clear that no peace and security are possible without
the effective participation of women in the political,
economic, social and cultural processes that cut across
all our societies.

