Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): I would like to
extend the gratitude of my delegation to you,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting on
women, peace and security. We also thank the
Secretary-General for his very incisive report
(S/2012/33) submitted in accordance with resolutions
1820 (2008) and 1888 (2009).

Today's deliberations reaffirm the great
importance that we individually and collectively attach
to the need to address sexual violence in the context of
armed conflict, as well as its impact on women and
children. Our deliberations also provide an opportunity
for us to take stock of what has been achieved and to
identify gaps and challenges that still remain in
addressing this scourge.

As stated in the report of the Secretary-General,
we note with satisfaction that reasonable progress has
been made to date in the implementation of resolutions
1820 (2008) and 1888 (2009), as demonstrated by the
notable efforts made by the United Nations system,
Member States, civil society and other actors,
including the Secretary-General's Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Armed Conflict
and the United Nations Action against Sexual Violence.

However, we remain deeply concerned about the
persistence and rising levels of sexual violence that
still persist in some countries. Women and girls
continue to be targeted, while rape and violence,
including sexual violence, continue to be used as
weapons of war. According to the Secretary-General's
report on conflict-related sexual violence, the past year
has seen several new and ongoing armed conflicts
where sexual violence was widespread and, in some
instances, may have been systematically aimed at
civilians. Mass rapes of women and girls were also
witnessed. That is despite repeated condemnation of
those inhuman acts by the Council's resolutions 1820
(2008), 1888 (2009), and 1960 (2010), which became
beacons of hope for millions of women and girl victims
worldwide.
While recognizing that national justice systems
may be significantly weakened in conflict and post-
conflict situations, we realize that inaction could send a
wrong message, namely, that sexual violence is
tolerated. We therefore call upon all concerned to
refrain from such human rights abuses, and instead to

promote respect for international humanitarian law and
non-violent forms of conflict resolution, and to
cultivate a culture of peace.

The importance of demonstrating our
commitment and political will to prevent sexual
violence, combat impunity and enforce accountability
by prosecuting those responsible for perpetrating such
crimes against civilians cannot be overemphasized. In
addition, we wish to stress the importance for States,
with the support of the international community, of
strengthening efforts to implement the policy of zero
tolerance for sexual violence, and to increase access to
health care, psychological support, legal assistance and
socio-economic reintegration services for victims of
sexual violence, in particular in rural areas, taking into
account the specific needs of women and children,
including those with disabilities.

Botswana sincerely commends the efforts of the
Secretary-General to address the underrepresentation
of women in formal peace processes. To that end, my
delegation welcomes the inclusion of women in
peacekeeping missions in civil, military and police
functions. We also recognize that their presence may
encourage women from local communities to report
acts of sexual violence and other human rights abuses.
In addition, efforts by national and international actors
to engage women and to address gender issues in the
context of combating conflict-related sexual violence
must be accelerated. More concrete action should be
taken to ensure that that is done. We believe that
effective steps to prevent and respond to acts of sexual
violence can significantly contribute to the
maintenance of international peace and security.

Botswana attaches great importance to the
protection and promotion of the rights and
advancement of the status of women. The Government
has made considerable achievements in protecting
women from all forms of violence and in ensuring a
safe and secure environment where their rights are
protected. In addition, it has undertaken several
initiatives to address violence against women and
children. Ending violations of women's human rights is
therefore a moral imperative, and one which we must
collectively combat. In that regard, Botswana strongly
condemns all forms of violence against women and
children and supports all efforts aimed at preventing
and eliminating violence, including sexual violence
against women and children.

In conclusion, we remain optimistic that, given

our collective will as Member States, especially in the

Security Council, we can bring an end to those
despicable crimes.

