Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, I would like to thank France for
convening this open debate on women and peace and
security, on the occasion of the seventeenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), which
Argentina supported as a non-permanent member of
the Security Council in 2000.

Argentina aligns itself with the statement made
by the delegation of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends on Women and Peace and Security.

1 would also especially like to welcome the
Secretary-General's report (S/2017/861), which
shares with Member States his views on the central
role of women in conflict prevention and sets out his
commitments to implementing the women and peace
and security agenda. Argentina shares and supports
the Secretary-General's vision for reforming the
Organization with a coordinated, robust and holistic
approach to prevention that is based on gender equality.
From the beginning, Argentina has embraced the new
emphasis given by the Secretary-General to conflict
prevention and the development of the concept of
sustainable peace, or upholding peace, a narrative in
which women and young people play a fundamental role.

In that regard, we would like to emphasize that
achieving sustainable peace will be facilitated by
increasing the participation of women as stakeholders in
all stages of the peace process, in particular as military,
police and civilian personnel in the Organization's
peacekeeping operations. As has been said, this is not
solely a matter of equity, but also of effectiveness in
fulfilling the mandates of those missions.

In that context, we underscore the fact that
Argentina has reached the United Nations goal of 15 per
cent participation of women as military observers and
officials in peace operations, and is therefore above the
general average. We will continue working to deepen
that commitment through the implementation of the
national action plan for the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions, which is as an
overarching instrument of all national bodies regarding
the issue of women and peace and security.

The strength of resolution 1325 (2000) has been
acknowledging the important role that women play as
key actors in peace processes. The inclusion of women
must remain our priority in defining the mandates
of peacekeeping operations and special political
missions, as well as Security Council peacebuilding
efforts, by integrating specialists in gender issues,
gender violence and sexual violence in the various
Security Council missions and mediation teams. In
addition, we consider it crucial that specific provisions
and gender commitments be included in peace and
ceasefire agreements.

Argentina welcomes the highly appropriate proposal
of the Secretary-General to strengthen the mediation
and good offices agenda of his Office, using a gender
perspective to reach solutions. Argentina therefore also
supports his recommendation to create and strengthen
national and regional networks of female mediators.

Argentina strongly believes that more equitable
and egalitarian societies that respect the rights of
women are more peaceful societies. For that reason,
and to conclude, I would like to reiterate Argentina's
continued support for various mechanisms and
platforms that contribute to complying with the
commitments assumed in the framework of the revision
of resolution 1325 (2000), particularly the Justice Rapid
Response initiative, the Women and Peace and Security
National Focal Points Network and the promotion of the
Oslo Safe Schools Declaration.

