Mr. Elbahi (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I should like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this open debate in order to consider the
issue of women and peace and security, which is one
of the permanent items on our agenda. I should like
also to thank the Secretary-General and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Bangura.

Aware of the need to highlight the role of women
in peacetime, my Government has established a policy
aimed at empowering women that is based on the
following pillars: the environment, health, education,
economic development,participationindecision-making
processes, the settlement of disputes, and peace and
human rights. A plan of action has been implemented
with a view to implementing that policy. In addition, a
number of administrative units responsible for women's
affairs have been setup. Gender-specific measures have
been promoted across all departments and ministries,
including in the provinces, in order to establish plans of
actions and strategies aimed at empowering women and
strengthening their participation at all levels.

Projects have also been set up for the economic
empowerment of women through the establishment of
a women's portfolio, a revolving fund for women for
the purpose of savings and economic development,
and small-business projects that benefit women, set
up by the Zakat department. I would also cite a project
involving young graduates, the establishment of a
group for working women, and other family-oriented
undertakings. Empowerment programmes are focusing
on rural women, particularly in Darfur, Kordofan and
Blue Nile.

We have made considerable progress in terms
of empowering women and strengthening their
participation. For example, laws were enacted on
equality of salary and retirement age. The electoral law
of 2008 increased women's participation in Parliament;
representation is now at 27 per cent. Women have been
able to run for office and vote since laws to that effect
were enacted in the 1950s and 1960s.

Women were included on the list of candidates for
the presidential election. The participation of women
in the public sector has increased significantly. In the
Parliament, the rate is 28 per cent; in the private sector,
54 per cent; and in terms of economic production,
87.8 per cent. The Justice Department includes
80 women judges, and there are 50 women diplomats,
including ambassadors and heads of missions to other
countries. Women can join the security and armed
forces and have reached grades as high as brigadier.
They participate fully in the private sector and have
made great strides in the public sector.
My Government has promoted such policies
throughout all of the Sudanese provinces and regions,
focusing on Darfur in particular. The projects are
aimed at meeting the concerns of rural women first and
foremost and include the financing of micro-projects
aimed at alleviating poverty, training and capacity-
building programmes, and awareness-raising
programmes on health and nutrition, women's rights,
education and peace education. The project allocates
30 per cent of its funding to small and medium-sized
enterprises.

Furthermore, my Government has undertaken
various projects at the central Government and
regional levels. Those projects depend on the specific
requirements of the area and are aimed at strengthening
women's participation in peacetime.

A national strategy to eliminate violence against
women was put in place in 2005. A unit on violence
against women and children has also been set up. Special
law-enforcement agencies have been established to
protect women and children, and women's rights are
also protected within the army.

Genital mutilation was eliminated in 2008, and
the criminal justice system has introduced provisions
relating to war crimes so as to protect women from
all forms of violence in Darfur; that was done in
cooperation with the United Nations Population Fund
and the human rights office in the Sudan. We have also
strengthened the World Health Organization protocol
on the protection of victims of rape, making it possible
to file a complaint and receive reparations. In 2010, a
law criminalizing child abuse was enacted.

In that context, I would like to underscore that
the Sudan's framework cooperation agreement with
South Sudan will have a positive impact in promoting
cooperation and assisting women in both countries,
in addition to eliminating sexual violence in conflict.
We should note that our disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes have, in coordination
with specialized agencies of the United Nations and
the United Nations Development Programme and
UN-Women, given top priority to women. The aim is
to implement a work plan pursuant to resolution 1325
(2000).

The solution to women's problems in times of
armed conflict is inextricably linked to the efforts to
analyse the root causes of conflicts, such as poverty,
lack of development and climate change, and to find
solutions to them. Measures adopted by the Security
Council must be based on reports of the Secretary-
General grounded in accurate information received
from reporting countries, not on reports from certain
non-governmental organizations or the media.

We hope that the discussions in the Council will
lead to the establishment of a system to examine
all women's issues. In that context, I would like to
underscore the importance of dialogue with countries
concerned in order to analyse and find appropriate
solutions to this very difficult topic.

