Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I thank
the Republic of South Africa for having convened
today's annual open debate on women and peace and
security, a topic of the utmost priority for the United
Arab Emirates, as it should be for us all given the
stark evidence of the gaps that remain, as outlined in
the Secretary-General's report (S/2018/800). We were
pleased to also co-sponsor resolution 2493 (2019),
which you, Mr. President, proposed today.

There is widespread recognition of the fact that when
women meaningfully participate in peace processes,
peace is 35 per cent more likely to last 15 years or
longer. Despite this recognition and an abundance of
conflicts around the world, not enough countries have
taken the necessary steps towards implementation.
Between 1990 and 2017, women constituted only 2 per
cent of mediators, 8 per cent of negotiators and 5 per
cent of witnesses and signatories in all major peace
processes. We believe that these statistics must be
improved in favour of women and girls, and not just at
the finish line. How do we do that?

First, the inclusion of women in peace processes
should not just be a box-ticking exercise of how many
women are present at the final agreement. Women
should be an integral part of both formal and informal
negotiations from start to finish and in the aftermath of
conflict resolution so as to ensure that women are not
excluded at critical points of a peace process, including
in the initial backroom negotiations on how the process
itself will run. Early planning, based on gender-
sensitive conflict and political analysis, must inform
all peace and security interventions.

Secondly, there is no substitute for financing and
visibility in the procedures and budgets of security and
peace actors. That is the most tangible way that Member
States can reflect meaningful change. The United
Arab Emirates strongly supports that a minimum of
15 per cent of all United Nations security and peace
spending explicitly targets gender equality and
women's empowerment, and we encourage all donors
to go beyond that required minimum. We further call
for prioritizing financing mechanisms that specifically
address the important role of women in humanitarian
and conflict responses. That could be done through
mainstreaming gender considerations in the provision
of post-conflict assistance or disbursing funds for that
specific purpose.

We therefore support meaningful budget line items
for protection in the humanitarian and peace work of
the United Nations, in line with the outcomes of the
Oslo Conference on Ending Sexual and Gender-Based
Violence in Humanitarian Crises, which we co-hosted
in May. We also strongly support the mandatory
application of gender and age markers across all United
Nations programming.

Thirdly, we simply physically need to increase
the number of women in peacekeeping operations, as
everyone has said again and again. How do we do that in
practice? An example from the United Arab Emirates is
our partnership with UN-Women to organize a military
and peacekeeping training programme for 134 women
from the Arab region this year to equip women with the
skills and networks to serve and lead. As a result of the
success of the programme, the United Arab Emirates
recently announced a second round for mid-January
2020, which aims to widen the scope to also include
women trainees from Africa and Asia. The programme
will support regional strategies in the implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda and support
the training of women in the military and peacekeeping,
not only in our region but globally, as well.

Fourthly, electoral reforms around the world
should be prioritized to enable women safe political
participation as voters and candidates, including the use
of quotas, where needed, as we have done in the United
Arab Emirates, resulting in a 50-50 gender balance in
our recent parliamentary elections.

Lastly, we believe that a focus on the inclusion
of women in post-conflict reconstruction will have a
multiplier effect and needs to remain a priority. I am
therefore pleased to announce that, on the sidelines
of today's debate, the United Arab Emirates and the
Georgetown Institute for Women, Peace and Security
launched apanel discussion series on the role ofwomen in
post-conflict reconstruction, one ofthe core dimensions
of resolution 1325 (2000). Drawing on the findings of
that collaboration, at this time next year, we will release
an action plan for the United Nations community, with
a shortlist of some key reforms needed to ensure that
gender is mainstreamed across United Nations services
to post-conflict and recovering communities.

As we have heard today, implementing the women
and peace and security agenda is not only morally
imperative for women's empowerment and gender
equality, it is also critical to preventing conflict and
building sustainable peace. Women are our first
responders, our community and family pillars and
agents of change. The United Arab Emirates remains
committed to that Vision. In line with that Vision, I
would like to note that the inclusion of women from
conflict zones, particularly youth, in briefings on
relevant issues is of great importance for the women
and peace and security agenda and would demonstrate
a real commitment to it here in the Chamber.

