Mr. Berger (Germany): I thank you, Madam
President, for having organized today's debate. I also thank
the Secretary-General, Ms. Bachelet, Mr. Kapambwe and
Ms. Nemat for their insightfiil remarks.

Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
made by Head of the Delegation of the European
Union.

As a member of the Group of Friends of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000), Germany has always
attached great importance to all aspects of the issue of
women and peace and security, and particularly to that
of turning words into action, 10 years after the
adoption of that groundbreaking resolution. We
therefore applaud the timely decision of the Nobel
Prize Committee to honour three courageous and
inspirational women who are exemplary models of how
women can make a difference.

Germany heartily welcomes the Secretary-
General's comprehensive report (S/2011/598*) and the
analysis and recommendations it contains, including
the strategic framework and the first set of indicators
set out.

The draft presidential statement to be adopted
today once again clearly recognizes women's
significant role in prevention, conflict resolution and
post-conflict rebuilding. Including women in peace
initiatives is not a benevolent act; we see it as a key
requirement for any lasting, sustainable peace.
Women's participation will strengthen our capacity to
resolve conflict and to build security and justice
systems that protect the human rights of all. However,
gaps still exist between stated commitments and the
situation on the ground. Women remain severely
underrepresented in peace negotiations and are often
marginalized in efforts to build sustainable peace.

What can be done to close this gap? First, at the
United Nations level, we commend UN-Women for its
work in leading mainstreaming efforts to include,
wherever possible, a gender perspective in United
Nations activities, and in measuring progress made in
implementing resolution 1325 (2000) against the
indicators. It is crucial to constantly strive to place
more women in leading positions, including within the
United Nations, and to give women a voice during
every stage of a peace process. There is a clear link
between women's participation in the early stages of
preventive diplomacy, peacemaking or peacebuilding
and their presence in implementation mechanisms.

Secondly, at the level of the European Union and
NATO, both within the European Common Foreign and
Security Policy and NATO, the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) in relation to conflict resolution
has progressed. Forces are better informed on gender
issues, and we are beginning to see the benefits of a
new awareness and understanding where it matters -
in the communities where soldiers are deployed.
Female military medical staff serving in field hospitals
lower the barriers to local women seeking treatment
and female soldiers gaining better access to local
women.
Thirdly, with regard to the national level, last
year the German Government presented its third report
to Parliament on its implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). It contains, inter alia, projects on gender
training, including for United Nations peacekeepers,
the prevention of sexual violence, and enabling
women's participation in peace processes and their
unhindered access to justice. A special focus is on
support for women's organizations and
non-governmental organizations in promoting women's
empowerment.

In addition, the German Government has set up
action plans on gender in development aid programmes
and on civilian crisis prevention. Germany implements
the indicators adopted by the European Union in 2010.

Fourthly and last, the Security Council could do
more to systematically integrate women, peace and
security issues into its daily work, including when
mandating or renewing United Nations missions.
Envoys and special representatives should address
those issues, where relevant, in their briefings to the
Council.

I would like to conclude by expressing
Germany's support for the draft presidential statement
to be adopted today.

