Mr. Toriello (Sao Tome and Principe): I would
like to congratulate you, Madam President, on your
country's presidency of the Council this month.

While there is much to say on this subject, for the
sake of brevity I would like to start by pointing out that
at the present stage of its history, the human race has
enormously strengthened its physical, emotional and
intellectual capacities. That is not a bad thing unless
we give such strengths free rein to indulge in selfish
exploitation and consumption and to focus solely on
greed for self-enrichment in a way that enables a creed
of individualism and predatory behaviour to dominate.
This is an inborn tendency of humankind, from which
spring our separations, divisions, oppositions, conflicts
and so forth, resulting, inevitably, in wars.

To put a stop to such myopic, vicious self-
destructiveness, we need a strong and decisive force
capable of inserting itself into this physical, emotional
and intellectual contest. What we need today is to
be energized by a new force, that of spirituality and
conscience. It is no coincidence that many have called
this the era of the awakening of our conscience, although
clearly it is not something that will happen easily.
The reality is that this process is opposed by various
powerful lobbies that exert their political, financial,
economic and mass-communications influence to
control Governments, directly or indirectly. But despite
their opposition, the awakening of our collective
conscience is still a reality.

Let us consider some major changes that have
occurred in recent history - the rise of a culture of
ecology; the growth of a preservationist culture aimed
at protecting animal species at risk of extinction;
an increase in volunteering activities and human
generosity to others, rather than confining efforts to
family members and people we know in closed circles
or groups; personal inner growth, creating greater
awareness and thus greater feelings of responsibility
towards society at large; and, last but not least, the
embrace of a wider, more holistic culture and vision
of life. All of these are signs that the awakening of our
conscience exists and is a genuine movement.

What about women, then? Why, in spite of such
an awakening of our conscience, do women today still
continue to see their rights abused, whether as citizens
of the world or as people? It is shocking that in today's
advanced world we still have to talk about the rights of
women and children as if it were a special concession.
Rather than commenting on such an absurdity, repeating
once again words that have been said over and over
since time immemorial, or speculating intellectually
on this issue, I would like to give it more constructive
consideration.

Unfortunately, the system by which humankind
operates is based on a structure of contradiction, so that
whatever may be promoted on the one hand is nullified
on the other. We do not take this factor of inherent
contradiction into serious consideration, and because
it is underestimated, this virus is free to worm its way
into our human apparatus and to negatively affect the
logic of our behaviour, to the point of affecting the
social and intellectual frameworks on which we human
beings have constructed the rules for our coexistence.
In fact, society in general has based its standards on
corrupt values that while supposed to be genuine turn
out not to be genuine at all. That is why our society
stands for poverty, degradation, corruption, depravity,
perversion, the abuse of power, conspiracy, genocide
and thousands of other miseries. Since our whole social
system has been based on unnatural, subverted values,
it has become clear that the system on which we base
our way of life is consequently vicious and crushing.

What is needed is a new leadership, based on holistic
scientific and educational models that can encourage
leaders to observe both themselves and their actions,
something that is a precondition for establishing a
culture where conscience dominates. In that regard, I
should reiterate that it is vital that we find science-based
solutions to these issues, and thus that we ensure that
scientific programmes are part of the educational and
training systems whereby human beings can be taught
according to a holistic vision of life that can overturn
the sterile philosophies and frameworks that govern us.

As for the younger generation, rather than teaching
them only how to earn money, they should be supported
through good governance in understanding their innate
creative attitude with a view to self-realization. They
can be taught natural ways of living, and thereby learn
how emotions work and how to listen to each other. They
can be taught how, in situations of conflict, to evoke
calm in themselves and through their surroundings
while practicing good communication methods.

Turning to the subject of women, research has
shown that women have an advantage in negotiating
because of two skills more often related to them. One is
listening, which enables interest and awareness of the
importance of truly listening to another person's point
of view and processing it in the context of one's own
point of view, instead of always thinking that one's
point of view is the only one that is correct.

The second quality and skill that women have
that is helpful in the context of negotiations is that
they tend to focus on cooperation more than on
competition or control. Research has shown that a
cooperation-oriented personality leads more often to
situations of tolerance that, in my view, are eventually
palliative and understanding that are crucial in reaching
an agreement.

Another point is that women having a voice in peace
and security fulfils a proposed focus area of the post-
2015 development agenda concerning gender equality
and women's empowerment. It also overlaps the focus
area of sustainable society because when women
feel empowered due to a peaceful situation, they can
create a peaceful family setting, as they are crucial in
the raising of children. That peaceful family context
then sets the stage for a more peaceful and sustainable
society, and therefore a more peaceful world.

It is a well-respected fact that women, who comprise
more than half of the world's population, help to keep
and protect peace and security through their strong
family ties and work in the home, as well as through
their influence on the work place and policy in their
professional and diplomatic lives. Just like that of the
men of honour throughout the world, women's influence
is critical to making and preserving the global village
of peace and security that every family and community
needs and wants.

Fortunately, the United Nations - in its
wisdom - has recognized the importance that women
play in issues of peace and security by establishing
UN-Women. While necessary, UN-Women can also
be seen as the result of a distorted societal system and
evidence that women have made concessions denying
them certain rights.

That is why it is aberrant and offensive to see
vicious men, hateful of all society - despite anything
they may say - attacking women in public, especially
the most defenceless, in the name of some cause or as
an act of war, or aberrant pleasure in conflict.

Violence against women is merely violence,
without merit or cause. It is without justification and
demonstrates the abandonment of hope. And it is not
merely violence against women that is unacceptable
and tragic, but sexual violence in particular. Rape, as is
known, is not a crime of sex but of violence, not a show
of power but of immeasurable weakness. It demonstrates
the worst in men and in civilization. How is it that men
in conflict condone such degradation not only to the
women they harm, but ultimately to themselves and
all humankind, through acts of sexual violence against
women during wartime?

In the end, sexual violence against women in
conflict is not a sign of the strength of one power
over another -although militias may believe that
due to reasons that may date back to generations and
civilizations when women were the property of men
and their subjugation by opposing forces reflected back
on the parties to the conflict.

Our world now has evolved to where it is clear
and well-known that those terrible acts stand alone
and apart from war, expressing the rapists' inabilities,
impotencies and wrongful thinking. Sexual violence
against women during conflict only reinforces in the
minds of the civilized world how wrong those guilty
warriors are and how bereft of merit their positions
must be to fall so low as to hurt the most vulnerable,
the most innocent and perhaps the least able to defend
themselves in those moments, against the senseless,
barbaric acts.

As our consciousness continues to grow and the
world evolves, we must take a united stand and say
"never more" to violence against women. We must hope
that those involved in conflict will one day understand
why they go to war and why half of the world does not
participate in their argument or in the spoils of war.
Yet that half always plays a part in the healing and the
return from conflict to peace and security once again.

