Mr. Cornado (Italy): I would like, first of all, to
commend you, Mr. President, for convening this
important meeting on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). Let me also thank Deputy Secretary-
General Migiro, Assistant Secretary-General Mayanja,
Executive Director Alberdi and Ms. Amin.
Italy aligns itself with the position expressed by
Sweden on behalf of the European Union.

Tragically, sexual violence continues to be used
with impunity as a weapon of war to destroy the very
fabric of society in many conflicts in the world. That
has to stop. As Secretary of State Clinton said in this
Chamber just a few days ago (see S/PV.6195), the
dehumanizing nature of sexual violence erodes social
and political stability, undermines economic progress
and holds us all back.

Italy has committed itself to make this issue one
the top priorities of its international action. In the
framework of the Italian presidency of the Group of
Eight (G-8), on 9 and 10 September my Government
convened an international conference in Rome on the
issue of violence against women. In the presidency's
conclusions of that meeting, we clearly stated that
violence against women and girls is a war crime and a
crime against humanity. The participants committed
themselves to strive to ensure the fullest possible
implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008), not least to eliminate the sense of impunity that
is still widespread among the perpetrators of such
crimes.

The use of sexual violence as a war tactic is
clearly a global emergency. In the past year and a half,
the Security Council has shown remarkable leadership
in this field. With hindsight, we can say that the
adoption of resolution 1820 (2008) was indeed a
watershed moment. It clearly established that sexual
violence in situations of armed conflict, when used as a
tactic of war, is a matter of peace and security, and
very much the business of the Council. Italy is proud to
have been one of the sponsors of that landmark
resolution and to have actively contributed to its
drafting.

Resolution 1820 (2008) brought about a better
understanding of the implications of sexual violence as
a weapon of war, thus opening the way for the Council
to adopt two other important resolutions: resolution
1882 (2009) and, only last week, resolution 1888
(2009). Both provide the Council with important and
effective new tools to end impunity and to hold
accountable the perpetrators of those heinous crimes. It
is now up to the Council to use those tools and
implement the resolutions in full and without delay.

We encourage the Working Group of the Security
Council on Children and Armed Conflict to use the full
array of means at its disposal to deal with parties
responsible for rape and sexual violence against
children. We look forward to the Secretary-General's
early appointment of a special representative for
women and peace and security to provide much-needed
leadership, coordination and advocacy. We are also
convinced of the importance of finding ways to ensure
better and more detailed reporting to the Council,
primarily with regard to the identity of the parties
responsible for these grave violations.

Women's security must be guaranteed. Abuses
must be prosecuted. Blanket amnesties must be off the
table. But the protection of women is just one pillar of
resolution 1325 (2000). Women are agents of change
and fundamental players for peace, stabilization,
reconstruction and sustainable development. That was
one of the key messages of resolution 1325 (2000).
What we need now is to move with equal
determination to achieve similar progress in
empowering women and ensuring their effective and
equal participation in every phase of peacemaking,
conflict prevention, peace processes and peacebuilding.

As stated in the conclusions of the presidency at
the G-8 meeting in Rome, to which I have referred,
global peace and security also depend on women's
actions and on their participation under conditions of
equality in social development and governance
mechanisms at local, national and world levels. The
resolution that the Council has adopted today,
resolution 1889 (2009), is the first important step in
that direction, and we commend Viet Nam for taking
this initiative.

The role of women is particularly important in
peacebuilding efforts, as recognized by the specific
gender mandate of the Peacebuilding Commission.
After a conflict, women are often victims of heinous
abuses and can be irrationally stigmatized for the
violence they have suffered. At the same time, they are
the pillars of families that need to be put back together
and of societies that need to be rebuilt. They are the
educators of future generations, partners in the
reintegration of ex-combatants, mothers of fatherless
children, the only dynamic economic actors in a
ravaged society. For those reasons, a peace that is built
without considering the needs and hopes of women
cannot be a lasting one.

As we have said time and time again, this is not
just a question of how many women are included in the
political and decision-making process; it is about
enabling them to champion issues that are vital to their
empowerment. This is possible only through the full
engagement of civil society and women's
organizations, which is why resource, training and
capacity-building needs must always be given full
consideration. The United Nations has an important
contribution to make in ensuring, for instance, that the
participation of women is better reflected in
peacekeeping mission mandates, and that those
missions are provided with much-needed expertise and
resources, including through the inclusion of a gender
component in all of its peacekeeping and political
missions.

Let me conclude by reaffirming Italy's firm
commitment to the full implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) and to promoting women's participation
and empowerment. We have made this a priority both
in our political action and in our development
cooperation. To that end, we have funded a number of
projects of the United Nations Development Fund for
Women (UNIFEM) focused on implementing
resolution 1325 (2000) in West Africa, and we have
started the process of drafting a national action plan.
As one of the main troop contributors to United
Nations peacekeeping, we have an important role to
play in ensuring that resolution 1325 (2000) is
mainstreamed in all United Nations missions.

