Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today's open debate and for presiding over it in person
in New York. I also wish to thank the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2007/567). I welcome his
presence and statement at this meeting. I also wish to
express my gratitude to Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno, Ms. Rachel Mayanja and Ms. Joanne
Sandler for their statements.

This year marks the seventh anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). A milestone in the
field of women, peace and security, that resolution has
laid the foundation for cooperation by all parties
concerned in this field. The Security Council has taken
a lot of follow-up action to the resolution and the
Member States concerned have also actively taken
relevant measures pursuant to the resolution. Since the
Secretary-General formulated the United Nations
System-wide Action Plan in 2005, positive results have
been achieved in the implementation of various aspects
of the resolution over the past two years.

However, we need to take an objective view of
the successes that have been achieved and the
shortcomings that still exist. As stated by the
Secretary-General in his report, various degrees of
progress have been registered in such fields as conflict
prevention and early warning, peacemaking and
peacebuilding, peacekeeping, humanitarian assistance,
post-conflict reconstruction and rehabilitation, the
implementation of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes, and the prevention of and
response to sexual violence.

On the other hand, capacity-building at all levels
still leaves much to be desired, the problem of
inadequate funding remains prominent, and there is a
lack of close coordination between international
cooperation and national activities. Those challenges
have compromised the effectiveness of the
comprehensive implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). The Security Council should further enhance
the implementation of the resolution and advance
comprehensive progress in all aspects of the issue of
women, peace and security. In order to achieve that
goal, all parties concerned should put special emphasis
on the following tasks.

First, the Security Council can play a unique role
in the field of women, peace and security, and various
organs of the United Nations system should strengthen

mutual coordination and cooperation, while working
under their respective mandates. It is the broad
common understanding of the international community
that it is necessary to protect and empower women,
safeguard their rights and interests, and achieve gender
equality. That is an important undertaking which
requires integrated action. The United Nations has
adopted quite a number of instruments in this field. As
the organ with the primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security, the
Security Council should work effectively within its
terms of competence, focusing on conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and post-conflict reconstruction. The
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council,
the Human Rights Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission have their respective mandates and roles
in advancing women's rights and interests, and the
work of the Security Council should not duplicate or
seek to replace that of those organs.

Secondly, it is necessary to enhance the
participation of women in all stages of a peace process
and to acknowledge their status and role so as to lay a
firm foundation for peacebuilding and the realization
of lasting peace. Respect for and protection of women
are manifestations of social civilization and progress,
and necessary elements of a mature social system.
Respect for and protection of women should be
incorporated into a peace process from the beginning
to the end. The special needs and concerns of women
should be accommodated and their potentials and roles
tapped. They should enjoy greater participation and
decision-making power with institutional guarantees.
In recent years, the Secretariat has taken many positive
measures to increase the ratio of female senior officials
and female heads and staff of peacekeeping missions.
We hope to see such efforts continue.

Thirdly, countries concerned should be
encouraged to formulate, on the basis of their specific
circumstances, national plans of action or strategies to
implement resolution 1325 (2000), with vigorous
support from the United Nations and the international
community. Resolution 1325 (2000) cannot be
comprehensively implemented without national action.
However, the countries that need to take
implementation actions the most, especially those
involved in or recently emerged from armed conflict,
often lack implementing capabilities and are burdened
by specific special situations and difficulties. The
international community and donors should come
forward with generous help and the United Nations
should provide various kinds of assistance to give the
Government and people of countries concerned full
ownership and strengthen their capacity-building, and
avoid acting in their place or imposing anything on
them.

The Outcome Document of the World Summit
emphasized that the progress of women is the progress
of all humankind. That is equally true in the field of
peace and security. The comprehensive implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) represents an important
guarantee for the realization of that goal. We support
the Secretary-General in his ongoing efforts to
implement the United Nations System-wide Action
Plan. The Chinese Government has always attached
importance to the protection of women's rights and
interests and the empowerment of women.

