Ms. Yanez Loza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, allow me to thank Bolivia for convening this
open debate and to congratulate its Permanent Mission
on the work it has conducted throughout its Council
presidency this month. We welcome the introduction of
new issues for discussion, drawing attention to ways
in which we might reinvigorate the Security Council's
working methods.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of Ecuador
on the political and economic empowerment of women
and their meaningful and active participation in the
quest for peace - from the prevention and resolution
of conflicts to the implementation of initiatives aimed
at the economic recovery of women in post-conflict
situations and their greater representation at all levels
of decision-making.

The Ecuadorian State has in place a solid legal
framework that guarantees the validity, exercise
and enforceability of women's rights, based on two
fundamental pillars: the Constitution, which explicitly
addresses gender equality, and the internationally
binding instruments ratified by the State. Moreover,
we have integrated the gender perspective in a cross-
cutting manner throughout our development plan, which
recognizes the equal participation of men and women
in both public and private life in order to consolidate
socioeconomic growth in harmony with nature.

Ecuador is committed to the political and economic
empowerment of women and their meaningful and
active participation in the quest for peace. In that
regard, we are striving to make women and men
equal at all educational levels nationwide and we have
implemented our comprehensive health-care model
that includes the incorporation of a gender focus when
developing public policies.

Ecuador is also firmly committed to facilitating
decent work for women and their access to
decision-making processes. The Government's
programmes to reduce underemployment and
unemployment encourage both the participation of
women in the labour market and reduction of the wage
gap. Moreover, the country's organic law on electoral
and political organizations demands equal participation
in the decision-making processes and at all levels
of power.

With regard to conflict prevention and resolution, the
Constitution establishes that Ecuador is a constitutional
State of rights that will adopt affirmative measures of
action promoting genuine equality in favour of rights
holders who find themselves in a situation of inequality,
as well as establishing priority protection in the public
and private arenas for victims of sexual violence. The
Constitution recognizes the right of people to live free
from all forms of violence.

Ecuador undertook a major national crusade to
eradicate discrimination and violence against women.
In that context, we highlight our integral organic law to
prevent and eradicate violence against women, which
entered into force in February. That constituted an
important milestone at the national level and ensures
the involvement of women in working towards its
implementation. Ecuador also has a national plan for the
eradication of gender violence, which was established
as a public policy in 2007.

Furthermore, the Constitution determines that
the armed forces of Ecuador are an institution for
the protection of the rights, liberties and guarantees
of citizens and that its members are judged solely on
judicial function. As of 2008, trials before military
courts ceased to exist, which reflects the determination
of the State to have impartial judges and thereby avoid
impunity. The incorporation of women into the armed
forces has increased since 2009, when military women
made up 1.1 per cent of the total number of troops,
and then again by 2012, where it more than doubled to
2.11 per cent. This year, the number of women troops
stands at 3.5 per cent. Ecuador currently contributes
women officers as observers in the United Nations
Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara.

The Ministry of National Defence incorporates the
concept of defence as a public asset and, in that context,
the gender approach is included in its defence policy
agenda. Human rights are also considered as an area
of action for the political management of defence and
include the promotion of policies for gender equality
and practices for peaceful coexistence and respect
for the cultural identity of its members, as well as the
effective implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000)
and 1889 (2009).

In conclusion, we welcome these spaces where we
can express ourselves about the political and economic
empowerment of women and their meaningful and
active participation in the search for peace. Likewise,
we express our sincere desire to join efforts for a
productive and successful dialogue that promotes
gender equality and the advancement of women in all
areas and in all fields. These are essential elements to
honour the commitment to leave no one behind.

