Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to thank the presidency of the Security
Council for having organized this important meeting.
My delegation welcomes in particular the opportunity
to participate in this debate after last year having
celebrated the tenth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000) entitled "Women and peace and security", a
historic resolution of which Tunisia, as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council in
2000, was one of the authors. I was personally
involved in negotiating that resolution.

My country continues to attach particular
importance to the issue and would like to underscore
its commitment to promoting the rights of women,
particularly women in conflict situations, as well as to
promoting the full implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) in all its aspects.

Tunisia's interest in the issue follows from its
long-standing commitment to the promotion of gender
equality and women's empowerment. That is a
strategic choice that was taken at the time of
independence in 1956 and which has become an
integral part of my country's national development
policy. The advanced status that Tunisian women enjoy
today is one of the most striking results of that choice.
My country is convinced that peace, development and
democracy cannot be carried out without the full
participation of women in public life and in the
decision-making process.
The 14 January 2011 revolution in Tunisia, in
which Tunisian women of all ages and all categories
actively participated, illustrates the commitment of
Tunisian women to establishing a democracy where
public freedoms, justice and equality are the custodians
of social peace and development. On 23 October, the
day of the historic elections to our National Assembly,
Tunisian women were at the forefront of voters, thus
affirming their right to active citizenship.

This debate on the issue of women and peace and
security is a good opportunity to evaluate the progress
made by the United Nations and Member States in this
area and to assess what remains to be done.

It is clear that resolution 1325 (2000) has defined
a framework of standards guiding United Nations
efforts on policies for integrating gender issues into the
whole of the work of the Organization. It is also
important to recognize that there is now great
awareness of the many types of violence inflicted on
women in conflict, and that significant attempts have
been made to address them. Since the primary victims
of armed conflict are women, along with children and
the elderly, it is important that they take on a key role
in peacekeeping and peacebuilding and, even more
urgently, in the process of prevention, to which it is
never too late to devote special attention.

That is why women's perspectives are
increasingly taken into account in planning and
implementing peace processes and in peacekeeping
operations. The appointments of the Under-Secretary-
General of the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women) and of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict are
important signs that should be built on, particularly
since it must be acknowledged that despite progress,
shameful crimes against women continue to occur
during armed conflict, especially in Africa and
occupied Palestine, where women are still coping with
terrible situations every day.

National ownership of resolution 1325 (2000) is
the best way to ensure its effective implementation,
given that primary responsibility for combating rape as
a weapon of war falls to Member States, whose duty it
is to urgently take measures to deal with this
phenomenon, measures that educate as well as enforce.
Tunisia has already launched a national action plan for
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). In
particular, it promotes training women in peacekeeping
and peacebuilding so that we can deploy qualified
personnel in United Nations operations on the ground.

The plan is also designed to improve
pre-deployment training, with particular emphasis on
special measures aimed at protecting women against all
forms of violence against them. In September 2010
Tunisia organized a regional seminar on this subject,
enabling participants from the western Mediterranean
countries in the framework of the 5+5 process to
exchange national experiences with regard to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

Tunisia intends to continue implementing that
resolution as apart of its comprehensive approach to
gender equality and the empowerment of women, and
will make itself available to the United Nations
concerning any aspect of implementing resolution 1325
(2000) and other international instruments dealing with
the welfare of women and their participation in
decision-making processes, as well as promoting a
culture of respect for women.

