Ms. Skogen (Norway): Let me start by thanking
the representatives of women and civil society who
spoke to us this morning.

When resolution 1325 (2000) was adopted, 15 years
ago, we believed it would result in more sustainable
peace and greater security. Today we know we were
right. Recent research shows that peace processes that
genuinely include women are more likely to lead to
an agreement and more likely to last. Therefore, why
then are women still often absent from the negotiating
table? Why are their voices not heard even when they
are present? Although there has been a steady increase
in the number of women mediators and gender experts,
we still have a way to go.

We have learned that political will and budget
lines can put gender on the agenda, even in times of
war. That is why Norway has earmarked funds to
implement the women and peace and security agenda
on the ground. For several years, we have allocated
approximately $4 million to the work of civil society
organizations. Ten percent of the resources spent on
peace and reconciliation efforts in focus countries
are to be allocated to efforts pertaining to women and
peace and security. Approximately $3.6 million is
earmarked specifically for the integration of the gender
perspective in our humanitarian assistance in 2015.

We are celebrating progress today, and rightly
so. But this is also a day of impatience. Two weeks
ago, we all committed to promoting peaceful and
inclusive societies for sustainable development. We
also committed to achieving gender equality and to
empowering all women and girls. Clearly, we should
know by now that we cannot achieve one without the
other.

I am proud to say that in all peace and security
efforts where Norway is engaged, women's and
men's needs, priorities and rights are to be taken into
account. Sexual violence in conflict will be fought.
The Norwegian national joint headquarters requires
knowledge ofresolution 1325 (2000) as a generic demand
for all Norwegian personnel who are to be deployed to
international operations. The gender perspective is an
integral part of all Norwegian predeployment training.

We are proud of the role we have played as
facilitator in the Colombia process, where women are
at the table and are making their voices heard. Norway
aims to increase the participation of women in peace
processes. Inspired by the African women mediators'
network, we are now establishing a Nordic women
mediators' network.

Norway is also providing funding to the Global
Alliance of Women Countering Extremism and
Promoting Peace, Rights and Pluralism because we
recognize the need to get women on board if we are to
succeed in fighting violent extremism.

Regional organizations have a key role to play.
NATO is now working to integrate the women and
peace and security agenda into all its activities and
operations. We will continue to work with NATO.
Norway also recently signed an agreement on providing
support to the office of the African Union Special
Envoy for Women, Peace and Security.

Fifteen years ago, the Security Council and the
United Nations started something big. We depend on
their continued leadership. Norway will continue to
raise the 1325 agenda whenever there are discussions
about peace and security, because we want peace, and
we want a peace that lasts.

