Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this debate on women and peace and
security. I also thank Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka,
Under-Secretary-General, Executive Director of the
United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women, for her statement. I also
thank the Secretary-General for his efforts to advance
the women and peace and security agenda and women's
empowerment at all levels.

We stress the importance of the full and genuine
participation of women in peace and security efforts.
We also stress the importance of the provision of
needed financing on a regular basis to ensure the
implementation the agenda and the empowerment of
women at all levels.

The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan believes
that women's role in achieving peace and security is
important. In response to resolution 1325 (2000), we
have developed a Jordanian action plan in order to
activate that resolution for the period 2018-2021. The
plan was launched in March by the Jordanian National
Commission for Women, which is officially responsible
for implementing it, with broad participation of civil
society stakeholders. The national plan is in line with
Jordan's commitments under relevant regional and
international treaties and conventions, in particular
those concerning the role of women in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts, as well as in the post-conflict
period, and carrying out relief and humanitarian
work, in addition to ensuring immunization against
extremist thought.

Jordan attaches particular importance to women's
empowerment at all levels because of our conviction that
women are essential to establishing sustainable peace.
Our national plan also meets the strategic objectives
with regard to armed conflict included in 1995 Beijing
Declaration, including women's increased participation
in conflict resolution and decision-making. The plan
also takes into consideration our commitment to
achieving the 2030 Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs), in particular SDG 5, on achieving gender
equality and empowering women and girls, and SDG
16, on promoting peaceful and inclusive societies to
achieve sustainable development, providing access to
justice for all and building effective and accountable
institutions in that regard. The Jordanian national plan
establishes the following four strategic objectives for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

First, women's active participation must be
strengthened in the security and military sectors and
in peacekeeping so asto maintain gender equality and
promote women's participation in most field units up
to 5 per cent by 2020. We are also working to involve
women from the general security sector in various
peacekeeping missions. Currently, we are also working
to increase the participation of military women in
military observation missions and among staff officers
in order to reach 15 per cent by the end ofthis year. That
is consistent with the Secretary-General's initiative on
peacekeeping action. We have also deployed around
2,573 women police agents and officers to work in
terrorism and extremism prevention programmes.

Secondly, we aim to achieve women's active
participation in addressing terrorism and violence, as
well as in peacebuilding and peacemaking, through
awareness-raising and training initiatives to renounce
extremism and establish ways to prevent it while
activating resolution 2250 (2015) on youth, peace
and security.

Thirdly, we intend to provide humanitarian,
psychological, social, legal, medical, educational and
rehabilitating services, as well as to facilitate access
to those services for Jordanian women and girls, in
addition to women refugees and vulnerable segments of
the society that are more exposed to violence and have
a genuine need for protection from sexual and physical
violence. That is consistent with Jordan's intervention
plan to address the Syrian refugee crisis. The plan
also takes into account the challenges resulting from
that crisis.

Fourthly, we want to promote a social culture that
supports gender equality and highlights the important
role of women and young women in creating a culture
of peace. We want to prepare those women to become
ambassadors of peace in their communities. At the
moment, we are preparing a project to ensure that
Jordanian women can participate in mediation and
peace negotiation. In that connection, we underscore
the importance of transforming the role of the
United Nations from peacekeeping to prevention and
addressing the root causes of conflicts. Women play an
important role in the prevention of conflicts.

As a co-Chair of the Group of Friends on
Countering and Preventing Violent Extremism, Jordan
attaches particular attention to protecting women and
girls from violent extremism. We take into account
the sensitive and pivotal role that women can play in
protecting societies from extremism and promoting
culture of peace.

Arab women have not been spared the conflicts
that have shaken our region for years, or their
consequences. Women and girls have suffered the most
from displacement, killing and sexual violence. It is
important that we pay the necessary attention to this issue
so that women and girls become empowered and able to
resist. We have to provide rehabilitation programmes
so that women refugees and displaced women can
be productive members of society and continue their
education during the period of displacement and after
they return to their countries.

In that regard, Palestinian women are facing
difficulties in the occupied Palestinian territories,
and we commend their resilience and endurance.
Palestinian women are victims of punitive Israeli
policies, including restrictions on their movement and
arbitrary detentions. Even girls under the age of 18 have
been arrested. We must also underscore the violations
carried out by the Israeli occupying forces against the
women of Jerusalem as part of Israel's policy to change
the identity of the historic holy city.

In conclusion, I wish to stress the importance of
strongly mobilizing international efforts to counter
the root causes of conflicts, involve women in peace
and security efforts, and promote the participation
of women while strengthening their involvement in
civil society. Experience demonstrates that genuine
participation of women has a positive impact on the
success and sustainability of security and peace plans.

Women play a major and impressive role in
building peace. It is impossible to uphold peace in
societies without the serious and true participation of
women. Nonetheless, it is impossible to achieve the
goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and sustainable peace without empowering women and
girls, achieving gender equality and eliminating all
forms of discrimination. Jordan will continue to work
at the national, regional and international levels to
support without delay the women, peace and security
agenda in order to ensure a better future for women
and girls.

