Mrs. Papadopoulou (Greece): I too would like
to thank Mr. Guehenno for his briefing today and to
express our appreciation to Prince Zeid for his tireless
work to address and resolve an issue which is
obviously of great concern to all of us - an issue
which has an undeniable impact on the credibility and
effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping efforts as
a whole.

Greece associates itself with the statement to be
delivered shortly by the Austrian presidency of the
European Union.

Peacekeeping operations constitute the most
effective and successful means to deal with situations
that constitute a threat to international peace and
security. And, in that respect, all personnel involved in
those operations play an invaluable role, working
under extremely difficult circumstances and even
putting their lives at risk. They are doing a truly
remarkable job, and they deserve our respect and our
deep gratitude.

It is unfortunate, though, that the unacceptable
behaviour of certain individuals within peacekeeping
operations threatens to tarnish the very name and
image which allow the United Nations to work so
effectively in war-torn countries and to bring peace and
stability to millions around the world. Only by holding
itself to the highest standards of ethical conduct can the
United Nations preserve the credibility and moral
authority necessary to carry out its mission in societies
already vulnerable and deeply wounded by the turmoil
and brutality of war.

Greece condemns in the strongest terms all acts
of sexual exploitation and abuse committed by United
Nations peacekeeping personnel, military and civilian,
and reiterates once again its strong support for the
United Nations zero-tolerance policy in such cases.

In this regard, the United Nations should
undertake every effort to further identify patterns of
abuse, record and report incidents and ensure that
justice is served. The misconduct of the few should not
undercut the contributions of the many. However, only
once accountable and transparent response strategies
are in place to prevent sexual exploitation and abuse
and to protect local populations from it will the United
Nations send a message that it does not tolerate or
condone such behaviour.

We would like to underline the importance of
bolstering the highest standards of discipline and
conduct befitting a United Nations peacekeeping
operation. Training programmes for new peacekeeping
personnel - including training in international
humanitarian law, human rights law and children's
rights law, with specific reference to the protection of
children and women - must make clear that the zero-
tolerance policy for sexual exploitation and abuse will
be fully enforced. Additionally, in order to implement
these standards, we must create a culture that rejects
and penalizes such abhorrent behaviour at every level,
from the senior civilian and military leadership down
to the level of individual peacekeepers.

Close cooperation between troop-contributing
countries and the Office of Internal Oversight Services
in the conduct of investigations is crucial in the fight
against impunity in order to ensure that any evidence
collected is admissible in the relevant national
jurisdiction. It is also extremely important that
managers and commanders be made responsible for
creating and maintaining an environment that prevents
sexual exploitation and abuse, that they be clearly
directed to facilitate investigations and that they be
held accountable for their failures in this regard.
Furthermore, it is indispensable that there be no
impunity for any individuals participating in
peacekeeping missions who have committed a criminal
offence, including United Nations staff and experts on
mission, bearing in mind the principle that the same
norms of conduct must apply to all categories of
peacekeeping personnel.

We believe that the revised draft model
memorandum of understanding to be adopted by the
General Assembly as a basis for negotiation with
troop-contributing countries will be invaluable for
ensuring that troop-contributing Governments are fully
aware of, and can be held to account for, their
responsibilities in this area.

The United Nations must ensure, as part of its
overall efforts to address sexual exploitation and abuse
by its staff and related personnel, that complainants
and victims have access to timely, effective and
compassionate support, including medical,
psychological and legal services. All complainants and
victims are to be treated with humanity and respect for

their dignity and human rights. To ensure that all new
policies are widely acknowledged, understood, adhered
to and enforced, unified guidelines applicable to all
United Nations peacekeeping personnel should be
developed and implemented.

It is unacceptable that anyone connected with a
United Nations peacekeeping mission - the very
people the world entrusts with the task of protecting
civilians from harm - should prey on the very women
and children seeking their help. The problem, though,
cannot be fixed overnight and needs to be addressed on
a long-term basis. All of us - the Secretariat and the
Member States - need to show commitment and
determination and take the necessary measures to deal
with it, both in our immediate response to such cases
when they occur and in formulating a comprehensive
strategy to combat and eradicate the phenomenon.

