Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like first of all to thank the delegation of the
United Kingdom for convening this debate. I am also
grateful to Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, the
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yury Fedotov, Mr. Kevin Hyland
and Ms. Ilwad Elman, for their comprehensive briefings.

I would like to highlight four points in my statement:
first, the time frame and the geographic area where
human trafficking, forced labour, slavery and other
similar practices take place; secondly, the root causes
of these problems; thirdly, what can be done to combat
them; and fourthly, the importance of victim support.

First, with regard to the time frame and the
geographic area, human trafficking, forced labour
and so-called modern slavery are social and political
aberrations that we see in a very great number of
countries, and in many cases in countries where
supposedly there is social peace. Unfortunately, the
absence of conflict is no guarantee of the absence of
these scourges. However, when these practices are
carried out in situations of conflict or weakness, the
victims find themselves in a situation of even greater
vulnerability in the face of the actions of terrorists
and criminal networks. It is necessary to bear in mind
that the geographic areas in which these practices
are generally carried out transcends those where the
conflict is unfolding, including neighbouring countries
and even distant countries. In addition, the time frame
goes well beyond the duration of conflicts, and the
consequences of these practices are suffered by the
victims for the rest of their lives.

It is fundamental that the international community
expressed its full-throated condemnation of human
trafficking when we unanimously adopted resolution
2331 (2016) last December, on the occasion of the
open debate organized by the delegation of Spain (see S/PV.7847). Human trafficking is an aberrant practice
in all its forms and manifestations and whatever its
purpose. Trafficking in persons represents a serious
abuse of human rights that denigrates its victims,
stripping them of their human condition to the detriment
of the interests of the criminal and terrorist networks
operating throughout the world. Uruguay welcomes the
growing link between the work of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, the Secretary-General
and the Security Council, and we would highlight
coordination with the Peacebuilding Commission
in order to prevent areas that are in a post-conflict
situation from becoming a fertile ground for the actions
of criminal organizations.

Secondly, we need to address the structural causes
that lead to conflicts. The absence of State authority,
the lack of guarantees, poverty, inequality in all its
aspects, and the lack of access to education or political
participation, generate vacuums that are filled by
terrorist organizations and human trafficking. Not only
do these organizations take advantage of the absence
or instability of a State that cannot fulfil its primary
responsibility for protecting its inhabitants, but they
also play on the desperation of the population affected.

Thirdly, in dealing with trafficking in persons
in the context of armed conflict, we must remember
that many of these scenarios are taking place in areas
where peacekeeping operations are deployed. We
therefore note the importance and appropriateness of
these operations having adequate mandates to identify,
protect and assist the victims of human trafficking, to
monitor and report on such situations, and to support
authorities in developing their capacities. It is also
important for States to comply with the provisions of
the relevant international instruments.

The adoption of the Palermo Protocol to Prevent,
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially
Women and Children, was a particularly important step
in understanding the issue and in making States aware
of their responsibilities to address the problem in a
comprehensive manner, both in terms of the prevention
and protection of victims and in investigating and
punishing traffickers. We call on all those countries that
have not done so to accede to the Protocol and ratify the
conventions of the International Labour Organization

on forced labour and the abolition of forced labour in
order to prevent the proliferation of such practices.

States must also adopt the national measures
necessary to monitor and hold the perpetrators
accountable. We must keep in mind that, according
to estimates of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC), some 60 per cent of trafficking
victims identified throughout the world are foreign
to the country where they have been identified.
Such data confirm that no country is exempt from
the responsibility to identify and eventually punish
those responsible.
Fourthly and finally, in relation to the situation
of victims, Uruguay wishes to highlight the need for
comprehensive assistance for victims of trafficking. The
focus should be on their recovery and reintegation into
society. Victims should receive legal and psychosocial
assistance and protection that address their specific
needs. The rights of victims of trafficking should be
at the centre of the entire enderavour to prevent and
combat trafficking in persons. The traffic in people
affects all sectors ofthe population, but there are certain
social groups that suffer disproportionately. In this
context, and as reported by Unodc, almost one-third of
victims are children and more than 70 per cent are girls
and women.

In conclusion, I wish to highlight the importance
of cooperation among States in combatting
trafficking in persons and in judging and condemning
those responsible.

