Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): Thank
you, Madam President, for holding this important open
debate on women, peace and security. I would like to
thank Michelle Bachelet, Lazarous Kapambwe and
Orzala Ashraf Nemat for their briefings this morning.

I would also particularly like to thank the
Secretary-General for the personal interest that he has
shown in this very important agenda item. Though we
support the comprehensive draft presidential statement
that will be adopted in this debate, I regret that because
of the opposition of some, we were unable to
unreservedly welcome the Secretary-General's report
(S/2011/598*). The United Kingdom does,
wholeheartedly, welcome that report.

Women have a central role in building stability in
countries at risk of conflict. Despite our collective
efforts, they remain underrepresented in peace
processes, in work to detect early signs of conflict, and
in mediation between warring parties. Some progress
has been made, but it is not until the participation of
women is included throughout the conflict cycle that a
durable and sustainable peace can be assured.

The Council, of course, may not be the best
model. With five female Permanent and Deputy
Permanent Representatives leaving the Council at the
end of this year, there may be only two female
Permanent and Deputy Permanent Representatives
around this table, both from the United States.

I have three points to make in today's debate. The
first concerns support for the role of UN-Women and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on

ll-56959
Sexual Violence in Conflict; the second addresses the
need to do more on conflict prevention and early
warning; and the third stresses the work that the United
Kingdom has taken forward through our national action
plan on women, peace and security.

Since taking up her position as Under-Secretary-
General and Executive Director of UN-Women,
Michelle Bachelet has passionately and effectively
promoted the women, peace and security agenda.
Supported by Special Representatives Radhika
Coomaraswamy and Margot Wallstrom, UN-Women
plays a vital role coordinating wider international
efforts to implement the full suite of United Nations
resolutions on women, peace and security. We
commend in particular, the efforts to improve
systematic reporting of progress through the
development of indicators and a strategic framework,
including the strategic framework of United Nations
Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict. In July, the
United Kingdom pledged $16 million over a two-year
period to UN-Women to support this important work.

We have a responsibility to use all the means
available to the United Nations to prevent conflict or
relapse into conflict. United Nations Member States
must be prepared to invest early to support countries
emerging from conflict and react rapidly should a crisis
arise. We must also continue to encourage the
development and deployment, at the invitation of
Governments, of United Nations mediation specialists
and special envoys. The United Kingdom welcomes the
Secretary-General's call to increase the number of
senior female mediators.

I would like now to say a word on national action
plans. The United Kingdom believes that national
action plans provide an important opportunity for
Member States to make their own commitments to
reducing the impact of conflict on women and girls and
to promoting their inclusion in conflict resolution.
Over the past year, the United Kingdom has supported
global efforts to implement resolution 1325 (2000). In
Afghanistan, the United Kingdom has funded a full
range of measures undertaken by the Criminal Justice
Task Force to minimize gender-related barriers to
working in a high-profile law enforcement
environment. We also supported the efforts of the
Government of Nepal to develop its own national
action plan to generate, among many other things,
work to provide support for women and girls who have
been the victims of sexual violence. We encourage

more countries to develop national action plans in
order to strengthen the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) and associated resolutions.

The Arab Spring has shown that threats to
security, and to women and girls in particular, are
changing constantly. In our work on women and peace
and security, we must be flexible enough to respond to
new threats and challenges as they emerge. There are
sweeping and positive social and economic trends at
work. The Council needs to show that we are
responsive to those trends. On this as on other issues,
we should demonstrate that we are on the right side of
history. In particular, we must ensure that governing
structures that emerge in the aftermath of conflict do
not undermine women's roles and participation in
society, and that the same opportunities are available to
men and women.

The United Kingdom believes that women's
inclusion in political settlements and peace processes,
the protection of women and girls in situations of
armed violence, and women's access to security and
justice are essential building blocks for more peaceful
and stable societies.

In a year when the Nobel Peace Prize was
awarded to three impressive women, we share the hope
of the Norwegian Nobel Committee that together we
can realize the great potential for democracy and peace
that women represent.

