Mr. Fedotov: My thanks go to the Security
Council and to the United Kingdom presidency for their
unflagging attention to the crime of human trafficking
in conflict situations.

We continue to witness criminals and terrorists
exploiting instability and vulnerability. As the
Secretary-General has just observed, human trafficking
thrives where the rule of law is weak or non-existent.
Armed groups are engaging in human trafficking,
capturing and coercing young girls and boys into sexual
slavery or to be used as child soldiers. Organized-crime
networks are preying on the many thousands of people
on the move.

The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) 2016 Global Report on Trafficking in
Persons confirms that migrants from countries with a
high level of organized crime, or that are affected by
conflicts, are more vulnerable to trafficking, as well
as violence, abuse and other forms of exploitation. As
conflict displaces countless people, as the rule of law
breaks down and as cooperation between countries
falters, criminals see a clear business opportunity. For
organized crime networks, human trafficking is a low-
risk, high-reward criminal business - a perception
that is reinforced by the inexcusably low conviction
rates still reported around the world. States can, and
must, do more to prevent people from falling victim
to traffickers. To protect those exploited, and to hold
criminals to account, they could take some concrete,
immediate steps.

First, there is a clear need to make the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
and its Protocol against Trafficking in Persons more
operational. That means developing comprehensive
legal frameworks to encourage and facilitate cross-
border cooperation and responses to human trafficking
and the organized crime that perpetuates it. It also
means putting in place a mechanism that would allow
for a review of the implementation of the Convention
and its Protocols.

Secondly, some countries' national laws may
apply to the actions of their citizens abroad, including
in conflict zones, which could be used to bring
perpetrators to justice.

Thirdly, anti-trafficking laws should not only
criminalize trafficking but also provide for the
protection and support of victims.

Fourthly, countries must devote more resources
to identifying and assisting victims, tailored to the
challenges of conflict zones and large movements of
refugees and migrants.

Fifthly, we must continue building capacities
to improve criminal justice responses and action to
detect, investigate and successfully prosecute cases of
human trafficking.

In October, Member States will appraise the Global

Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons,
which the Secretary-General mentioned and which
the General Assembly adopted in 2010 to support
the implementation of the Protocol and to coordinate
national responses. That event offers a chance to
discuss and advance efforts against trafficking in
conflict situations, and I hope members will take
advantage of that opportunity. I also hope that Member
States, the private sector and all those concerned will
help us provide a much higher level of direct assistance
through the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for
Victims of Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children, a facility that was established under the
Global Plan of Action.
As always, UNODC remains engaged in supporting
members to improve responses to human trafficking.
We are assisting with the identification and protection
of trafficking victims among refugees and displaced
persons. We are helping to build capacities to disrupt
organized crime and terrorist groups, including
through intelligence sharing, financial investigations
and coordination within and across borders. We are
working with our United Nations partners, including
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, to
mainstream responses to human trafficking in efforts
to address the conflict cycle. Furthermore, UNODC
is seeking to strengthen United Nations coordination
through the Inter-Agency Coordination Group against
Trafficking in Persons. UNODC and its partners will
hold a Group briefing to Member States in New York on
Friday, which I hope members will attend.

Clearly, international responses to human
trafficking continue to fall short, and we cannot accept
the status quo. The best way we can swiftly improve
action against trafficking and protect the vulnerable is
to fully implement and make use of the frameworks we
have worked so hard to build and more effectively deploy
the tools we have painstakingly crafted to confront
human trafficking in all its forms. As the Secretary-
General has so eloquently said, this is an issue that can,
and should, unite us. The Security Council's continued
support for our work is essential.

