Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): I thank you
for convening this important debate today, Madam
President. I would also like to thank this morning's
briefers for their thought-provoking presentations.

New Zealand welcomes the ongoing development
and strengthening of the normative frameworks
around the agenda on women and peace and security,
made manifest through the various Security Council
resolutions adopted over the past decade and a half. The
challenge now is to put those concepts into practice,
as is the case in other areas of the Council's work.
Focusing on the needs of particular groups can shine
a light on the implementation gaps that should be
addressed. That is why we particularly welcome your
initiative, Madam President, in focusing today's debate
on displaced women and girls.

As other speakers have noted today, the number of
displaced people is higher now than at any time since the
Second World War. The rise of violent extremism is also
raising severe challenges to protection. In the turmoil
of conflict and post-conflict situations, displaced
women and girls are uniquely exposed to the erosion
of protection standards. Traditional community-based
frameworks of stability disappear, and the urgency and
uncertainty of ongoing violence obscure its long-term
consequences for vulnerable groups.

The challenges to the protection of displaced
women and girls remain acute. Sexual violence in
conflict is still a particular vulnerability. There is a
need for responses that can address all violations of
rights in conflict. Incorporating gender indicators into
early warning frameworks could be a useful practical
step to help identify vulnerabilities as quickly as
possible and to target responses. To have a real chance
of finding solutions, we should combine that awareness
of vulnerability with an equally strong recall of the
premises of the agenda on women and peace and
security, going back to resolution 1325 (2000) - that
is, that women and girls have an important active role
to play in preventing and resolving conflict. Sustainable
solutions cannot work if women's participation is not
addressed with that perspective in mind.

That is why we must ensure that women and
girls are consulted and listened to at every stage of
peacebuilding and programme design. That is the only
way we will realize their potential as leaders. There are
worthy examples of this in practice, but the challenge is
to ensure that it happens far more regularly. It requires
sustained and conscious effort, including the active
recruitment, training and promotion of women leaders
both in affected communities and at Headquarters,
so that they are part of the most senior levels of
decision-making. Regional organizations can also play
an important role in facilitating the rise of women and
girls as agents of change.

As we have heard today, the cycle of displacement
can often last many years, spanning initial
displacement, resettlement and recovery - and,
eventually, return. We acknowledge that the challenges
that displaced women and girls face are not related
merely to immediate protection, but also extend to the
consequences for their livelihoods, health care and legal
status and rights. We must ensure that the international
community's response addresses those challenges in
an holistic way, so that displacement does not lead to
a lifetime of disadvantage and vulnerability, and that
their leadership potential and contribution to peace and
security can be realized.

