Mr. McLay (New Zealand): I thank to Ms. Bangura
and Ms. Allamin for their briefings and, above all, for
the dedication and the energy that they bring to a cause
to which we should all be committed.

May I also say to my colleague, the Ambassador
of Spain, that if Spain intends to take an ambitious
approach with regard to the review of resolution 1325
(2000), he will find ready support from this part of the
table.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/203)
paints a very grim picture. Civil conflict, the collapse
of State authority, unprecedented numbers of displaced
people, and the use of sexual Violence as a weapon
of war have all exposed more women and girls to the
risk of sexual violence than at any other time in living
memory. And, as if to emphasize that point and the
grimness of the situation, just yesterday we marked the
first anniversary of the abduction of 276 Nigerian girls
by Boko Haram, of whom 219 are still missing. These
are grim statistics on a very sad day.

There are many ways in which we could approach
this issue, but today I am going to focus on the
practical steps that might translate our collective
commitments - the words of Council members around
this table and the words of many others - into action,
and which can result in safer environments for women
and girls everywhere. United Nations peacekeeping has
a crucial role to play in meeting those commitments,
particularly where the capacity of national authorities
has been significantly degraded, as is sadly the case
in so many of the situations we must review. That role
can range from active enforcement to providing support
or capacity-building to national partners. All of these,
wherever they are pitched, are practical steps.

New Zealand has witnessed the impact that the
United Nations can have on a post-conflict setting. In
Timor-Leste, the Government sought the assistance of
the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) in developing community-based policing
strategies in order to tackle domestic abuse and sexual
Violence. Initial support, through UNMIT, translated
and transitioned into longer-term bilateral policing
programmes; community policing and gender protection
principles were integrated into Timor Leste's national
legislation, well as the country's policing doctrine and
training. All of that demonstrates the progress that can
be made when strong, focused and determined national
leadership receives targeted support from the Council
and the United Nations.

We commend the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and others for developing guidance and
training on preventing and responding to sexual
violence, because it is important that our peacekeepers
have access to that sort of guidance. In many conflict
situations, barriers to women's participation in
decision-making are exacerbated. Women are often
excluded from conflict resolution and peacebuilding,
thus undermining the effectiveness and sustainability
of peace initiatives. We therefore echo the Secretary-
General's call for sexual violence to be integrated into
the approaches taken by the United Nations in conflict
and post-conflict settings, including protection of
civilians and conflict-resolution strategies, which
are, again, practical steps. We also call for particular
attention to be paid to combating sexual violence
against displaced persons. We have more of them these
days than at any time since the Second World War.

In our region, Pacific Islands Forum leaders
have recognized sexual violence and Violence against
women as a pair of the most significant human security
issues that face their communities. The Secretariat
of the Pacific Islands Chiefs of Police, representing
21 Member States, aims to develop practical and
ethical policing standards in its member countries,
including a Women's Advisory Network to support
the professional development and leadership of Pacific
Islands policewomen. Preventing and combatting
sexual violence is ultimately a national responsibility,
and one that is assumed on behalf of organizations such
as the Pacific Islands Chiefs of Police.

The framework of resolution 1325 (2000) provides
useful mechanisms for supporting national and local
solutions, including the development of national action
plans on women, peace and security. New Zealand is
currently finalizing its own national action plan, which
is under public consultation at this time. That plan
sets out a range of initiatives tailored to our specific
needs and circumstances, including tackling domestic
violence, which is ever a problem in all societies.
The plan also focuses on increasing the number of
military and policewomen who are available for senior
deployment in peacekeeping operations. Each of the
steps I have outlined are small, but every small step
can make a difference and, collectively, all of those
differences will be important. Only if we all take such
steps we can make progress against sexual violence.
That is the challenge and, step by practical step, that
should be our collective response.

