The President (Spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Afghanistan,
Albania, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Belgium, Botswana, Brazil, Burundi, Canada,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Egypt, Germany,
Guatemala, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Luxembourg, Mexico, Morocco, the Netherlands,
Pakistan, Poland, the Republic of Korea, Rwanda,
Senegal, Slovakia, South Africa, the Sudan, Sweden,
Switzerland, the Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand,
Turkey, Ukraine, Uruguay and Zimbabwe to participate
in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Kyung-wha
Kang, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator;
Ms. Helen Durham, Director for International Law and
Policy at the International Committee of the Red Cross;
and Ms. Ilwad Elman of the NGO Working Group on
Women, Peace and Security.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Ioannis Vrailas, Deputy Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.

I propose that the Council invite the Charge'
d'affaires ad interim of the Permanent Observer Mission
of the Holy See to the United Nations to participate in
this meeting, in accordance with the provisional rules
of procedure and the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2015/32, which contains a letter dated
16 January 2015 from the Permanent Representative of
Chile to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-
General, transmitting a concept note on the item under
consideration.

I now give the floor to Ms. Kang.

