Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We wish
you, Madam President, every success during the course
of your presidency of the Council's work for this month.
We also thank Ambassador Matjila and the members of
his delegation for their outstanding presidency of the
Council last month.

I thank the Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Amina
Mohammed, and the Permanent Observer of the
African Union (AU) to the United Nations, Ms. Fatima
Mohammed, for their briefings on their recent joint
visit to the Horn of Africa.

I would like to focus in my statement on three
issues: the centrality of African security; developments
this year; and women and youth.

On the centrality of African security, the links
between the Horn of Africa and peace and security
are demonstrated in the convening of this meeting,
following the awarding of the Nobel Peace Prize to
the Prime Minister of Ethiopia, Mr. Abiy Ahmed. We
reiterate Kuwait's congratulations to the leadership
and people of Ethiopia on that merited prize. The visit
also coincided with the annual joint meeting of the AU
Peace and Security Council and the Security Council.

The social, religious, cultural, economic and
security ties between the Arab peninsula and the entire
Arab region and the Horn of Africa are historical and
multifaceted and intimately link the security situation
ofthose two regions. The League ofArab States plays an
important role in the security of the African continent.
Likewise, the AU and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) play a central role in strategic
Arab security. We recall today with appreciation the
achievements recently made in that regard, thanks to
the leaders of the region, reflected by the Custodian
of the Two Holy Mosques and the leaders of Horn of
Africa, with the aim of achieving rapprochement and
making peace. We hope to see greater Arab-African
cooperation in the near future, especially at the fifth
Arab-African summit, to be held in Riyadh late
this month.

With respect to this year's developments, we
note the reconciliation between Ethiopia and Eritrea,
the rapprochement between Eritrea and Djibouti,
the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, the crucial role
of the United Nations and the AU in achieving peace in
Somalia and the dialogue with armed movements in the
Sudan. All of those developments show the willingness
of both the leadership and the peoples of the Horn
of Africa to achieve peace within one year. That is
why we still have hope in seeing greater cooperation
and regional integration among those peoples. The
accomplishments of the peoples of the Horn of Africa
towards making peace and healing the wounds of the
past are examples to be followed and merit our attention,
support and appreciation.
We welcome and encourage the visits of the United
Nations and regional organizations to States of the
Horn of Africa. We hope to see more such visits in the
future, and we call for continued interest in that key
region, whose security is closely tied to the security of
international navigation and trade.

On women and youth, half of our society is made
up of women while young people represent the future
and, in many States in the region, are the largest strata
of society. Those two groups have a central role to play
in achieving and consolidating peace. The democratic
change in the Sudan is not far-fetched. Women occupy
leadership positions in the State as well as other
sovereign positions, in addition to important ministerial
portfolios in Ethiopia, the Sudan and South Sudan. That
raises hope in the continued empowerment of women
through their growing representation at the legislative
level in the Sudan and South Sudan.

In her briefing, the Deputy Secretary-General
provided us with information about the empowerment of
women and their role in making and building peace. That
draws our attention to the fact that investing in human
beings, in particular women and youth, is not confined
to issues of war or peace, but is an uninterrupted project
of many interrelated issues. As the Security Council
deploys multidimensional operations, while believing
in the importance of dealing comprehensively with the
issues of security and peace, the questions of women
and youth are also closely related to peace and security.

Lastly, we welcome the historic visit to the Horn of
Africa and hope to see greater progress and prosperity
for the peoples of that region and throughout Africa.
We also wish our colleague Ambassador Jonathan
Cohen every success in his future endeavours.

