The Secretary-General: Thank you very much,
Madam President, for convening this important
meeting. I appreciate your personal attention to the
problem of sexual violence, which is a top priority for
me and the United Nations system.

I thank all members of the Security Council for
the draft resolution to be adopted during the course of
this meeting. The Council will thereby put in place a
vital building block for holding perpetrators
accountable. It will also send out a resounding message
to those who would violate both women's bodies and
the law that impunity will not be tolerated.

But let us remember that even as we take this step
here, catastrophe is unfolding for communities caught
in the chaos of conflicts. Armed elements are targeting
civilians, raping women and men and terrorizing entire
populations. Premeditated campaigns are being waged
with the most sinister goals: to silence women leaders,
empty areas that are filled with rich minerals but poor
people, recruit others and perpetuate the cycle of abuse.

Sexual violence shatters lives, devastates
countries and destroys hope. Victims who might have
contributed to development are shunned. Girls who
might have grown into great leaders cannot even attend
school. In many places, the threat is so pervasive that
women cannot cultivate land, collect water or get the
fuel they need to cook and feed their families - for
fear that they will be attacked in the process. Often,
perpetrators seem to reserve particular cruelty for
children, intentionally traumatizing boys and girls by
forcing them to watch as their mothers are attacked or
by attacking the children themselves.

Earlier this year, this horrific reality played out in
Walikale, in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Hundreds of women were
raped, as were girls, boys and men. One young girl,
just five years-old, suffered such severe physical
injuries that she may never fully recover. We can only
imagine the psychological trauma she now endures.
10-69655

Victims may survive such attacks only to be
subjected to another form of abuse. Sexual violence is
one of the only crimes where the victims - and not the
perpetrators - are left with stigma. This is true not
only in the Democratic Republic of the Congo but in
other countries around the world. Victims are shamed
and marginalized. Their husbands reject them. Men and
boys who are sexually attacked often suffer isolation
and discrimination. Just when these individuals need
support from their communities, it falls away.

Silencing the victims only benefits the
perpetrators. It feeds impunity, which erodes faith in
the justice system. Make no mistake: this is intentional
and part of the very design of the violence. Attacks on
women are attacks on peace itself. That is why we must
do more to fight stigma, protect women's security and
help the victims. They need services and they deserve
comprehensive reparations. This is critical to recovery
for individuals and justice for society.

The United Nations and the international
community can support national efforts, but we cannot
supplant them. I call on leaders to join me in declaring
that enough is enough. We cannot permit the sexual
violence that is used as a tactic of war to become a way
of life. The United Nations is working in conflict areas
and troubled areas around the world to protect
populations and combat impunity. We have seen that
determined and concerted action can yield positive
results.

In Walikale, peacekeepers of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), in a joint
operation with Congolese forces, arrested "Lieutenant
Colonel" Mayele, who was allegedly responsible for
commanding the mass rapes. But many perpetrators are
still at large. MONUSCO and the United Nations
system are helping the Democratic Republic of the
Congo authorities to investigate the crimes, protect
witnesses and bring perpetrators to justice. MONUSCO
has also launched a targeted operation to better protect
civilians in the affected areas. As a result, a number of
suspected human rights abusers have been arrested and
many internally displaced people able to return to their
homes.

Important steps have also been taken at the
international level, including the recent arrests of
leaders of the Forces democratiques de liberation du
Rwanda in France and Germany, and the work of the
10-69655
International Criminal Court on sexual violence
crimes.

Today's draft resolution gives us sharper tools
and sharper teeth in the fight against sexual violence. It
gives me a mandate to list, in my reports on this
question, parties who commit such acts. It challenges
the United Nations system to provide better
information, and it reaffirms the Council's commitment
to adopting sanctions against perpetrators. I will do
everything possible to ensure that the draft resolution
leads to real protection for populations at risk.

My Special Representative is bringing the voices
of women to the Council's deliberations. I am grateful
that she has been invited to brief the Council today,
and hope that she has many opportunities to do so
again in the future. The Council's sustained political
support for the deployment of the Team of Experts on
the Rule of Law and the protection of advisors in
affected countries will be critical as we move ahead.

The entire United Nations system is mobilized
under my campaign "UNiTE to End Violence against
Women". We are working to change attitudes across
the world. Together, the United Nations, national
Governments and the international community can
eliminate this menace and secure a better future for all
people.

