Mr. Mawe (Ireland): Ithank you, Sir, for convening
this debate. It provides us with an opportunity to take
stock of our progress and the challenges that face us
in the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda. There is indeed much to review: eight
resolutions, 63 national action plans and initiatives at
the international, regional and national levels, which
are too numerous to list. The report of the Secretary-
General (S/2016/822) shows that the women and peace
and security agenda has fundamentally changed the
way in which we approach issues ofpeace and security.

Ireland fully supports the statement made by
the observer of the European Union, and, in my
national capacity, I would like to focus on how the
implementation and mainstreaming of the women and
peace and security agenda have led and can further
lead to paradigm shifts in four crucial areas. The first
area is migration. Last month, we adopted the New
York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants (General Assembly resolution 71/1). It confirms that our response
to refugee and migrant flows must go beyond border
security, camps and asylum processes. It highlights the
particular risks faced by women migrants and women
refugees, including sexual violence and trafficking.
Moreover, it recognizes the role of women in peace and
reconciliation processes and in developing solutions.
Those are intrinsic elements of the women and peace
and security agenda. Their inclusion in the Declaration
is a major achievement. We urge Member States and
other partners, including the Security Council, to
maintain momentum by ensuring that women and peace
and security priorities are now mainstreamed through
our collective response to this global phenomenon.

The second is conflict prevention and peacebuilding
initiatives. We are moving closer to plugging what former
Secretary-General Kofi Arman termed the "gaping hole"
in the United Nations machinery for sustaining peace.
Much more remains to be done. Resolution 2282 (2016)
and General Assembly resolution 70/262, adopted in
April, provide us with a robust policy framework for
enhancing the United Nations work in the areas of
conflict prevention and peacebuilding. The women and
peace and security agenda, however, provides us with
a tool for implementation. We have plainly seen that
when women participate in society and their voices
are heard, there is a higher chance of achieving and
sustaining peace or preventing the outbreak of conflict
in the first instance.

The Peacebuilding Fund has met the Secretary-
General's gender target of 15 per cent and is pioneering
the mainstreaming of the women and peace and security
agenda in peacebuilding. Last month, Ireland pledged
more than $3 million to the Peacebuilding Fund over
three years. We urge the States Members of the United
Nations and the Security Council to support the work
of the Fund and the Peacebuilding Commission as
part of a wider move to harness the women and peace
and security agenda as a driver of conflict prevention
and peacebuilding. Thirdly, women-and-peace-and-
security mainstreaming has also driven changes in
mediation and peace processes. A formula for lasting
peace cannot be reached by excluding half of society.
That has been shown by the Global Study on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and is also
rooted in fundamental logic.

Thankfully, we are advancing in that regard. Since
2012, all United Nations mediation-support teams have
included women. We have best practices, including
Colombia, from which to draw. Nevertheless, the
report of the Secretary-General shows mixed progress
regarding the inclusion of women in peace processes.
Through our experience of reconciliation on our own
island and our consistent engagement with the United
Nations Mediation Support Unit, Ireland can attest
to the crucial need for the participation of women
in mediation and peace processes. We call for the
redoubling of efforts on the part of special envoys and
representatives, with support from Security Council
member States and regional partners, so as to ensure
that next year's report of the Secretary-General can
point to clear progress in that regard.

Fourthly, the women and peace and security agenda
is leading to a sea change in the peacekeeping paradigm.
For Ireland, we do not have to look any further than
home to see that. Resolution 1325 (2000) was transposed
directly by our defence forces into an action plan for
women and peace and security. That plan supports our
national action plan on women and peace and security,
which is now in its second phase. It means that women
and peace and security priorities are included in almost
every stage of Ireland's overseas engagements, from
pre-deployment training to the planning, execution and
reporting of operations. Initiatives to target women in
our 2016 army recruitment drives have been held up as
best practices. We are also pleased to announce that the
recent deployment of Lieutenant Colonel Mary Carroll
to head the Irish contingent of the United Nations

Disengagement Observer Force represents the first
woman commander of a mixed gender infantry unit in
a United Nations mission.

Those are only four areas in which the women and
peace and security agenda has catalysed change and
can continue to do so. There are many more, including
disarmament, international criminal justice and the
prevention and countering of violent extremism. It
would be remiss not to focus lastly and briefly on those
of us charged with living the changes that we have made.

First, with regard to the United Nations
system - more work is needed to advance the Global
Study's recommendation that a gender perspective
should be mainstreamed throughout the United Nations
response to conflict emergencies. The recent adoption
by the Peacebuilding Commission ofa gender strategy is
an example ofa best practice that we can all learn from.

Secondly, with regard to regional and subregional
organizations, in May, Ireland was pleased to host the
inaugural workshop on the regional acceleration of
resolution 1325 (2000). It brought together regional
organizations working on peacekeeping. Such work
must form part of a larger effort to support and learn
from women and peace and security initiatives at the
regional level.

Thirdly, with regard to Member States, 63 national
action plans mean 63 opportunities to identify lessons
learned, which could serve to spark new initiatives. We
look forward to participating actively in the national
women and peace and security focal points network
launched by Spain in September.

Finally and crucially, with regard to civil
society organizations, those on the front lines of the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda are often those most in need of support.
Ireland has contributed almost $500,000 to the Global
Acceleration Instrument for Women and Peace and
Security and Humanitarian Action since its launch last
February, and we encourage other donors to support
this civil society organization-driven fund. When we
speak at next year's debate, we hope to be able to point
to even greater progress within the frameworks of
peace and security, all with the women and peace and
security agenda at the core.

