Mr. Matjila (South Africa): My delegation wishes
to express its appreciation to the Chef de Cabinet for
the Secretary-General, Ms. Viotti, for her statement
and for the annual report on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) (S/2017/861). We also welcome
the insightful contributions that were made by
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director
of UN-Women, as well as by Ms. Charo Mina-Rojas,
representative of civil society, and Ms. Michaelle Jean,
Secretary-General of the International Organization of
la Francophonie.

The year 2017 will mark the seventeenth anniversary
ofresolution 1325 (2000), which formally acknowledged
the changing nature of warfare, in which civilians are
increasingly being targeted and women continue to
be excluded from participation in peace processes.
The resolution remains a significant milestone in the
progress towards women's full enjoyment of their
rights and equality throughout the world, a world in
which for the first time women are given a significant
and necessary voice in the field of peace and security.

Despite that honourable objective, much more
needs to be, and must be, done. Women remain excluded
within peace processes, including in the drafting of
peace agreements, and their involvement in United
Nations peacekeeping within the military, police
and civilian components is limited. In addition, the
contribution of women and girls to the peacebuilding
process remains undervalued and underresourced,
leaving a vital tool regarding transformative change
and sustainable peace underutilized.

South Africa is committed to contributing to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). My country's
history illustrates the relevance of the role that women
play in achieving and maintaining peace and security
in a post-conflict environment. South Africa's women
have been at the forefront of efforts to drive reform
and to develop and advance responsible policies and
legislation aimed at advancing the role of women in
society. Today, at the level of political decision-makers,
42 per cent of South Africa's representatives in
Parliament and 41 per cent of the national cabinet
are women. That illustrates the progress that is being
made towards a 50-50 representation in both houses
of Parliament and the cabinet. Furthermore, both the
speaker of the national Parliament and that of the house
of Provinces are women.

South Africa provides training for women
mediators in the African region. Such mediators will
make up an African women mediators' network that
can assist in peace negotiations. In addition to that,
the South African National Defence Force operates
the Peacekeeping Training Centre in Pretoria, where
women peacekeepers from South Africa and throughout
the region receive training. It must be stressed that the
National Defence Force is highly aware of the fact that
gender issues need to be highlighted, which is reflected
in the fact that at present 30 per cent of our National
Defence Force comprises women.

Additionally, we recently held the third Gertrude
Shope Annual Dialogue Forum on Conflict Resolution
and Peacemaking in Africa. That initiative includes
participants from across the African continent and
inspires women to play more important leadership and
peacebuilding roles than they have traditionally played,
without necessarily being part of an official delegation.
That Forum also provides a platform that women can use
to share their experiences, reflect on existing policies
and challenges, and thereafter make recommendations
to national, regional and international institutions.

This year saw the adoption the historic Treaty on
the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons on 7 July, and
we are pleased that South Africa was one of the first
countries to sign that Treaty on 20 September. South
Africa wishes to warmly congratulate the International
Campaign to Abolish Nuclear Weapons for being
awarded the 2017 Nobel Peace Prize. That well-
deserved and timely award is a clear recognition of the
role played by civil-society organizations in the area of
nuclear disarmament in pursuit of a world free of nuclear
weapons. Allow me to pay special tribute to women's
organizations for their active role in the abolishment of
nuclear weapons, including the Women's International
League for Peace and Freedom based in Geneva.

In order to strengthen the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and the resolutions that build
upon it, including resolution 2242 (2015), my country
continues to engage with representatives of civil society
and academia to find ways to further empower women
and remove obstacles that impede their participation
in peacekeeping missions and mediation efforts on the
African continent. Furthermore, we fully support the
various solidarity missions to Africa that have been led
by UN-Women and the African Union recently.

South Africa looks forward to further cooperation
and the sharing ofexperiences with Member States, UN-
Women, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and other partners that seek to further incorporate
gender perspectives and the concerns of women in order
to enhance the sustainability of peace and security in
all conflict situations. We support the slogan HeforShe.

