Mr. Suarez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to
thank the delegation of Egypt for its work during its
presidency of the Security Council during the month
of May. We also congratulate the delegation of France
on its assumption of the presidency for the current
month. We reiterate our support for the success of your
efforts, Sir, as President of this body. We welcome the
convening of this important debate. We also thank the
Secretary-General for introducing his annual report
(S/2016/361) on conflict-related sexual violence. And we
express our gratitude for the briefings by Ms. Bangura,
Ms. Giammarinaro and Ms. Davis.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela condemns
sexual violence in all its forms, in particular violence
that occurs in the context of armed conflict and carried
out by different actors, whether State or non-State actors.
There is no justification of any kind for committing
such reprehensible acts. That crime violates human
dignity and leaves devastating consequences for its
victims. In the majority of cases, they are stigmatized
and face a series of obstacles that result from social
pressure, cultural and religious patterns and the lack
of specialized personnel and infrastructure at the most
basic level to look after them. Furthermore, such acts are
an express violation of international law, international
human rights law and international humanitarian law.
We cannot allow impunity when it comes to that type
of crime. Our country calls for effective accountability
for all forms of sexual violence. We should impose
exemplary sanctions for all those who instigate or who
are responsible for that kind of crime.

The vulnerability that the civilian population faces
in the midst ofan armed conflict is all the more alarming
when we focus on women and children, and even more
when they are displaced or refugees, because in many
cases they end up being the victims of trafficking in
persons and sexual slavery, where an important role is
played by non- State groups and criminal gangs that feed
off each other. The economy of war feeds on human
tragedy and the most vulnerable sectors.

The existence of non-State actors accused of using
sexual violence as part of their war tactic, as pointed
out in the report, is a challenge for the international
community when it comes to determining how to
ensure the promotion of specific commitments in order
to prevent the use of sexual violence by those armed
groups that the Council does not describe as terrorists.
In that regard, we deem it relevant to promote adequate
agreements on that particular topic in scenarios where
peace talks and ceasefire talks under way.

Building resilience, in particular with regard to
training and increasing national institutional capacity-
building linked to justice, health and social welfare
systems in countries that are in armed conflict or
post-conflict situations, plays a fundamental role. It
is therefore necessary to combine our efforts so that,
while fully respecting the sovereignty of the States
concerned, we can develop and strengthen those
capabilities for the proper enforcement of accountability
and the rehabilitation of victims and children of such
violence, so that they are guaranteed the right to
preserve their identity, including, among other things,
their nationality, which is a fundamental right of every
human being.

With regard to the process of institutional capacity-
building, we acknowledge the important work done by
the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict.

We reiterate our firm condemnation of all incidents
of sexual exploitation and abuse committed by any
foreign force or by military, police or civilian personnel
deployed in peacekeeping operations or special political
missions, as well as by staff of this Organization
considered not to be deployed in such operations.
Hence we support the policy of zero tolerance regarding
any sexual-violence incidents that have taken place
or will take place in any peacekeeping operation or
military mission that has a mandate or support from the
Security Council.

The United Nations must be an example of
consistency and firmness with respect to the importance
ofpreventing such acts, and, above all, of accountability
with respect to any staff member of the Organization or
of international forces authorized by this body who has
committed this type of crime.

As indicated in the report, sexual violence has
reached new levels. Extremist groups and terrorists in
the Middle East and Africa use it as an instrument of
war and selective attacks against ethnic or religious
minorities with a View to annihilating them, and, in
other cases, to displace populations in order to control
territory and natural resources. The main perpetrators
of such actions are the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham (ISIS), Jaish al-Islam, Al-Qaida, Al-Nusra,
Boko Haram and all associated groups and militias in
locations where they have a presence.

In this regard, we reiterate our appeal to the
international community to fully respect the provisions
of international law and of the resolutions adopted
by the Council related to the ban on supplying arms,
financial or logistical support to these groups, so that
we can effectively neutralize their operational capacity
and their abhorrent practices of sexual exploitation
and violence.

We also agree with the statement made by
the Secretary-General in his report reiterating the
importance of strategically coordinating efforts to
prevent sexual violence and to do so in unison with
efforts to prevent violent extremism and terrorism.

We would also like to add that measures aimed
at the effective prevention and eradication of the
crime of trafficking in persons with a View to sexual
exploitation in armed conflict requires a broad
democratic discussion forum that would ensure
the full participation of Member States, all United
Nations entities with responsibility in this area, and
various regional and subregional mechanisms, so as to
coordinate and establish synergies among these actors.

Finally, we wish to express our support for the
recommendation that the issue of sexual violence in
armed conflict be included in the work of the sanctions
committees, in particular those related to ISIS and
Al-Qaida.

