Mr. Muburi-Muita (Kenya): I join other
delegations in congratulating you, Mr. President, on the
excellent stewardship of the work of the Security
Council and especially in organizing today's debate on
women, peace and security. We have been enriched by
the incisive contributions presented thus far.
A year ago, the President of Kenya, His
Excellency Mr. Mwai Kibaki, stated in the General
Assembly:
"Kenya affirms the centrality of gender
equality and recognizes the critical role that
women must play in development. We also
recognize that achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals depends on the
empowerment of women. As part of our effort to
fully attain this objective, my Government has
adopted a national policy on gender development.
The aim is to integrate women in decision-
making through legal, regulatory and institutional
reforms." (A/60/PV.10, p. 10)

In this room a month or so later, my predecessor
spoke passionately during a session similar to this one,
emphasizing the centrality of mainstreaming gender
and, in particular, of including women at all levels
while addressing security issues, especially during
post-conflict peacebuilding measures.

Last Friday, in keeping with his solemn pledge to
include women at all levels in decision-making,
President Kibaki decreed that 30 per cent of all public
service jobs would be reserved for women henceforth.
In his words, he said,

"The women of this country provide a
critical mass for our economic development
However, there is a serious imbalance between
the number of women employed in the public
service and that in the private sector and in the
leadership of the country in general I therefore
call upon the public service to apply affirmative
action in new employment by ensuring that a
minimum of 30 per cent of new recruitment and
appointments in public service establishments are
women."

Kenya expresses its deep gratitude to the
Secretary-General for the comprehensive report on the
status of implementation of the resolution, in particular
through the System-wide Action Plan developed in
2005.

The report showcases the key sectors where
tangible progress has been achieved and identifies the
gaps and challenges in implementation. While
expressing gratitude for the four excellent
presentations from the Secretariat this morning, I must,
however, hasten to add that, despite the progress made,
numerous challenges still stand in the way of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). These
challenges include: a lack of capacity to understand
and implement gender mainstreaming programmes; an

unfortunate lack of leadership and commitment in
implementing the resolution; a lack of adequate
accountability mechanisms; a lack of resources; and
limited inter-agency coordination. In view of these
challenges, we welcome the comprehensive
recommendations made in the report of the Secretary-
General aimed at overcoming these challenges and
strengthening implementation of the resolution.

Kenya appreciates the fact that the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations has made great strides in
promoting gender balance among peacekeeping
personnel. The incorporation of full-time gender
advisers in peacekeeping missions has been very useful
in this regard. Although gender balance is far from
having been attained, we have taken steps in the right
direction. The Department of Peacekeeping Operations
should redouble its efforts towards achieving this goal.
It must develop and disseminate to States, especially
troop-contributing States, effective guidelines to ensure
sustained efforts in gender mainstreaming at all levels
of peacekeeping operations.

In response to resolution 1325 (2000), Kenya has
made deliberate efforts to increase the participation of
women in peacekeeping missions. Currently, we have
women in uniform deployed in six out of the eight
peacekeeping missions in which we are engaged. We
are determined to raise this number.

Resolution 1325 (2000) emphasized the need to
incorporate gender perspectives in post-conflict
reconstruction and peacebuilding. We are happy to note
that there has been increased attention to the role of
women in the post-conflict rebuilding process,
especially in the judicial, legislative and electoral
sectors, as well as in the restoration of the rule of law
and transitional justice. Women still need considerable
support and capacity-building to be effective in new
democratic and legal structures that were traditionally
dominated by men.

We continue to encourage the United Nations
Development Fund for Women in its role in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), especially
in promoting the role of women in peacebuilding and
post-conflict transition, in particular on the African
continent. However, limitations in funding and
resources threaten to undermine this effort. We urge
member States to explore strategies that will ensure the
alignment of resources with priorities and the provision
of adequate and regular funding for activities related to
the implementation of this resolution.

Finally, Kenya strongly endorses the
recommendation for the need to re-conceptualize the
Action Plan in order to strengthen its accountability,
monitoring and reporting system and to ensure
enhanced coordination across the United Nations
system. Establishing a Security Council working
group, or designating a focal point on women, peace
and security issues, as recommended by the Secretary-
General, would ensure systematic integration and
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

