Mr. Akasaka (Japan): Having experienced
frequent outbreaks of regional conflict since the end of
the cold war, the international community has come to
realize the need to address major issues relating to
conflicts, such as the protection of innocent civilians in
armed conflict and the prevention and settlement of
conflicts, from a wider perspective and in a more
comprehensive manner, in order to put an end to the
scourge of armed conflicts in the new century. In this
context, for example, significant progress has been
made in the field of the protection of children during
and after conflicts through efforts to put emphasis on
that issue.

From that standpoint, Japan shares the view that a
gender perspective must be taken into account, and that
concrete issues such as the protection of women in
armed conflicts and their participation in peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peace-building should be further
discussed if progress is to be made in this area.

I should therefore like to pay high tribute to you,
Mr. President, for your thoughtful initiative in
convening this open debate. My delegation also
commends Ms. Angela King, Special Adviser on
Gender Issues and Advancement of Women, and Ms.
Noeleen Heyzer, Executive Director of the United
Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM), for
their efforts in this regard.

This year, at the Beijing + 5 special session of the
General Assembly, the international community
reaffirmed its strong commitment to mainstreaming a
gender perspective in every area of human endeavour.
Among the efforts being made to follow up that
commitment, this discussion in the Security Council is
particularly timely and meaningful, as the issue of
conflict is the most critical issue that we have to tackle
in the twenty-first century.

In that context, we welcome the efforts already
made in this area, such as the participation of women
in the Burundi peacemaking process and the adoption
of the Namibia Plan of Action on the occasion of the
Windhoek seminar on mainstreaming a gender
perspective in multidimensional peace support
operations. I believe that, with these precious inputs,
our discussion today will lead us to an exploration of
further concrete actions in this area.

I would like to take this opportunity to state the
views of Japan on some important points relating to
this issue. First of all, there is a clear need to
strengthen efforts to provide protection to women and
girls in conflict situations. In view of the horrific
reality that we are facing, where innocent civilians
continue to be victimized in armed conflicts, the
protection of women and girls should be our paramount
concern. I would like to appeal to all the parties to
conflicts and to the international community as a whole
to form as clear a picture of the situation as possible,
face up to it and together take the measures necessary
to protect women and girls and to introduce the
viewpoint of women victims into the peacemaking
process.

The second point I would like to emphasize is the
importance of the role of women, especially in peace-
building. Because women are such a Vital part of every
grass-roots community, it is essential that they be
involved if the vicious circle of poverty and conflict is
to be broken and if rehabilitation is to be successful.
Japan has long attached special importance to the role
of women in addressing poverty, which is a root cause
of conflict, and for that reason has promoted the
Women in Development initiative that it launched at
the Fourth World Conference on Women.
In view of the need to enhance the participation
of women in the rehabilitation process, which makes an
important contribution to peace-building, Japan
actively supported the convening of a symposium on
empowerment of women in post-conflict
reconstruction, held by the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) in Tokyo last July.
Further, Japan has been implementing many projects in
areas such as education, health and the economic
independence of women in countries in Asia and
Africa, such as Cambodia and Ethiopia, all of which
have been severely damaged as a result of conflict.
Japan intends to continue those efforts.

My third point is the importance of a
comprehensive approach to this issue, and the
concomitant need for cooperation among international
organizations, Governments, non-governmental
organizations and other partners of the international
community. Today's debate should be a turning point
for us. We should move from a phase of advocacy to
one of concrete action. Japan is of the View that
relevant international organizations, such as UNIFEM,
that have gender expertise should strengthen their
efforts to study specific measures to achieve gender
mainstreaming in conflict prevention, peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peace-building, and to implement
programmes to assist women in the field.

Japan believes deeply that we should put
emphasis on a human-centred approach which gives
priority to respect for the life and dignity of every
human being in order to achieve in the coming century
an international society characterized by peace and
stability. We are convinced that greater participation by
women in the process of peacemaking, peacekeeping
and peace-building would greatly contribute to the
consolidation of peace and stability, as women are the
ones who have been experiencing a serious degradation
of life and dignity in armed conflict.

I would like to conclude my statement by
reaffirming Japan's readiness to take an active part in
the efforts of the international community to address
this issue, guided by the Council's debate here today.

