Mr. Milanovie (Serbia): I should like to thank the
Secretary-General for his statement and Ms. Zaina
Bangura, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and Ms. Rhoda
Misaka for their comprehensive briefings.

Serbia aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the delegation of the European Union. In my
statement, I shall add a few remarks on behalf of my
country.

Serbia supports the fight against all forms of
violence, especially against sexual and gender-based
violence in all circumstances. Sexual violence in
armed conflict presents one of the most serious forms
of violation and abuse of international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. In recent years,
prevention and suppression and an adequate response
to sexual violence in conflict has been the subject of
intensive deliberations in the Security Council. We
welcome the efforts made to that end. We support the
activities undertaken by the Secretary-General and
have followed the actions of Ms. Bangura very closely.

Significant efforts have also been made by Member
States, civil society and non-governmental organizations
in preventing and fighting this crime. However, much
more must be done in order to fully eliminate sexual
violence in conflicts. My country believes that the
prevention of conflict-related sexual violence is of the
utmost importance. We support the efforts invested
within the United Nations to engage with State and
non-State parties and obtain commitments to prevent
and respond to conflict-related sexual violence.

We also support the recommendation of the
Secretary-General to include the prevention of conflict-
related sexual violence in the mandates ofpeacekeeping
and special political missions, as well as to continue
with the deployment of women protection advisers in
peacekeeping missions and the training of all United
Nations peacekeeping personnel using the innovative
tools developed by United Nations Action against
Sexual Violence partners.

The victims of sexual violence in conflicts are by
and large non-combatants, in particular vulnerable
population groups such as women and children. We
are deeply concerned that refugees and internally
displaced persons are at increased risk of sexual
violence in conflicts. In some cases, that has led to
human trafficking and sexual slavery. All victims of
sexual violence must be provided with psychosocial,
economic and legal assistance and non-discriminatory
health care, including appropriate services for children
and male survivors.

We firmly believe that international activities
aimed at addressing sexual Violence in conflicts must
be coordinated among Governments, international
organizations and non-governmental organizations
based on valid information and measurable results.

Proceeding from resolution 1325 (2000), in 2010
Serbia adopted its national action plan for the 2010-2015
period concerning the implementation of the resolution.
In addition, Serbia also implements its national strategy
for the prevention and suppression of violence against
women in the family and intimate partner relationships,
adopted in May 2011.

By signing the Declaration of Commitment to End
Sexual Violence in Conflict in September last year,
144 States, including Serbia, pledged to do more on the
prevention of sexual violence in conflict and to better
support the victims. In that way, a strong message was
sent that sexual violence in conflict is unacceptable
and that those responsible will be brought to justice,
prosecuted and punished appropriately. We believe
that it is necessary to work towards preventing these
crimes precisely by raising awareness that they cannot
go unpunished. The role played by Governments and
by international criminal justice in that regard is very
important.

