Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): I would like to thank
Jordan for convening this important debate, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Zainab
Hawa Bangura and Ms. Hamsatu Allamin for their
statements, and the Secretary-General for his recent
report (S/2015/203) on conflict-related sexual violence.

Today we have heard in depth about the horrific
prevalence of sexual violence in conflict all over the
world. Ms. Allamin and others' heart-wrenching
accounts have demonstrated the crippling effect of
sexual Violence on women's ability to lead healthy and
productive lives, on their psychological, emotional
and physical well-being and on their families and
communities. It is alarming, as the Secretary-General
notes in his report, that violence against women has
become a systematic pattern in conflict zones, and that
the suffering of women everywhere is being multiplied
by the unprecedented increase in Violence and a new
wave of extremism around the world.

In Afghanistan, almost 40 years of war, terrorism
and violent extremism have created deep fissures
in the very fabric of our society, shredded human
relationships, restricted access to services and justice
and undermined the State's capacity to protect its
citizens. Women have been the biggest Victims of the
conflict, and their suffering has been compounded by
a culture of discrimination against women. Today, the
Taliban and other extremists continue to use sexual
Violence as a tool not only to pursue their destructive
ends and their campaign of terror and fear, but also
to weaken communities, the rule of law and long-
established traditional values.

We recognize the need to hold all perpetrators
of violence against women to account, no matter
where they come from or with which group they are
affiliated. A few weeks ago, my country was appalled
to see young men commit egregious violence against
an innocent woman, Farkhunda, who was beaten and
then burned in one of the most brutal and inhuman
killings in our history. Farkhunda's name has become
a powerful symbol of the plight of Afghan women, and
her story has moved the whole society to demand an
end to violence against women, once and for all.

The national unity Government of Afghanistan
is committed to ensuring the elimination of violence
against women by strengthening our justice system and
reinforcing and implementing legal frameworks that
guarantee human, religious and constitutional rights
for all Afghan citizens. As President Ashraf Ghani
Ahmadzai has said,

"There is no point talking about how much
we respect women's honour, if we let rape go
unpunished or allow harassment in our streets".

Afghanistan is party to global conventions to end
Violence against women and has launched a women,
peace and security national action plan. Since 2009,
the Government has worked to implement the law
on the elimination of violence against women, which
criminalizes 22 types of Violence against women and
establishes specific punitive measures for perpetrators.
The Government of Afghanistan has also drafted
national regulations on the prevention of sexual
harassment, and in November 2014 launched the first-
ever gender-based Violence treatment protocol for the
health sector in Afghanistan.

Those steps are important, but ultimately combating
sexual Violence in Afghanistan will require a paradigm
shift in the way that our society treats women. In that
regard, President Ghani Ahmadzai has called for a
mental and cultural revolution across Afghan society.
This requires women to play an active role in the
social, economic and political life of the country, as
well as commitments to educate Afghan girls. Civil
society, particularly the Ulema, and human rights and
women's rights activists, are central to efforts to raise
awareness of women's rights and to build a foundation
of collective action against the evils of Violence, terror
and extremism.

Today's debate compels us not only to bear witness
to the societies suffering from violence and conflict,
and the women who have survived the horrors of sexual
violence; it also compels us to work together, as an
international community representing the conscience
of the world, to ensure that even when the flames of
war are still burning, women and men and all citizens
can live in dignity and peace.

