Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, at the outset, I would like to thank you
for convening this open debate on women and peace
and security and to extend our gratitude to the
Secretariat for the report submitted today to the
Council on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and related plans and programmes
(S/2007/567).

The report of the Secretary-General undoubtedly
reflects an enormous effort to follow up
implementation of the 2005-2007 Action Plan, as well
as to formulate the new Action Plan for 2008-2009. It
reflects growing interest by all entities of the United
Nations system, along with necessary efficiency, in
particular on the part of the Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General, the United Nations Development
Fund for Women (UNIFEM), the International
Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of
Women (INSTRAW) and other relevant bodies.

Yet there are many questions that require
responses in order to achieve the desired coherence
among activities at the level of the Organization and
the activities of Member States, non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) and the private sector in
implementation of the resolution and the Action Plan.
First and foremost, this requires effectively addressing
the institutional gaps and challenges identified by the
Secretary-General and relating to internal
administrative matters. These are caused, on the one
hand, by a lack of non-core resources from voluntary
contributions, and on the other, by the lack of a clear
vision of the ultimate result, which differs from case to
case. Another cause is the lack of effective reporting
and evaluation on the substantive impact of the
Organization's efforts on the ground. Lastly, there is a
failure to recognize the vital role that can be played by
the Peacebuilding Commission in designing the
conceptual framework for addressing this issue,
particularly in post-conflict situations, as reflected in
operative paragraph 17 of General Assembly resolution
61/143.

Furthermore, it requires us - not only in the
Security Council but throughout the United Nations -

to formulate a clear system-wide action plan to deal
with the issues with the participation of all principal
organs, through the simultaneous adoption of
resolutions by the General Assembly, the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council.

The serious issue before us does not need
scrutiny by Member States through the establishment
of a monitoring mechanism to guarantee full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and the
Action Plan, as suggested by the Secretary-General.
Rather, what it needs is a collective international effort
to strengthen the capacity of States to help with
implementation and to provide the financial resources
and technical expertise needed to make progress
possible.

Egypt attaches great importance to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) within a
holistic framework that mobilizes the efforts of all
Governments, civil society and the private sector, and
is fully prepared to see the resolution implemented
throughout the Arab world and Africa. The
Government of Egypt has supported many activities
related to the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), the Action Plan and the related programmes
and has assisted other countries on the African
continent to address the matter effectively. We have
done this by providing direct technical assistance and
trilateral cooperation with other partners. The Suzanne
Mubarak Women's International Peace Movement, one
of the major non-governmental organizations in this
field, has provided great assistance in that regard. It
has done so by convening a series of regional meetings
through which governmental and non-governmental
organizations support women's activities in achieving
peace and stability in the Arab world. In particular,
those organizations support the role of women in
launching effective political negotiations aimed at
reaching settlements to ongoing international political
issues.

The Government of Egypt is also making great
efforts to strengthen the status of women in all fields,
especially in such vital areas as peacekeeping and
peacebuilding in post-conflict situations, which require
particular attention and follow-up.
Egypt will continue to play its role in national,
regional and international efforts to strengthen the
status of women, in coordination with the main bodies
responsible for women's issues within the
Organization.

