Ms. Rossignol (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me to begin by thanking the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kevin Hyland, Mr. Yury Fedotov and Ms. Ilwad
Elman for their briefings.

France associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.

The actions committed by Da'esh in the Middle
East and by Boko Haram in Africa are a dramatic
illustration of the links that exist today between
threats to international peace and security and human
trafficking. At the global level, trafficking in persons
and trafficking in drugs and counterfeit currency are
among the most profitable. Their annual profits are
estimated at $32 billion. It is one of the most extensive
forms of trafficking. Sexual exploitation, forced
labour, servitude, kidnapping for forced prostitution,
rape - the list of atrocities committed in armed
conflict is, unfortunately, long. Deriving profits from
human beings and considering them as merchandise,
the traffickers, as well as consumers and users and
the clients of sexual exploitation, clearly and brutally
violate their victims' human rights and further stoke
the causes of conflict.

The international community has invested heavily
in this problem since the beginning of this century,
but further efforts are needed in order to address the
scourge of human trafficking. I therefore welcome the
initiative of the United Kingdom during its presidency
of the Security Council and thank that country for
giving us this opportunity to have an exchange on this
very important subject.

For France, the issue oftrafficking in human beings
and slavery, especially that of women and children, is
of major importance. The statistics are, unfortunately,
well known, but we must constantly point them out:
80 per cent of the victims of trafficking are women
and children. The challenges are also well known:
the identification of victims is still in its infancy, and
organized mechanisms for fighting this scourge vary
greatly between countries. Despite progress since the
entry into force of the Palermo Protocol to Prevent,
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially
Women and Children, still too few prosecutions have
been initiated in cases involving the crime of human
trafficking. The victims themselves do not always assert
their rights and very often are insufficiently protected.
In that context, international cooperation must be
stepped up so as to increase the geographic coverage
of the legislation providing effective protection against
networks and to improve international cooperation
aimed at dismantling those networks. Prevention,
protection and the fight against impunity are the three
priorities of French diplomacy in the fight against
trafficking in human beings.

Since human trafficking is now an integral part
of the strategy of certain terrorist groups and it fuels
transnational organized crime, the Security Council
has a special responsibility in combating this scourge.
The adoption of resolution 2331 (2016), last December,
at the initiative of Spain, was a major step forward
towards better addressing the link between trafficking
in human beings, sexual violence and terrorism. France
very much looks forward to the report to be prepared by
the Secretary-General by the end of the year.

We have in place a robust international legal
framework and appropriate tools, in particular the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its Protocols and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, which is doing
sterling work in this field.

On International Women's Rights Day, the President
of the French Republic also announced that France
would propose an additional protocol to the Convention
for the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women. That protocol would address violence
against women in order to complement the existing
international framework. But we must ensure that
the obligations arising from that legal framework are
effectively implemented. Our words must now be
translated into action.

Rest assured, Mr. President, that France will
continue to play its full part in those efforts.

