Mr. Sauer (Finland): I wish to align myself with
the statement made by the observer of the European
Union.

I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
important meeting to mark the fifteenth anniversary
of resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security. I also welcome the newly adopted resolution
2242 (2015), which Finland is proud to co-sponsor.
We congratulate UN-Women for its leadership, and
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy and the high-level
advisory group for the comprehensive global study to
be officially launched tomorrow.

I would like to highlight some of our priorities and
how we will strengthen our commitment. Finland has
been a dedicated supporter of the women and peace and
security agenda. This is reflected in the new Government
programme setting out the implementation of 1325
(2000) as a priority. Finland is currently implementing
its second national action plan. Next year we start the
preparations for the third national action plan, taking
into account the recommendations of the global study
and the high-level review.

We welcome the fact that the United Nations
reviews - the global study and the reviews of peace
operations and the peacebuilding architecture - bring
conflict prevention and mediation to the fore and stress
the importance of the participation and leadership
of women. Finland continues to promote conflict
prevention and the role of mediation, and strives to
effectively and meaningfully involve women in peace
and mediation processes. Finland is committed to a
joint Nordic initiative called Nordic Women Mediator's
Network, to be established this year.

It is undisputed that increasing the number of
women in peacekeeping operations enhances the
effectiveness and operational capacity of these
operations. Strengthening the gender architecture of
peace operations, both in the field and at headquarters,
is crucial. Finland will continue deploying women
to peacekeeping operations as military experts in
numbers at least equivalent to the proportion of women
in our national defence forces. We also aim to increase
the number of Finnish female police officers seconded
to United Nations peacekeeping operations. As a new
commitment, we stand ready to deploy a specialized
unit of 3-4 female police officers to the United Nations
by the end of 2016.

Gender training of peacekeeping staff, including
senior management, is crucial for the effective
mainstreaming of the gender perspective. Our training
institutes for military and civilian peace operations
personnel have adopted resolution 1325 (2000) as
part of their training curriculum. Finland commits to
continuing to provide gender training for all Finnish
personnel deployed to peace operations.

I would like to stress the importance of abiding by
the Secretary-General's zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse by mission personnel. We must
take more robust measures in tackling these cases in
order to make the zero-tolerance policy into a zero-case
reality. We have committed ourselves to investigating
and punishing all cases.

The implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
is facing new challenges, such as violent extremism,
which has a dramatic impact on women and girls.
A coordinated and integrated approach, with the
leadership and empowerment of women, are needed for
countering extremism.

Sexual violence and abductions of women and girls
are used as a weapon of war and a tactic of terror. The
critical need to address sexual violence in conflict
and to step up efforts to eliminate impunity has been
forcefully recognized across the world. Finland has
been a staunch financial supporter in this area and
will continue to be one. We have provided multi-year
financial support to the International Criminal Court
Trust Fund for Victims. Finland has also contributed
financially to the Justice Rapid Response initiative, the
United Nations Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and
Sexual Violence in Conflict, and the Coalition for the
International Criminal Court.

Today's meeting is important for keeping up
the momentum, strengthening our commitment and
pressing for more results. The support for UN-Women
needs to be increased in order for it to fulfil its
leadership role in the promotion and implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda. As one of
UN-Women's top donors, Finland remains committed
to supporting this goal.

We need to allocate more funds to the women and
peace and security agenda. Accordingly, I would like
to note that 52 per cent of funding by Finland to fragile
States is directed to activities with a gender focus.

Finland is continuing partnership cooperation on
national action plan processes. As an example of this
cooperation, Finland has supported Afghanistan in
the preparation of its recently launched national action
plan, and we stand ready to support the implementation
process as well.

The implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) is our
collective responsibility. Only effective implementation
at the international, regional and national levels will
lead to sustainable peace and the empowerment of
women.

