Mr. Alier (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I take this
opportunity to congratulate Spain on its initiative to
convene this important open debate on women and
peace and security, marking the fifteenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).

The Security Council's engagement with the
issues of women and peace and security has greatly
contributed to our common efforts to improving the
lives of women in conflict situations around the world.
The resolutions adopted by the Council have created a
comprehensive body of norms and stimulated progress
on the protection and promotion of women's rights.
Resolution 1325 (2000) was the first document of the
Security Council that reflected in detail the impact of
conflicts on women during armed conflicts and in their
aftermath, and in particular on the important issue of
ensuring the equal participation of women in peace
processes and their protection from the devastating
consequences of armed conflicts. In the context of
armed conflict, parties must respect their obligations
under international, humanitarian and human rights law
to protect civilians, especially women and girls. The
continued practice of using gender-based violence as a
tactic of war is both legally and morally unacceptable.

As we have stated on a number ofoccasions, wrongs
that have been left unpunished or unrecognized may
impede progress in achieving long-awaited peace and
reconciliation. Such wrongs can also play a key role in
the eruption ofnew conflicts and the commission ofnew
crimes. Our consistent focus on that particular aspect
of the problem is based on my country's experience in
addressing the tragic humanitarian consequences of
the war unleashed against it, including mass atrocities
committed by armed enemy forces, forced population
displacement in Azerbaijan and the continuing military
occupation of its territories.

Azerbaijan reiterates its strong condemnation of
all acts of sexual violence committed against women
and girls in situations of armed conflict. There can be
no tolerance for such acts, and all necessary measures
must be taken to bring the perpetrators to justice and to
put an end to impunity. The scourge of sexual violence
in armed conflict has rightly been the subject of the
Council's attention.

Unfortunately, not all grave violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law,
including acts of sexual violence, have received the
attention they deserve or a response at the international
and regional levels. Measures that are more resolute and
targeted are required to end impunity in such situations.
Commitments to protection must be free of selectivity
and politically motivated approaches and preferences.

While addressing different aspects of the women
and peace and security agenda, it is necessary
to recognize the role of women in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts, peace negotiations,
peacebuilding, humanitarian responses and post-
conflict reconstruction. We are called upon to focus on
the importance of furthering the equal rights of women
and their right to equal participation in decision-making.

Essential work is being carried out for the
reintegration of internally displaced women into society
and the promotion of their participation in political,
economic and public life in Azerbaijan. Recently
Azerbaijan launched a regional project on the theme
"Women for conflict prevention and peacebuilding in
the South Caucasus", aimed at strengthening advocacy
work for an increased role of Azerbaijani women in
decision-making in conflict prevention and resolution
at the national, regional and international levels.

Azerbaijan remains committed to the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda, and is
proud to have made a contribution to the work of the
Security Council during its presidency in October
2013, including the adoption of resolution 2122 (2013).
In accordance with that resolution, an informative
and comprehensive report of the Secretary-General
(S/2015/716) has been issued recently. The global
study on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
presented yesterday, is a fundamental piece of research
that deserves our high commendation and attention.

We look forward to participating in further
deliberations and activities on this extraordinarily
important topic in order to advance the implementation
ofthe women and peace and security agenda established
by the adoption of the historic resolution 1325 (2000).

