Mr. Normandin (Canada) (spoke in French): On
behalf of the Government of Canada, I wish to thank
the Chinese presidency of the Security Council for
convening this debate.

In resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace
and security, the Security Council called for women's
participation and involvement in all efforts to prevent
and resolve conflicts and build lasting peace. Eight
years later, we have only begun to answer that call.

The United Nations and its Member States have
undertaken important measures to increase the
representation and participation of women. We now
have here a significant body of research findings and
many widely known best practices. For instance, when
sexual violence cases are prosecuted at the outset,
impunity for crimes targeting women is less of an
obstacle to women's engagement in peacebuilding. In
addition, when women are included in peace talks, a
more inclusive and sustainable peace is negotiated.

We know what is needed: vastly increased
representation of women at all levels of decision-
making as negotiators, mediators, police officers,
soldiers, military observers and special representatives
of the Secretary-General. On that issue, I would like to
highlight that there is currently only one woman among
the special representatives of the Secretary-General.
Among United Nations special envoys, there are none.
In his most recent report, the Secretary-General
noted the excellent work carried out by the United

Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) and
the United Nations Development Programme, among
others, in promoting women's participation in peace
talks, in particular those in Colombia, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Nepal, Somalia and the Sudan.
In that connection I would like to note that, in the
Sudan, Canada has provided technical assistance to
efforts to integrate women's rights and equality
concerns and to strengthen the participation of women
in the Darfur peace process.

Allow me to highlight the fact that only 7.4 per
cent of United Nations police personnel in peace
operations, and 10 per cent of those deployed by
Canada, are women. Canada is undertaking recruiting
efforts to increase the representation of women police
officers in missions, taking into account the impact it
can have on the perception of the role of women in the
host country. Canada takes inspiration from best
practices, such as India's formed police unit, the first
all-female United Nations contingent, which is
deployed in Liberia. I have been able to witness their
work first-hand on the ground.

(spoke in English)

In another example of measures that we as
Member States can take, Canada has deployed a gender
adviser to Afghanistan's Ministry of the Interior to
assist in the development of policies and programmes
aimed at increasing the representation of women in the
Afghan National Police. That will assist police
operations in fulfilling their protection role.

With the adoption of resolution 1820 (2008) in
June, the Security Council recognized the critical
relationship between sexual violence as a weapon of
war and the maintenance of international peace and
security, as well as the fundamental importance of
women's participation in all processes related to ending
sexual violence in conflict. In that respect, Canada is
pleased to be supporting the Pearson Peacekeeping
Centre courses on sexual and gender-based violence
intervention, prevention and investigation, which are
offered to 60 female and male African police personnel
currently deployed to the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.

Canada calls on the Security Council to identify,
report and respond systematically and comprehensively
to all instances of sexual violence in countries on its
agenda. The evidence demonstrates that part of that
response must be support for women's participation in

the peace process. Despite efforts such as those and
many more, progress has been slow and unreliable.
New research by UNIFEM. demonstrates that in the
minority of cases in which such information is
available, women's participation in peace talks has
averaged approximately 7 per cent in recent years.

Clearly, the ad hoc approach is not having the
desired effect. Increased women's participation
requires a long-term commitment to applying
systematically the measures that are known to have a
positive and sustained impact. It requires the
systematic inclusion of women in all peace processes,
including peace talks. By now, that should be a
standard practice. We also know that gender advisers
can provide valuable technical guidance to United
Nations mission staff. Every United Nations mission
should have a full-time gender adviser. Again, by now,
that too should be a standard practice.

In conclusion, Canada is convinced that a
sustained and systematic approach will enable us to
reach our shared goal. Not only is full, equal and
meaningful participation by women just - lasting
peace depends upon it.

