Ms. Bolafios Perez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the delegation of Chile for organizing this
open debate on the eve of the 2015 high-level review by
the Security Council to assess progress in implementing
resolution 1325 (2000). In that regard, we believe
that addressing this issue is very timely. We are also
grateful to Ms. Kyung-wha Kang, Ms. Helen Durham
and Ms. Ilwad Elman for their respective statements.
We are also grateful for the concept note (S/2015/32, annex), which the presidency circulated among all
delegations and which contains valuable guidance to
focus our debate.

It is undeniable that women and girls suffer the
most devastating effects, in addition to the effects
that are already part of an armed conflict, particularly
because of the increasingly widespread use of gender-
based violence, rape, sexual exploitation, sexual
slavery, the unwanted pregnancies resulting from these
deplorable acts and their stigmatization in their own
communities - all of which affect their mental and
emotional stability and even put them at risk of losing
their lives.

Any response that addresses these women and girls
must take into account the trauma they have suffered
and continue to suffer as displaced women, through
flashbacks, constant rejection and prolonged separation
from their families. They therefore require assistance
and counselling for rehabilitation on a massive scale.
However, the road to recovery also involves the
attempt to restore some kind of normalcy to their lives,
including through employment, which brings with it the
dignity of earning their own money and the freedom
of spending it themselves, and providing an education
for their children because that engenders hope for a
better future. Similarly, for a girl, going to school, even
though it may be in a bombed building or in a refugee
camp, symbolizes a system, a routine and a path to
normalcy, recovery from trauma and overcoming it.
The empowerment of women starts in childhood with
access to education, the certainty that women's rights
are protected and promoted and the conviction that they
are part of all the processes that affect their well-being
and their future.

Despite all this, women should not be considered
only as victims of war. They have a fundamental role
to play in ensuring the survival of their families in the
midst of chaos and destruction and actively participate
in the movement for peace at a community level and
promote peace within their communities. However, the
absence of women at the negotiating table and in the
roles of mediators, negotiators and technical experts in
peace processes is undeniable.

Furthermore, we are concerned with the
emergence of new and more radical armed groups; the
fragmentation of the armed forces and the increase of
other crueller groups, such as the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant and Boko Haram, which use sexual
violence as a weapon of war and which have been
changing the landscape of armed conflicts by forming
alliances; and the emergence of other structures - some
in opposition to their Governments and others in
association with them. In that connection, I would like
to stress Guatemala's support for the United Kingdom's
initiative on the prevention of sexual violence in conflict.
Ending that scourge is a global responsibility. For this
reason, we believe that the focus on the protection of
civilians should develop in accordance with changing
circumstances. We believe that in societies with greater
gender equality, extremism is less likely to take root
and women are less vulnerable to its effects.

We must ensure that all the instruments at the
Council's disposal are adequately adapted to combat
crimes against civilians, particularly women and
children, and contain solid elements of deterrence,
accountability and justice. The lessons learned
from conflicts - from the worst failures to best
practices - should serve as a useful guide. All
these instruments available to the Council should be
used consistently to impose sanctions, including in
cooperation with the International Criminal Court
and special tribunals, fact-finding missions and
commissions ofinquiry. We must redouble our efforts to
ensure that justice is served and put an end to impunity
for crimes committed against innocent civilians.

The protection of civilians is a legal obligation. We
must ensure that members of the security forces, local
militias and other armed groups who have committed
violations of international humanitarian law or human
rights law be held accountable. It bears repeating again
that United Nations troops cannot be a substitute for
the State in fulfilling its basic commitment to protect
its civilian population. When States are unable or
unwilling to honour that commitment, we face major
humanitarian disasters, as we have seen repeatedly in
recent years and even in recent weeks in Iraq, Syria,
the Central African Republic, South Sudan and the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, among
other countries.

In order to protect and strengthen the rights of
civilians and displaced people and integrate the rights-
based orientation of governmental structures, we must
increase the capacities of public institutions, which
tend to be dismantled or weakened after a conflict.
This requires ensuring that the practice of protection
be made more coherent and effective through training
and awareness-raising among members of the national

security forces; supporting local civil society groups
working in the field of human rights and the protection
of displaced women; and conducting awareness-
building activities for the rights of displaced women
with relevant stakeholders. Like others, we believe it is
important for the United Nations to redouble its efforts
in training peacekeepers in multidimensional United
Nations mandates.

We must ensure that the special needs of women
and girls in the field receive the special and privileged
attention they deserve in the framework of the active
cooperation of the United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes that relate to the issue and Member States
with the support of non-governmental organizations
and civil society. We call on them to continue their
valuable contribution in response to the challenges that
reality presents.

