Ms. Bangura: I wish to thank the Secretary-
General for his presence here today and for his personal
and steadfast commitment to this issue. I wish to thank
the Government of Nigeria for hosting this open debate,
which comes at a crucial moment of consolidation of
this agenda, as well as the Council for the concerted
focus and priority it has given to this issue for several
years. I am also grateful that Ambassador Tete Antonio
of the African Union (AU) and Ms. Rhoda Misaka,
representing civil society, are able to join us to offer
their valuable perspectives.

It has been almost two years since I took
responsibility for this mandate. I could not have
imagined how difficult and heartbreaking it would
be. The horrors suffered by the women, children and
men that I have met re-affirm my conviction that
sexual violence in conflict represents a great moral
issue of our time.This crime, in its utter destruction
of the individual and the pervasive way in which it
undermines the prospects for peace and development,
casts a long shadow over our collective humanity. That
is why it deserves and requires the singular attention
afforded by the Council.

It was a year ago that I visited Bosnia and witnessed
first-hand the long-term implications of war-time
sexual violence left unaddressed. An estimated 50,000
women were targeted with sexual violence during four
years of conflict, but 20 years after the peace was made
impunity for these crimes still reigns. The truth, most
likely, is that most of the survivors will see no justice
because the evidence is long lost and the perpetrators
have long since fled the immediate scene of the crime.
Yet, the irony is that those same perpetrators are not so
far gone in reality. They still walk among the women
and their families, occupying positions of authority and
power that shield them from justice. For the victims,
those perpetrators are a daily reminder of their broken
lives. But the impunity that the perpetrators continue to
enjoy is also a reminder to all ofus - a reminder of our
commitment to justice and accountability.

One of the questions raised by the Secretary-
General in this year's report (8/2014/181) is: "What
about the children born of rape?" In Bosnia, these
children - possibly hundreds or even thousands - are
now teenagers. How have they fared? Are they also
pursued by stigma and shame? What are their health
and psychological needs? What are their prospects for
education and employment? For me, the survivors of
sexual violence in Bosnia are not only the courageous
women that I met; their children and families are also
survivors. Therefore, today I once again make an
appeal on their behalf. Even ifjustice in the courts of
law has so far been denied, the survivors must have
reparations, including livelihood support, education
for their children, and the medical and psychosocial
services that they deserve and require.

The Secretary-General's report also raises a number
of other themes, such as the acute vulnerability of
refugee and internally displaced persons' communities,
the lack of services for survivors, men and boys as
victims, and the concerted focus now required on
prevention, among other things. The report covers 21
conflict and post-conflict countries. It lists 34 State and
non-State parties credibly suspected to be perpetrators
of sexual violence. It paints a grim picture ofa problem
the full scale, scope and character of which we do not
yet fully comprehend. However, today we do understand
more about this phenomenon than we did earlier, and
that knowledge is a source of hope that we can come to
grips with conflict-related sexual violence.

While the road ahead remains long and hard,
there is some light on the horizon. Never before in
history have we seen such a level of political will and
momentum. A historic declaration by the Group of
Eight, and commitment by 144 members of the General
Assembly last year, extend and reinforce the consensus
that already exists in the Security Council.

Today the circle of stakeholders on this issue is
dramatically expanded. This may once have been the
concern of the lone gender adviser, but that is no longer
the case. Now it also engages political leaders at the
highest level, uniformed peacekeepers, mediators,
ceasefire monitors, war crimes prosecutors and the full
range of civilian protection, justice and security sector
actors.

Resolution 2106 (2013) reinforces the infrastructure
and the elements of accountability and compliance
established by resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009)
and 1960 (2010) - an accountability regime based on
reliable and timely information and analysis and the
political- and operational-level actions that must be
taken on the basis of such information. In its scope,
operational detail and clarity, resolution 2106 (2013)
encompasses the evolution of our understanding of
conflict-related sexual violence and what it takes to
prevent it. It outlines, for the first time, a framework to
curb and prevent this crime.

Therefore, in terms ofinternational legal norms and
instruments, we now have the tools required to turn the
tide. Our critical challenge now is to convert political
will into practical action, to transform the resolutions
into solutions and to drive real change on the ground.

That progress is crucial, and indicates that
addressing conflict-related sexual violence is not
a mission impossible. I believe that the progress
vindicates the investment and focus of the Security
Council, and is an encouragement to the Council to stay
the course and reinforce its efforts.

Over the past few years, we have also gained greater
clarity on the role that military and other security
personnel can play in protection and prevention, and
an important investment has been made in training to
enhance operational readiness of our peacekeepers.

As we continue to drive this agenda on the ground,
we will need to consider how to deepen the role of the
defence and security sector, peacekeepers as well as
national military and police personnel. To better focus
our collective action, I believe it will be important
to agree and clearly articulate the key priorities for
intervention by defence and security sector actors in
areas such as military justice; monitoring, information
and early-warning; disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration processes; ceasefire monitoring; and in
the context of security sector reform. Those priorities
are consistent with the elements of prevention under
resolution 2106 (2013). Therefore, transforming military
cultures to enhance protection and prevention is one of
our essential priorities moving forward.

Coming into this role, my priority has been to deepen
national ownership, leadership and responsibility.
There have been some modest but meaningful gains in
that regard. Last year, as the Council heard from the
Secretary-General, the Governments of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Somalia signed joint
communiques with the United Nations outlining priority
areas of intervention to address sexual violence. Those
commitments were undertaken at the highest levels of
Government and are the basis for implementation plans
that are now being developed by the national authorities
in concert with the United Nations and other partners.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, there
were 187 convictions of soldiers and commanders
between July 2011 and December 2013, and 39
prosecutions related to the Minova incidents. In Guinea,
there have also been high-level indictments related to
sexual violence that occurred in 2009 in the wake of
the contested elections. The United Nations Team of
Experts has also been supporting national authorities
in Colombia, Cote d'Ivoire and South Sudan. And in
Central African Republic, the Team is supporting the
establishment of a specialized rapid response unit of
the gendarmerie to deal with sexual violence crimes.

At the regional level, we have signed a framework
of cooperation between the United Nations and
African Union that outlines key areas in which we
intend to strengthen our cooperation, including more
operationally oriented training for AU and United
Nations peacekeeping personnel.

Unfortunately, the unacceptable reality is that today
it is still largely cost-free to rape a woman, child or man
in conflict. Sexual violence has been used through the
ages precisely because it is such a cheap and devastating
weapon. That is why the international community has
placed such great emphasis on combating impunity.
By focusing on impunity, we direct for the first time
a more determined spotlight on the perpetrators, and
by so doing we begin to re-direct the stigma and the
consequences of sexual violence from the survivors to
the perpetrators.

Therefore, I would like to conclude my remarks
with a message to the perpetrators: the spotlight is now
turned on you, and we are coming after you with all
the ways and means at our disposal. There is no hiding
place. If you commit, or command, or condone such
crimes against humanity, humanity will pursue you
relentlessly, and eventually you will be held to account.

That is our solemn promise to the survivors.

