Ms. Wallstrtjm: On the morning of 30 September
2009, two dramatically different events took place.
One - which Council members are all familiar with -
was the adoption of resolution 1888 (2009) creating the
mandate of a United Nations Special Representative on
Sexual Violence in Conflict. The other was a
demonstration just outside the United Nations
complex, condemning mass rape by security forces in
the small West African nation of Guinea.

As the Council reached consensus on new
measures to combat sexual Violence, beyond the
Chamber protesters decried yet more premeditated
mass rape. As world public opinion applauded the
commitments of this body, international headlines told
of soldiers raping in broad daylight. Some Council
members noted the connection between resolution 1888
(2009) and the use of rape to suppress a peaceful rally
in Guinea-Conakry. They noted that when rape is part
of the repertoire of conflict or political coercion, it is a
form of collective Violence that can threaten collective
peace and security.

I would like to congratulate the Council on its
groundbreaking consideration of that issue over the
past three years, and to thank the presidency of Togo
for convening today's debate. It is a chance to take
stock of a fundamental question, namely, whether the
gap between what is said in the Chamber and what
happens in the world beyond has narrowed.

Last November, I went to Guinea to meet with the
survivors. A young woman, who had been gang-raped
and left for dead after joining the demonstration,
recalled the chilling words of one soldier: "You wanted
power - this is what you will get". What was striking
to me was not how many women had been scarred by
that atrocity, but how many have stood back up,
organized and dared to tell their stories. Their demands
for recognition, justice and the removal of perpetrators
from positions of power are now reflected in a joint
communique that the Government has signed with the
United Nations.

Earlier this month, a Guinean panel of judges
charged Lieutenant Colonel Moussa Tiegboro Camara
for his alleged role in the atrocities. That is progress. It
signals to the survivors that, while justice may have
been delayed, it cannot be denied. In that respect, the
report before the Council today (S/2012/33) is already
partly out of date. It calls upon the Guinean authorities
to take action against Camara. In the time between
12-2393]

issuing the report and today's debate, they have done
so.

However, of course, conflict-related sexual
violence is not specific to one country or continent. It
is a global risk. The terror of unarmed women facing
armed men is age-old and universal. The Security
Council has led the way in recognizing that rape can
acquire a strategic twist as a tactic of war. Today, there
is broad recognition that the more brutal and shocking
the crime, the more effectively it terrorizes
communities into submission and lends notoriety to
groups vying for power.

The terms of the debate have shifted from
reacting to sexual violence, like any other tragedy, to
preventing it, like any other threat. Instead of talking
about women's wartime suffering year after year after
year, protection mechanisms have been established.
Instead of seeing the same few women in meeting after
meeting, we are building a broad coalition.

The circle of stakeholders now extends to
peacekeepers, peacemakers, war crimes prosecutors
and the full range of protection actors. After all, it is at
the moment of negotiating a peace deal, signing a
ceasefire, training troops and sending peacekeepers on
patrol that such resolutions have a real-world impact.
In short, the Council has ushered in an ideological
shift. When it takes notice, others do as well.

A decade ago, my mandate to be present in the
Chamber, addressing this subject, would have seemed
improbable. Yet the Council has kept pace with the
changing dynamics of conflict. In contemporary wars,
it has become more dangerous to be a woman fetching
water or collecting firewood than to be a fighter on the
front line. Wars have entered the marketplaces where
women trade; they follow children en route to school;
and haunt the prison cells where political activists are
detained. Accordingly, the Council has embraced a
view of security that includes the physical integrity and
perspectives of women. During my Visits to countries
of concern, I have promised to bridge the voices of
those women to the work of this body. At the political
level, such visits can initiate a dialogue for civilian
protection commitments.

My aim is to remain relevant to the Security
Council and to ensure that the mandate adds value to
its work. Resolution 1888 (2009) also created the Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict, which is currently supporting initiatives of

12-2393]

the Governments of Guinea, Liberia, South Sudan and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to combat
impunity. It is clear that, now more than ever, we have
the tools to succeed.

One such tool is the report being debated today. It
provides striking examples of sexual violence as a
threat to security and an impediment to peacebuilding.
No one can read that report and remain unmoved. But,
as many participants have asked me, what does it mean
to appear in the Secretary-General's report? I would
like to address that head-on by highlighting three key
implications.

First, the report, based on United Nations-verified
information, is an instrument in the hands of political
leaders to help them track and address sexual violence
that is linked with insecurity. It cites illustrative
incidents that point to larger patterns. As the new
monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements
mature, they will yield a deeper evidence base for
action.

Secondly, it does not highlight only horror
stories. Such reports are a place to feature the stories of
actions that have made a difference, such as enforcing
command responsibility and vetting perpetrators from
the security forces. It is in the interests of every
Government to ensure that the national uniform
symbolizes professionalism, discipline and service, not
rape, pillage and terror.

The third point is that it provides a baseline for
systematic engagement with parties to armed conflict,
with the consent and partnership of Governments. Such
reports are vehicles for putting names to some of
history's complex horrors. The acts of sexual torture
and terror recorded here are not inevitable by-products
of war, but crimes committed by combatants and their
commanders. The fog of war does not absolve them of
their responsibilities.

The report is also a historical record. This is
critical, as the history of rape has been a history of
denial. What explains the suppression of these stories?
Perhaps the fact that it is the victim, not the attacker,
who is often shamed and stigmatized, that society is
more likely to pass judgement than to deliver justice.
Perhaps it is because rape has been treated as a lesser
evil in a context of lethal violence, or traded away by
negotiating parties as the price of peace. Whatever the
explanation, every speaker who adds his or her voice to
3
this debate is helping to end centuries of silence that
have made rape an effective secret weapon.

From the Congo to Cambodia, from Bosnia to
Liberia, these crimes have been neglected at the peace
table and stricken from the public record. In Bosnia, I
met with women who had survived the hell of rape
camps in the early 1990s. Sixteen years later, I
expected to talk about memorials and remembrance. I
expected to talk about women's political power and
economic recovery. But what we talked about was the
rapes that these women are living and reliving every
day, as if it were yesterday. The lack of redress and
justice is staggering. An estimated 50,000 rapes have
led to just 30 prosecutions. When Bosnia was on the
Security Council, it recognized this painful reality and
actively championed resolution 1960 (2010).

In Cambodia last year, women organized an
informal hearing to spotlight sexual violence during the
Khmer Rouge era, which has been left unaddressed by
formal mechanisms. Collectively, they broke over
thirty years of silence. I have urged the Governments
of both Bosnia and Cambodia to deliver justice for
these victims. In Rwanda, children born of rape are
coming of age and trying to find their place in society.

So rape is not over when it is over. The point is to
better understand conflict-related sexual violence and
its consequences, to give rape a history in order to
deny it a future.

At its heart, resolution 1960 (2010) is about
prevention. It creates, for the first time, a workable
system of deterrence and accountability in response to
conflict-related sexual Violence. This compliance
regime includes a listing option as leverage.

In relation to other protection issues, such as
ending the recruitment of child soldiers, the practice of
listing has yielded tangible results. Expanding the
naming and shaming list on children to those credibly
suspected of patterns of sexual violence against adult
women and men has made the approach comprehensive
and the message to armed groups clear. The point is to
cease all acts of rape, whether the victim is 8, 18 or 80.

I will never forget the story of an elderly woman
I met in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo,
who told me that she had felt secure in the belief that
she was too old to be raped, that she could be the
soldier's grandmother. But that did not protect her.
While not a panacea, the list is an important tool.
It reminds those who commit, command or condone
sexual violence that they can no longer sleep easily at
night under the cover of impunity and anonymity. The
practice of listing shows that this is not just a war of
words. Yes, preventive diplomacy is important. And
yes, zero-tolerance policies matter. But ultimately, rape
must carry consequences. Some have said this exercise
is too optimistic, too ambitious. But surely we must
bring all measures to bear in addressing this scourge.

The vision is to create conditions in which armed
groups see sexual violence as a liability that will invite
national and international scrutiny and censure unless
concrete measures are taken. These measures are
outlined in resolution 1960 (2010) as a basis for
delisting. They include the issuance of orders through
chains of command and the prohibition of sexual
violence in codes of conduct, as well as timely
investigation of alleged abuses to hold perpetrators
accountable. A command structure with the capacity to
sustain military operations and to punish deserters has
the capacity to rein in acts of rape.

Those who tolerate sexual terror should be on
notice that they do so in defiance of the Security
Council, with its power to enact enforcement measures.
In the case of C6te d'Ivoire, for example, this means
the militiamen who threatened to burn women alive if
they resisted rape. They know why they appear in this
list. The Council has signalled its intention to consider
sexual violence when establishing or renewing
sanctions regimes. Exemplary action has already been
taken by the Sanctions Committee for the Democratic
Republic of Congo with regard to Mai-Mai leader
Ntabo Ntaberi Sheka. This sends a powerful message
to others.

a

As a frame of reference, the term 'conflict-
related sexual violence" has been critical in
channelling relevant information from the country
level to the Security Council. This framing mirrors the
resolutions by focusing on violence that has a nexus
with peace and security, rather than on isolated
incidents.

Isolated acts of rape occur in all societies, in
times of war and of peace. These crimes need to be
addressed by the national law-and-order machinery.
However, when sexual violence is driven by the
dynamics of conflict, is widespread or systematic,
constitutes a grave breach of international

12-2393]

humanitarian law, or is used for military or political
gain, it also warrants consideration by this body, in line
with its competence under the Charter of the United
Nations.

As a process of intimidation, targeted rape is
often a precursor to conflict, as well as the last weapon
to be relinquished in its wake. It is important not to
exclude from consideration sexual violence that
continues after the guns fall silent. Sexual violence that
is normalized, owing to impunity, or committed by
recently demobilized combatants is also a security
issue that requires a security response.

Such violence subverts efforts to cement the
peace. We know that a ceasefire does not mean peace
for women if the shooting ceases but the rapes continue
unchecked. Such violence should be included in the
definition of a ceasefire and in the monitoring
provisions. Monitoring teams must be gender balanced,
not gender blind. But to date, just three ceasefire
agreements have included sexual violence. The new
guidance for mediators on addressing conflict-related
sexual violence, developed by Department of Political
Affairs, will fill an analytical and practical gap.

Modern history attests that post-war rarely means
post-rape. In Liberia, I have seen how sexual violence
during the civil war left a profound imprint on society.
Addressing that legacy is not just a moral, but an
operational, imperative. It is a credibility test for the
nascent military and police forces. To echo what has
been said so often within these walls, impunity fuels
the vicious cycle of violence. Peace is not only the
absence of conflict, but the presence ofjustice.

Nor can we overlook the use or threat of sexual
violence as a tool of political repression and civil
strife. That would negate the promise of prevention.
Politically motivated rape is a disturbing trend
witnessed in the wake of contested elections in places
such as Kenya, Guinea and Cote d'Ivoire. It has also
been part of political violence in Libya, Syria and

Egypt.

In relation to Syria, the Secretary-General has
expressed concern about the sexual abuse of men in
detention as a method of extracting intelligence. In
Libya, United Nations information indicates a pattern
of women being abducted from their homes, cars and
streets and subjected to repeated rape during the
conflict. Yet survivors are coming forward only in
cases of urgent medical need. In the words of one

12-2393]
Libyan victim, "If the bleeding had stopped, I would
never have reported it."

This underscores that we cannot wait for hard
data to surface before taking action. The relationship
between incidents and reports of wartime rape is like
the relationship between the tip of an iceberg and its
mass. Only the extremity is Visible. I trust that the
Council's forthcoming resolution on Libya will
explicitly mention the need to address sexual violence.
A critical test of the National Transitional Council will
be its willingness to investigate violations by both
sides in the conflict and to ensure comprehensive
services for survivors.

Due to the blame, shame and stigma, most
survivors still have more to lose than to gain from
reporting rape. Improved data collection is therefore
inextricably linked to improved assistance. Our
primary focus must always be needs, rather than
numbers. Data is not an end in itself, but an evidence
base for action.

And we must deliver as one. I am proud to Chair
the inter-agency network United Nations Action
against Sexual Violence in Conflict. United Nations
Action has provided strategic support at the country
level and catalyzed joint initiatives in close partnership
with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
UN-Women, such as scenario-based training for
peacekeepers.

But in terms of response, for too long we have
been too late. The United Nations system is working to
become better attuned to the red flags and early
warning signs. Rape is not a fact of human history, like
disease or drought; it is often planned and therefore
predictable. United Nations Action has scanned past
conflicts to compile the United Nations Matrix of
Early-Warning Indicators of Conflict-Related Sexual
Violence to equip monitors to identify and prevent
spikes.

This analysis also sheds light on the roots of
wartime rape. For instance, the proliferation of small
arms and light weapons enable these atrocities. As
many women have told me: "That man had the gun and
he had the power". Sexual violence is often perpetuated
by incomplete disarmament and the absence of vetting,
training and security sector reform. For example, in
Somalia, a practice has recently been detected of
national security forces renting out their uniforms to
civilians by night, which facilitates rape. Such patterns
must be met with disciplinary measures. We also know
that militarized mining can fuel human rights
violations by enriching armed groups, for instance in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The Council has understood that there can be no
security without women's security. The aim is not only
to protect women from Violence; it is to protect them to
participate in public and economic life. Rape has a
chilling effect on women's political participation,
casting a long shadow of trauma and terror. It can
inhibit their access to polling booths and public
squares. We must send a message that women's lives,
votes and voices count and will be counted.

Certainly, the women I have met cannot be
caricatured as passive victims. They have fought daily
wars - not for medals and monuments, but battles for
bread, to feed their children and to make their presence
felt. I am particularly concerned, at this historical
juncture, that unless women can shape their own
political and personal destiny, the Arab Spring will turn
into a winter for Arab women.

While sexual violence disproportionately affects
women and girls, men and boys also number among the
direct and indirect victims. We need to ensure that our
interventions are gender-responsive and community-
based.

In the wake of war, the aim is not just to build
back, but to build back better. That means addressing
pre-existing injustice and inequality. What we have
already achieved gives us hope. The action of this
Council tells survivors that their lives matter. It also
tells perpetrators - and potential perpetrators - that
war does not give license to rape. The world is
watching.

I would like to conclude by taking a step back
from the technical and operational details that often
consume us, to simply recall that the Council has
changed the way we think about rape. From the 1907
Hague Convention, which gave wartime rape a
glancing reference as a crime against family honour,
sexual violence is now seen as a self-standing threat to
security. This has validated the experience of survivors.
And in the end, that kind of transformation is what this
work is all about.

I thank members for listening, and I look forward
to the debate.
