Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): My
delegation is pleased to participate in this open meeting
on the third anniversary of the adoption of the historic
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security. I should like to express my
delegation's appreciation to Under-Secretary-General
Jean-Marie Guehenno for his opening remarks, which
we found to be useful and very helpful in this debate.
Similarly, we greatly appreciate the presence of Ms.
Amy Smythe, Senior Gender Adviser of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The first-hand information that
she has provided about her experiences and about the
challenges in the field merits our careful and serious
consideration. The demonstrated catalytic role of the
Office of the Special Adviser on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women, under the leadership of Ms.
Angela King, is also highly appreciated, and we
encourage Ms. King to persevere on that path.

The adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) was an
acknowledgement of the importance of the role of
women in conflict prevention and resolution and in
peace-building. It was a further acknowledgement of
the fact that women not only are disproportionate
victims in conflicts but also assume a variety of roles
during and after conflict, including those of civilian
combatants, peace activists and participants in
reconstruction efforts. It was also an acknowledgement
of the need to involve women fully in the maintenance
and promotion of peace and security and to make that
role concrete and visible.

Resolution 1325 (2000) prescribes a role for all
players. Three years after its adoption, it is evident that
there is a gap between resolve and reality. It is obvious
that, for resolution 1325 (2000) to become a reality,
Member States must take action commensurate with
operationalizing the provisions of the resolution.

That leads me to pose a few questions. Have we
been able to give meaning to the resolution by
incorporating gender perspectives into all peacekeeping
operations? Have we been able to allocate adequate
resources - including human resources- to permit
gender mainstreaming in peacekeeping operations?
Have we made any provisions for the required training
of staff, consistent with the resolution?

At this juncture, it is important for me to
acknowledge the appointment of an interim Gender
Adviser in the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations. That is certainly a welcome development,
which, my delegation believes, signifies the relevance
and importance of resolution 1325 (2000). While we
express the hope that the Gender Adviser will
champion the incorporation of gender perspectives into
peacekeeping operations, it is important to ensure that
her Office has the requisite support and cooperation
from the United Nations system as well as from
Member States. We appreciate the fact that the position
of a Senior Gender Adviser is being earmarked for the
peacekeeping mission in Liberia. We hope that that will
be standard practice in future.

I wish to avail myself of this opportunity to share
with the Council efforts that have been made in the
regions of East Africa and Southern Africa to give
meaning to resolution 1325 (2000). Conflict situations
have amply demonstrated women's abilities to take
active and leading roles in resolving conflicts. Women
in the region are progressively taking a keen interest in
issues related to peace and security. Political and
military establishments and armed groups are
increasingly becoming aware of the role and potential
of women in those areas. Women, on their own, are
also increasingly becoming a powerful constituency in
advancing their role in peace and security issues and
have proved to be essential in that area. The
involvement of women in the Burundi peace process is
a case in point.

In the broader context of gender mainstreaming,
we within the Southern African Development
Community (SADC), have set for ourselves the goal of
reaching a minimum target of 30 per cent
representation by women in politics and in decision-
making structures by 2005. The overall regional
situation indicates that SADC member States are
making progress in that regard. At least two member
States have provided for representation by women in
their respective constitutional amendments. Women's
combat experiences and their civilian roles in the
liberation movements of many of these countries have
proved valuable and have paved the way for the logical
involvement of women in post-conflict governance,
reconciliation and nation-building.

There is a deliberate, gradual increase in the
proportion of representation by women in various
structures in most member States. As most member
States in the region are expected to hold general
elections in 2004 and 2005, it is expected that they will
use the opportunities of those forthcoming elections
and other measures to advance and achieve the
immediate minimum target of 30 per cent. The process
of women's empowerment will continue thereafter. The
imperative is not to give token attention to women's
participation, but to acknowledge the fact that the
foundation for durable peace, development, good
governance, human rights and justice lies in women
playing a full part as equal partners in all peace
processes and in the maintenance of peace.

My country, Tanzania, is working closely with the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees to ensure the security of refugees, including
women and girls, as well as to ensure the humanitarian
and civilian nature of refugee camps and settlements.

As we in the Great Lakes region prepare for an
international conference on peace, security, democracy
and development in the Great Lakes region to be held
in June 2004, we are gratified to note that women have
carved out a niche for themselves as important
participants in the preparatory process leading to the
conference.

While we take note of the few positive steps
towards the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000), it should be a matter of
concern to all of us that women still make up only a
small part of those who participate in peace and
security negotiations. They continue to be marginalized
in most post-conflict planning. My delegation believes
that resolution 1325 (2000) is a powerful instrument in
our hands. Our challenge is to put that instrument to
work to achieve the results it is intended to accomplish.
That can happen only if we harness the political will to
allocate the necessary funding, to identify the requisite
staffing and to provide the training that is required to
make resolution 1325 (2000) a way of our political life.
Today's debate is a valuable contribution in sustaining
the momentum for change in that direction. The trend
towards empowering women has generated its own
dynamic, which cannot be ignored or reversed.

