Mr. Anshor (Indonesia): Allow me to begin by
expressing our appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
convening this open debate on an important issue, as
well as to thank the briefers for their presentations.

Indonesia wishes to reaffirm its support for
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, and for the subsequent follow-up resolutions.
We fully support the inclusion of a gender perspective
within the protection-of-civilians agenda.
Over the past decade, there has been growing public
attention on the issue of the protection of civilians in
armed conflicts. Yet the deplorable fact remains that
civilians continue to fall victim to violence. Persistent
violations occur, including the deliberate targeting of
civilians, the indiscriminate and excessive use of force,
and sexual and gender-based violence - in violation of
international humanitarian law, human rights law and
refugee law. Women and girls are particularly exploited
as part of combat tactics, too many times becoming
casualties with impunity.

Armed conflicts, with their manifold health, social,
cultural and economic impacts, not only affect victims;
they also affect victims' families, communities and
societies, with long-lasting disruption. Indonesia
strongly believes that the first step should be to build
a culture of peace and to prevent armed conflicts
from happening in the first place. That means that the
international community should put a greater premium
on conflict prevention, including the peaceful resolution
of disputes. In our view, however, if a conflict does
erupt, there are ways by which civilians, in particular
women and girls, are best protected.

First, full adherence to international humanitarian
and human right law by all parties to a conflict is the
most important element. Parties should do everything
feasible to protect civilians, in particular all vulnerable
groups, including women and children.

Secondly, since the primary responsibility for
the protection of women, girls and other citizens lies
with the State concerned, the United Nations and other
international partners should undertake enhanced
efforts that support the building up of the relevant
national capacities and enhancing synergy among the
various national actors on the protection imperative.

Thirdly, all efforts to protect civilians in armed
conflict must be founded on the tenets of human rights,
security and development - the three pillars of the
United Nations. Those three principles should guide
our efforts to ensure that civilians are protected in
conflict and in post-conflict situations.

In developing a more effective policy in this
particular field, we believe that the Security Council
should make use of inputs emanating from the various
relevant initiatives under taken by Member States,
including outside the United Nations framework,
that involve engagement with a broad range of
actors, including think tanks and non-governmental
organizations working in the field. To cite a few
examples in that regard, I would mention the series of
regional workshops that have taken place; the Global
Conference on Reclaiming the Protection of Civilians
under International Humanitarian Law, initiated by
Norway, in which Indonesia took an important part; and
the Global Summit to End Sexual Violence in Conflict,
initiated by the United Kingdom, with which Indonesia
associates itself.

It is worth underlining that women should not
be seen just as victims, but also as peace enablers
in mitigating conflicts. History has proven their
credentials in creating peace. The policies of the United
Nations system should therefore promote extensive
measures to ensure greater participation of women at all
stages, from conflict prevention to conflict resolution
and from peacekeeping and peacebuilding.

I would also like to briefly share our View on how
the United Nations missions can deliver their mandate
to protect women and girls in times of war and post-
conflict periods.

First, on prevention, we should continue to promote
gender mainstreaming in peacekeeping missions at
both the policy and operational levels. Integrating the
gender perspective in humanitarian responses and
development assistance relating to displacement and
early recovery is significant.

Secondly, recognizing that women and girls have
distinct needs, specific assistance and protection should
be arranged accordingly. That includes ensuring women
and girls's equal access to humanitarian assistance and
providing specific basic services such as reproductive
health and protection from gender-based violence.

Thirdly, to effectively ensure that women and girls
can thrive as survivors and leaders in post-conflict
situations, we have to empower them. Women can play
a vital role as societies recover from armed conflict.
It is essential to ensure their full participation in the
economic and political lives of their nations.

To conclude, I reiterate Indonesia's commitment
to working together with all partners in strengthening
the protection of civilians, in particular women and
children.

