Mrs. Nguyen (Viet Nam): My delegation would
like to thank the French presidency for convening this
open debate on women and peace and security. We
also express our appreciation to the Secretary-General
and to the Executive Director of UN-Women for their
comprehensive reports.

Our discussion today under the theme of"Realizing
the promise of the women and peace and security
agenda: ensuring its full implementation, including
the participation of women", is very timely, as there
are growing threats to peace and security that are both
traditional and non-traditional. This event offers us an
opportunity to renew our commitments to the women
and peace and security agenda in order to enhance the
equal participation and involvement of women in all
efforts to maintain and promote peace and security.

We welcome efforts and progress made in the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda, which have greatly contributed to the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals.
We are pleased to see that the role and participation
of women have been promoted in conflict prevention,
conflict resolution and post-conflict reconstruction, as
well as their growing leadership in peace processes.

Despite those efforts and progress, much remains
to be done. Women's underrepresentation, gender
inequality and discrimination still persist. We are
concerned about the continuing violence and abuse
targeting women and girls. We strongly condemn the
heinous acts of forcing or recruiting women and girls to
commit terrorist attacks.

Against that backdrop, we call for a strengthened
collective response to effectively address these
challenges. Representation and decision-making by
women in post-conflict structures and peace operation
efforts should be broadened to ensure that their
needs and interests are reflected and met. The gender
perspective should be mainstreamed in a consistent and
comprehensive manner in all areas of peacebuilding
and conflict prevention. Impunity must be ended
to effectively combat and eliminate human rights
violations, including conflict-related sexual violence
and abuse. In that regard, we welcome the global
study on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
and encourage serious consideration of its findings
and recommendations.

We would also like to highlight the importance of
education in enhancing women's capacity. Together
with women's economic empowerment, it is crucial to
equip women and girls with the knowledge to better
protect themselves from conflict-related risks as well
as to build their resilience against economic shocks,
climate change and natural disasters. At the same
time, we need to raise awareness of the women and
peace and security agenda through different means of
communication and encourage the engagement of all
the relevant stakeholders, especially young people, in
its implementation.

Throughout the history of Viet Nam, women have
proved and played an indispensable role in national
defence, construction and development. Today we are
proud to see the increased participation of women in
all spheres of life, especially the military and security
forces. Women are an essential driving force of our
economic and social development, making significant
contributions to promoting and maintaining an
environment of peace, security and stability.

This year the twelfth National Women's
Congress of Viet Nam, under the theme
"Solidarity - Renovation - Equality - Integration",
set its objectives for the term 2017-2022. These include,
inter alia, the promotion of women's potential and
creativity, improving their material and spiritual life
and status, striving for gender equality and women's
advancement and contributing to the cause of national
construction and defence.

We are also pleased to announce that we are now
working closely with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations in preparation for the early deployment of
the very first Vietnamese woman officer to the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan. Another nine women

are prepared to work at our level 2 hospital once it is
deployed in South Sudan.

It is women who plant the seeds and inspire the love
for peace. For the seeds of peace to grow and the love
ofpeace to be nurtured, we must turn our commitments
into actions. It is necessary to mobilize greater support
for the role of women, increase opportunities for their
meaningful participation and tackle all challenges that
stand in their way. Viet Nam is committed to working
closely with Member States and the relevant United
Nations agencies in this endeavour.

