Mr. Dogan (Croatia): With all protocols observed,
Croatia aligns itself with the statements delivered
by the observer of the European Union and by the
representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security. I take this
opportunity to make some additional remarks in my
national capacity.

Owing to the specific experience of having
undergone war and post-conflict recovery in the
19905, Croatia can attest that women not only bear a
disproportionate burden during a conflict but that they
also have an indispensable role to play in ending wars,
peacebuilding and post-conflict management.
At the national level, Croatia has taken steps to
promote women's participation and leadership and to
ensure that the guiding principles of the women and
peace and security agenda are integrated into our
national policies and practice through the national
action plan for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). The plan's implementation contributed to
increased participation and leadership by women in the
national security forces and in international missions
and operations. Croatia currently exceeds United
Nations recommendations on women's participation in
peacekeeping operations, having deployed contingents
consisting of almost 20 per cent women. In addition,
Croatia contributes to the active implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda through
the implementation of a United Nations integrated
international course for foreign women police officers.
Furthermore, Croatia has adopted the 2015 Law on the
Rights of Victims of Sexual Violence in the Homeland
War, providing victims with support, recognition and
compensation, which is considered a State responsibility
even if the perpetrators are never found or brought
to justice.

On the eve of observing the twentieth anniversary
of resolution 1325 (2000), we see an opportunity to
reflect on what has been achieved and what still needs
to be done. As the Secretary-General's newest report
makes clear (S/2019/800), we still live in a world where
women are excluded from peace and political processes,
while grave abuses and violence against women and
girls, including sexual violence, continue. Protecting
women in armed conflict, in parallel with enhancing
their contribution to peace processes and the rebuilding
of their communities, remains a crucial challenge.

We strongly believe that the prevention of
widespread or systematic sexual and gender-based
violence begins in times of peace, when national
laws should prevent permissive attitudes in wartime.
General recommendation No. 30 of the Committee
on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women
states that protecting women's human rights at all times,
advancing substantive gender equality before, during
and after conflict and ensuring that women's diverse
experiences are fully integrated into all peacebuilding,
peacemaking and reconstruction processes should be
important objectives for all countries. Therefore, we
need to improve cooperation, as well as coordination
between the women and peace and security agenda
and various United Nations mandate holders, including
special procedures dealing with the protection and
empowerment of women.
In conclusion, I take this opportunity to draw
participant's attention to the powerful monument
overlooking the East River, which, in addition to
being the tallest on the grounds of the United Nations,
epitomizes the essence of our women and peace and
security agenda. It represents a woman riding a horse,
with an olive branch in one hand and a globe in the
other, leading peoples of the world towards peace. We
have to join forces - civil society and Member States,
women and men - to follow her symbolic lead.

