Mr. Okio (Congo) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, my delegation would like to thank you
for having convened this meeting that allows us to
continue thinking about a vital question that has to do
with the United Nations image. I would also like to
thank Mr. Guehenno, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, whose briefing this morning
has shown the importance of the activities undertaken
by his Department to combat sexual exploitation and
abuse. I would, of course, also like to thank Prince
Zeid Al-Hussein, the Special Adviser of the Secretary-
General, for his briefing, which gives us an update and
presents positive developments in the implementation
of his report.

We can say, without fear of error, that through
peacekeeping operations - the success of which until
now has been undeniable, given the growing number of
countries that have managed to extricate themselves
from conflict situations - that the Security Council
presents a positive image of its action in terms of
peacekeeping. Well aware of the importance of this
fact, leaders from around the world emphasized, during
the September summit, that peacekeeping is at the
heart of United Nations activities and that the
Organization needs to be up to the task of meeting the
challenges in this area. They also expressed their
concern with regard to sexual exploitation and abuse.
That latter point, which is the subject of today's debate,
is sufficiently important that the duty to become more
aware of such deviant behaviours and to provide
assistance to those who are vulnerable has led us to
greater cohesiveness in the various United Nations
bodies.

If any good can come from this, it will come from
determining, not which organ has done the bestjob, but
rather how we, together, can contribute to curbing this
evil. How can we not act collectively, given these
arguably ignominious actions?

In his report, Prince Zeid said,

"prostitution and other sexual exploitation in a
peacekeeping context is profoundly disturbing to
many because the United Nations has been
mandated to enter into a broken society to help it,
not to breach the trust placed in it by the local
population. Moreover, the Organization should
not in any way increase the suffering of
vulnerable sectors of the population, which has
often been devastated by war or civil conflict".
(A/59/710, para. 6)

The example of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the most often cited one today, shows to what
extent these actions sometimes begin to look like really
villainous crimes. Young girls have been raped and
then put in a dependency situation for a handful of cash
or a little bit of food, and then they are pushed further
back into prostitution and degradation.

My delegation believes that deviant behaviour in
peacekeeping operations, which, by the way, is not
something recent and the current scope of which can
only cause more shock and indignation, is
unjustifiable. Exploitation and sexual abuse, the
subject of our debate today, are contrary to the ideal of
peacekeeping operations, as many delegations have
indicated. That ideal is to save human lives and
attenuate the suffering of people in countries
undergoing conflict.

We must, therefore, be firmer in our approach to
extract peacekeeping operations from this difficult and
shameful situation, because silence exposes them to
public opprobrium and their essential goal is to save
lives, not to destroy them. I would, therefore, like to
salute the efforts undertaken by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations with the troop-contributing
countries in implementation of the Brahimi report to
remedy these situations.

The recommendations set out in Prince Zeid's
report - whose implementation by DPKO is well
under way - give us an effective framework, as they
provide a comprehensive solution to a problem that is a
challenge. We therefore urge the continuation of these
efforts, including the implementation of a zero-
tolerance policy and a zero-complacency policy,
referred to by the Secretary-General's Chef de Cabinet
yesterday. Such a commitment would honour our
institution.

In my delegation's view, the zero-tolerance policy
requires practical measures involving Member States,
troop-contributing countries and the populations
concerned. We support the regulatory provisions
already adopted or now being elaborated on codes of
conduct and behaviour. In that regard, we see as
positive the incorporation of provisions contained in
the Secretary-General's bulletin (ST/SGB/2003/13)
into legal agreements related to experts on mission and
into past agreements with troop-contributing countries.

However, adopting measures is one thing;
implementing them is another. The role of training
becomes readily apparent here. And we are pleased to
note that the Secretary-General's report
(A/60/640/Add.1) indicates that provisions are in the
process of being implemented or formulated to
compensate for certain shortcomings. We also note
with interest the circulation to Member States since
October 2005 of the generic training module, whose
first part is devoted to sexual exploitation and abuse.

In his recommendations, Prince Zeid says, quite
rightly, that the guilty silence must be broken. That is
why we insist on the following. The concerned
populations, who must be aware of their rights -
including the right to file complaints regarding abuse

that they have experienced - must be trained and
educated. In that regard, peacekeeping missions must
implement the Department's directives and must be
accountable. The civilian and military hierarchies of
the various contingents must be trained and educated to
ensure that sexual exploitation and abuse are not
covered up or tolerated. These hierarchies - which
themselves are not above suspicion - must be able to
implement and ensure compliance with the United
Nations zero-tolerance policy. Oversight mechanisms
must be instituted, including within these hierarchies,
to break the silence at all levels. The role of the
Department itself with respect to the collection and
management of data on the management of disciplinary
procedures and the adjustment of policies could go as
far as establishing an early warning system.

Zero complacency means finding the guilty,
identifying them and applying the appropriate
punishment. All modern means must be used for that
purpose. The so-called peacekeeping babies must not
remain fatherless. It would also be highly desirable if
all those involved in peacekeeping operations
voluntarily agreed to submit to state-of-the-art identity
testing. Thus, evidence of rape would be easily
identifiable, and unaware fathers could be traced.

In that connection, legal agreements with troop-
contributing countries must be sufficiently explicit. A
mechanism must be found to ensure that the guilty are
truly punished in their countries of origin. We must
also plan a mechanism enabling victims to seekjustice,
which is not always obvious in certain cases in which
the individuals concerned might be illiterate. When
individuals cannot act on their own because of
ignorance or fear of reprisal, a specific mechanism
should be set up.

I cannot conclude without paying a well-deserved
tribute to all those men and women who have
sacrificed their lives in the service of peace.
Fortunately, among the men and women who serve
peace, there are honest people whose merit cannot be
overshadowed by the guilty behaviour of undisciplined
elements. These honest men and women, who
constitute the great majority, deserve our recognition
and respect. Without their commitment, our action in
the service of peace could not be carried out.
My delegation reaffirms its firm support

for peacekeeping operations, which - for Africa in
06-25109
particular - are a tool of international cooperation in

situations of armed crisis.

