Mr. Zidar (Slovenia): I would like to thank
Uganda for the initiative to convene this important
open debate on women, peace and security. I also thank
the Secretary-General, Under-Secretary-General for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
Bachelet and other distinguished guests for their
presentations today.

Slovenia fully aligns itself with the statements to
be delivered by the representative of the European
Union and by the representative of Costa Rica on
behalf of the Human Security Network.

Resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace and
security acknowledged that women are not just victims
of armed conflict and that their equal and full
participation is of vital importance in conflict
prevention, peacekeeping, conflict resolution,
peacebuilding and post-conflict recovery.

In the past 10 years, many activities have been
carried out to strengthen the role of women during and
after conflict. However, this anniversary reminds us
that despite those efforts, much needs to be done in the
protection of women and in the promotion of the
participation of women at the decision-making level, in
conflict resolution and in peace processes.

Violence against women, especially sexual and
gender-based violence, persists in conflicts. Recent
events in the Democratic Republic of the Congo have
shown that women continue to be deliberate targets of
injustice and sexual violence in the conflict and its
aftermath.
In his report (S/2010/498), the Secretary-General
takes up United Nations activities in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). The report
shows that a vast range of activities has been carried
out in the past 10 years. However, the fragmentation of
those activities demonstrates the need to streamline and
coordinate the action of all members of the
international community. Slovenia supports the
Secretary-General's recommendation to develop a
single comprehensive framework that consists of an
agreed set of goals, targets and indicators to guide the
implementation of the resolution in its second decade.

We are of the opinion that the issue of women,
peace and security needs to be addressed in a holistic
and comprehensive manner. We welcome the Security
Council's decision to take forward the set of indicators
developed by the Secretary-General to track the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in situations
of armed conflict as well as post-conflict and other
situations. We hope that the indicators will now
become operational.

Slovenia also supports the recommendation to
establish a dedicated working group to review progress
in the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and to
make recommendations to the Security Council on how
to address gaps and challenges to accelerate progress in
the implementation of the resolution.

Stronger steps should be taken to address
accountability and to end impunity for perpetrators of
violations. The Security Council should impose
targeted and graduated measures against all parties to a
conflict responsible for grave violations of women's
rights, including sexual violence. Sexual violence
should be a priority element in all Council resolutions
mandating the sanctions committees.

We all have a responsibility to implement
resolution 1325 (2000). The development of national
action plans is a key means by which Member States
commit themselves to fulfilling that responsibility. I
would like to report that Slovenia is about to finalize
and adopt such an action plan. The goal is to
interconnect existing national and international
activities addressing a broader concept of women,
peace and security in order to translate them into
genuine political commitments, and thus accelerate the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
contribute to the empowerment and protection of
women.

In Slovenia, gender equality is a priority not only
in the field of human rights and development
cooperation but also in security and defence policy.
Since 2008, much has been done to promote gender
equality in the security and defence sector. Those
activities range from awareness-raising and training to
the adoption and modification of legislation and other
measures, including codes of conduct. The recently
adopted strategy on the participation of the Republic of
Slovenia in international operations and missions
promotes equal opportunities with regard to such
efforts at all levels, irrespective of gender.

Lastly, let me take this opportunity to encourage
the Security Council to continue to address the issue of
women, peace and security and to seek the most
effective means to improve the situation of women in
armed conflict. With a comprehensive United Nations
approach and increased ownership by Member States
over their activities, the plight of women in situations
of armed conflict and its aftermath can be eliminated.

