Ms. Kikuta (Japan) (spoke in Japanese; English text provided by the delegation): I am very pleased that
today's open debate has been organized under the
leadership of the First Deputy Prime Minister of
Uganda, Mr. Eriya Kategaya, with high-level
participants from Member States.

I would also like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon; the Executive Director of the United Nations
Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women (UN Women), Ms. Michelle Bachelet;
Mr. Hamidon Ali, President of the Economic and
Social Council; and Ms. Thelma Awori, on behalf of
the Civil Society Advisory Group to the United Nations
on Women, Peace and Security, for their insightful
presentations.

First of all, on this tenth anniversary of the
adoption of the landmark resolution 1325 (2000), I
would like once again to affirm, together with all
present here, the essential message of the resolution
that lasting peace can never be achieved without the
participation of women.

Over the past 10 years, Member States, the
United Nations system and civil society have engaged
jointly in an effort to achieve peace by enhancing the
protection and participation of women. However, when
we recall that innocent women and children remain the
principal victims of every conflict, we know that there
are many challenges yet to be overcome. In order to do
so, the international community needs to address in a
comprehensive manner the issues of prevention,
participation, protection and recovery.

One key to the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) is monitoring. Japan therefore attaches great
importance to using the set of indicators that has been
developed to aid us in identifying comprehensively
how much needs to be done to make the objectives of
the resolution a reality. I believe that the indicators
must be applied globally with a view to both
preventing conflicts and providing early warning when
a conflict is about to erupt. Japan therefore supports
the Security Council's endorsement of the set of
indicators and encourages its early use by United
Nations entities and Member States.
Japan also welcomes the commitments contained
in the action plan for gender-responsive peacebuilding,
presented by the Secretary-General (see S/2010/466),
and hopes that they will be translated into action on the
ground with all due speed.

In the implementation of peacebuilding
strategies, the ways in which the international
community, including the United Nations, provides
support are of considerable consequence, as the
ownership of the countries concerned must be
respected. In particular, since we have a different
support structure in each country, we need to formulate
a country-specific strategy with a gender perspective
by enhancing the integration of peacekeeping
operations, political missions, the work of United
Nations country teams and other efforts.

The Government of Japan hopes that when it
becomes operational in January 2011, UN Women, led
by Ms. Bachelet, will provide leadership in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). For its part,
Japan is a candidate to join the first Executive Board of
UN Women and is determined to provide all possible
support for the activities of the new entity.

In April this year, Japan hosted the Security
Council ministerial open debate on post-conflict
peacebuilding (see S/PV.6299), with then-Minister for
Foreign Affairs Okada serving as President. The
presidential statement adopted at that meeting pointed
out the need for "an integrated approach, which
strengthens coherence between political, security,
development, human rights and rule of law activities"
(S/PRST/2010/7). We believe that the same approach
would prove effective in the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).

When conflicts break out, civilians are always
under threat of violence, and the protection of women
and girls is therefore an important responsibility the
international community must shoulder. To that end,
cooperation between peacekeeping operations and
humanitarian organizations needs to be strengthened,
so that the voices of the people in the area where a
conflict is raging may be heard and their problems
properly addressed. We must also strengthen
governance in such countries, including in the areas of
the rule of law and the protection of human rights;
promote security sector reform, including in the
military and police sector; and ensure that a gender
perspective is incorporated into all of those activities in
order to protect women and girls.

And another point to be borne in mind is that
efforts for peace and security must be accompanied by
social and economic development. In particular, for
achieving stability in post-conflict societies, not only
must there be reconstruction at the country level, but it
is also essential to rebuild communities and empower
people affected by conflicts, employing a bottom-up
approach. Women must participate fully and effectively
in the reconstruction of society, development, and the
formulation of post-conflict strategies. And
cooperation with civil society is vital. Those elements
constitute the human security approach, to which Japan
attaches great importance.

In its Initiative on Gender and Development,
announced in 2005, Japan stipulated that, in the
implementation of official development assistance in
countries in or having just emerged from conflict, the
needs of women and the vulnerable would have to be
properly considered from the perspective of gender in
all phases, from emergency humanitarian assistance to
post-conflict peacebuilding. Through this initiative,
Japan has been contributing to the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).

In Afghanistan, where many women still face
poverty and violence, Japan has been providing a range
of support for women, including efforts to promote
their economic empowerment and reduce poverty.
Now, at this critical moment for the country, Japan is
committed to enhancing its assistance for the
empowerment of women, with a view to helping
Afghan women transform themselves from the victims
of conflict to agents ofpeace.

By applying a gender perspective in the fields of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, the Government of
Japan has been attempting to create an environment in
which more women can play active roles. To cite a few
examples of its efforts in this area, Japan has sent
female Self-Defence Force personnel to train
peacekeepers in Africa, and it has also accepted women
from Timor-Leste at its National Defence Academy,
who are expected to join their country's national forces
when they finish. In the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, as part of its assistance to democratize the
police sector, it is providing training to a number of
women police officers, with a View to protecting and
promoting the human rights of women and children.
Through its Programme for Human Resource
Development in Asia for Peacebuilding, which targets
both Japanese and other Asian participants, Japan has
also trained 55 women as professional civilian
peacebuilders over the last three years, and many are
now working in the field.

In preparation for the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of the resolution, the partnership among all
stakeholders was strengthened through the
establishment of the high-level steering committee and
the Civil Society Advisory Group. Today, however, we
need to reaffirm our commitment to implementing that
resolution, and to maintaining the momentum
generated at this meeting over the next ten years. For
its part, Japan would like to reaffirm its commitment to
implementing resolution 1325 (2000), both on its own
and working with the rest of the international
community.

