Mr. Sinjaree (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): Madam
President, allow me to congratulate you on having
assumed the presidency for this month; we thank you
for the efforts made in order to fulfil your mandate.
We also welcome the presidential statement adopted
this morning by the Council (S/PRST/2014/21). We
would like also to thank the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for the support he is
providing to the work of the United Nations aimed at
promoting the rights of women.

Let me stress the political will of the Iraqi
Government to continue to support the rights of
women. This approach began in 2003, with a view
to strengthening the role played by women in Iraqi
society. Allow me to refer here to a few ofthe successful
measures taken by the Iraqi Government to support
women and resolve various problems in this area.

First, the Iraqi Council of Ministers set out two
national strategies on the promotion of women. The
first relates to the struggle against violence against
women, and the second promotes the role of women in
general. Also, the Commission on the Rights of Women,
under the authority of the Iraqi Ministry on Women,
created a joint working group among ministries aimed
at implementing the two national strategies effectively.

Secondly, the Iraqi Government set up a national
action plan to implement resolution 1325 (2000) on
women and peace and security, from 2014 to 2018. The
plan of action was launched in February. Iraq is one of
the countries most advanced in the field of women's
rights in the Middle East.

The plan of action stresses the importance of
enabling women to participate in decision-making
and in conflict resolution while providing them with
protection and care. It also calls for the carrying out
of a study on legislation in Iraq so as to identify those
provisions that pose an obstacle to ending discrimination
against women and violate the rights of women as set
out in the Constitution, and to review current related
legislation so as to either end or amend it, to ensure that
it is in compliance with international instruments on
the rights of women.

In addition, gender divisions have been created
within all Iraqi ministries to respond to the request made
by the secretariat of the Iraqi Council of Ministers, so
as to respect human rights and the principle ofjustice
and equality of opportunities between the different
genders in Government, giving prime importance to
all women's issues. That division is also responsible
for preparing statistics on the number of women in
State ministries and the percentage of women in those
ministries, so as ensure a better distribution of women
across the various departments of different ministries.

Thirdly, the Iraqi Constitution, in its article 49,
paragraph IV, states that women must occupy 25 per
cent of seats in the Iraqi Parliament. Currently 81 of
the 325 seats in the Iraqi Parliament are occupied by
women.

The Government of Iraq has always worked, and
will continue to work, to promote the status of women
in Iraqi society despite the considerable challenges we
are facing as a people and a Government as a result
of the barbaric terrorist attacks against us, which have
undermined social cohesion within the country. Iraqi
women have been the prime target of such attacks, and
particularly following the events of 10 July, women
were subjected to serious violations carried out by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in various
parts of Iraq controlled by that criminal entity.

ISIL has carried out measures including killings,
kidnapping, rape, forced marriage and other kinds of
practices that have traumatized the victims thereof and
their families. Furthermore, the fate of Iraqi women
kidnapped by ISIL remains unknown, which further
traumatizes the families of the victims and is of deep
concern to all Iraqis.

ISIL attacks and intimidation have led people to
flee their homes to try to find safe haven far from the
terrorists. This has exacerbated the suffering of Iraqi
families and Iraqi women in particular, especially with
the arrival of winter in Iraq. There is also an urgent
need to support medical care, including vaccinations
for pregnant and lactating women.

The Iraqi Government has used all of its available
resources and has collaborated with the international
community and Iraqi and foreign non-governmental
organizations to try to alleviate the suffering of those
women by providing urgent aid for displaced persons
and to protect and liberate the regions controlled by
that criminal entity. Furthermore, we will continue to
work to determine the fate of the kidnapped women and
to free them.

Once again we call upon the international
community, including States and organizations, to
continue to help the Government of Iraq in its war
against terrorism to try to liberate the regions from those
criminal groups and prosecute the perpetrators and
instigators of such attacks. We call on the international
community to help the victims ofterrorism by providing
psychological assistance, especially women. We know
that women have a vital role to play in rebuilding Iraqi
society.

