Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the delegation of Canada on behalf of a
group of countries.

We thank South Africa for having convened this
debate. In the context of the tenth anniversary of the
establishment of the post of the Special Representative
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Argentina wishes
to reiterate its support for the work that has
been accomplished.

Achieving gender equality and the full
empowerment of women and girls in all their diversity,
as well as ensuring that gender becomes a cross-cutting
issue across the peace and security agenda, are sine qua

non conditions to effectively prevent conflicts, find
peaceful solutions and build sustainable peace. In that
respect, we must redouble our efforts to increase the
representation, participation and leadership of women
throughout all peacebuilding and conflict-prevention
processes, at all levels of decision-making.

Sexual Violence in conflict is one of the most
appalling and terrible Violations of human dignity and
represents an impediment to the greater involvement
of women in conflict resolution and the building of a
sustainable peace. We therefore wish to strengthen our
commitment to the prevention and eradication of and
accountability for such crimes, placing Victims at the
heart of our action and pooling our efforts to address
the underlying structural causes that make women so
vulnerable and puts them at risk.

Concerning measures aimed at the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), this year the Ministry of
Defence of Argentina trained 450 military staff using
instruments related to gender and gender-related
violence. Anonymous surveys were also carried out
to identify situations in which rights were being
violated, and the results were used in the context of the
trainings. These surveys made it possible to update, on
an ongoing basis, the framework of the training module
for such personnel.

In order to strengthen the role of women in regional
peacebuilding, in August the Argentine Minister
submitted to representatives and ambassadors of the
Southern Cone, during the second meeting of the
Federal Network of Mediators, a proposal to establish
a regional network of female mediators in the Southern
Cone so as to enhance and increase the resources
available for the training of female mediators, as well as
promote the empowerment and significant participation
of women in decision-making forums.

To conclude, I wish to stress that we must guarantee
ongoing access to safe education during conflict.
This is a fundamental goal that will contribute to
shielding women and girls from the risks of armed
conflict. I should therefore like to draw attention to
the significant role of the Safe Schools Declaration,
an initiative led by Norway and Argentina, and I
invite States to endorse the Declaration, a non-binding
instrument that also contributes to the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000).

