Mr. Donoghue (Ireland): Ireland commends you,
Madam, for organizing today's debate and its particular
focus on refugee and displaced women and girls. We
align ourselves with the statement made on behalf of
the European Union and with that delivered by the
representative Austria on behalf of the Human Security
Network.

We welcome the adoption today of presidential
statement S/PRST/2014/21, which recognizes the
heightened risks faced by refugee and internally
displaced women and girls.

This debate could not be more timely. Today, as
many speakers have observed, the proliferation of
crises and protracted conflicts has led to a situation in
which we have the highest number of refugees, asylum-
seekers and internally displaced persons since the end
of the Second World War, with more than 51 million
affected. If this number represented a country, it
would be greater than the population of Argentina and
would be approaching that of the Republic of Korea.
It is a simple fact that the majority of this vast wave
of dislocated humanity is comprised of women and
girls. It is also a fact that they face multiple forms of
discrimination and violations.

In Syria, we have witnessed the largest one-year
refugee exodus since the Rwandan genocide 20
years ago, with almost a third of the country on the
move involuntarily. In South Sudan, where more
than 1 million displaced people are surviving in dire
conditions, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Bangura,
attested to the "unimaginable living conditions, acute
day-to-day protection concerns and rampant sexual
violence" (S/PV. 7282, p. 4) in that country.

The specific threats of conflict faced by women
and girls present themselves in some very old ways and
also in new and disturbing ones. I am glad, however,
that today's debate takes full account of resolution
2122 (2013) and moves away from a narrow view of
women as victims of their circumstances, recognizing
that they are often leaders within their communities
who must be politically, socially and economically
empowered. The emphasis in presidential statement
S/PRST/2014/21, on the need to ensure the full and
meaningful participation of women and girls through
all stages of the displacement cycle, is welcomed.

There is, however, quite evidently a significant
gap in implementation, as the most recent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2014/693) outlines, and there is a
need to link the women and peace and security agenda
to other policy frameworks. The yardstick for change
lies at the level of implementation; the challenge before
us is to translate political commitments into real,
positive improvements in the lives of women and girls
affected by armed conflict.

In addition to confronting sexual violence in conflict,
there is a need to improve the protection afforded to
women and girls in humanitarian emergencies. The
protection of women and girls is one of the key criteria in
Ireland's decisions on humanitarian funding, including
in programmes of support to displaced persons. Our
national action plan on resolution 1325 (2000), which is
currently being updated, also prioritizes empowerment
and access to services for refugee and asylum-seeking
women in Ireland.

In April, on the occasion of the most recent
open debate on women and peace and security (see S/PV.7160), Ireland supported a discussion involving
Ms. Bangura and a Myanmar representative of civil
society and former refugee, Ms. Naw K'nyaw Paw.
Fleeing persecution, Ms. K'nyaw Paw's family joined
110,000 Karen people now living in refugee camps that
run the length of the Thailand-Myanmar border. In line
with resolution 2122 (2013), we must step up efforts to
support the leadership of thousands like her. We must
listen to, invest in and build the capacity of individual
women and of women-led civil society organizations to
ensure durable solutions.

Across the women and peace and security agenda,
the lack of a clear evidence base remains a challenge.
Attaining greater access to data is the only way in which
we can truly assess progress and identify barriers to
implementation. Ireland supports the increased use
of sex- and age-disaggregated data in the design and
implementation of programmes. Evidence shows us
that gender markers contribute to better planning and
understanding ofhow the women and peace and security
agenda is funded. Ireland welcomes the Secretary-
General's recent report (S/2014/693), which suggests
that the Council request data and analysis on the
situation of women and girls on a more frequent basis.
We also welcome the call by this Council in today's
presidential statement for more systematic collection,
analysis and utilization of sex- and age-disaggregated
data.

The Arms Trade Treaty is the first legally binding
international agreement adopted by the General
Assembly to regulate international transfers of
conventional weapons and ammunition. It has been
ratified by 80 per cent of the members of the Council
and is also the first treaty to recognize the links between
the international arms trade and gender-based violence.
Both of these firsts signify meaningful advancement
for international humanitarian law, human rights, and
peace and security. As one of the Treaty's strongest
supporters, Ireland looks forward to its coming into
force within a number of weeks. We need, however,
to ensure gender criteria and related commitments are
given full attention in its implementation.

As we look towards the high-level review of
resolution 1325 (2000) next year, we must fully grasp
this opportunity to take stock of where we have had
significant impact over the past 15 years, to fill in
knowledge gaps, to critically examine persistent and
emerging challenges, and to capture lessons learned and
good practices across all regions. Last month, Ireland
was delighted to co-host the launch of the global study
to review resolution 1325 (2000), and we will continue
to support the study over the coming months.

In conclusion, we need to move beyond mere
potential and opportunity and to effect real change in
the lives of women and girls. We need more consistent
and systematic application of resolution 1325 (2000)
and subsequent resolutions on the issue. We need to be
ambitious in driving local ownership and in addressing
the root causes of why women and girls are so
disproportionately affected by conflict. And we need to
ensure that women are fully and effectively empowered
as key stakeholders in the prevention and resolution of
conflict.

