Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We wish to thank you,
Madam, for convening this important debate on a
subject that arouses the interest of so many countries.
We would also like to express our gratitude for the
work and briefings of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Bangura, and of Ms. Allamin.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela condemns
sexual violence in armed conflict because it is a crime
against human dignity. We reject the abduction of
women and girls, who are abused, sexually enslaved
and subjected to massive abuses that may cause their
death. In that regard, my country urges all parties
to conflict to respect the norms and provisions of
international law, international humanitarian law and
human rights, as well as the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council on this topic.

The abominable crimes that are committed in
situations of armed conflict are not new and do not
always follow a single pattern; rather, they change
according to circumstance, as do their perpetrators,
whether State or non-State actors. That is why it is
important that the strategies implemented to prevent
and eradicate sexual Violence in armed conflict take
into account the specific context and confront the root
causes of conflict situations, including any political,
religious, ethnic, cultural or other underlying causes
of the sexual violence suffered by women and girls.
Women can no longer be seen as spoils of war or made
subject to Violence or oppression in any society or in
any circumstances. Ensuring that efforts to prevent
and eradicate such crimes are as effective as possible
requires coordination and synergy between the States
concerned, all the relevant United Nations bodies and
the various regional and subregional mechanisms.

The Secretary-General's 2014 report on conflict-
related sexual violence (S/2015/203) refers to 45 parties
suspected of committing acts of sexual Violence in
situations of armed conflict, 13 of which appear for
the first time. My country urges that those parties be
investigated and the perpetrators brought before the
appropriate tribunals. There should be no impunity for
this type of crime, which we agree in many instances
should be termed a crime of terror. We are particularly
concerned about the increasing rates of atrocities and
sexual violence in armed conflicts as examples of
systematic action on the part of extremist groups, and
about the fact that this phenomenon is directly related
to the training, equipping and encouraging of non-State
groups, designed to promote the break-up of States for
political reasons and thereby contribute to the collapse
of their institutions and turn them into fertile ground
for impunity and the perpetration of atrocities that
violate human dignity, including sexual violence.

All of this prevents sufficient care and protection
from being provided to survivors and their families,
and raises obstacles to achieving accountability. If
the ban on providing such groups with arms and
financial support were respected in accordance with
international law, the ability of non-State agents to
operate would decrease along with rates of sexual
violence in situations of armed conflict. Once again, we
call on the international community to take measures
to bring to justice those responsible for giving military
and financial aid to extremist and terrorist groups.

The report also notes that sexual Violence is
frequently not denounced because of the risks faced by
the surviving victims and their families and witnesses.
Most victims of sexual violence are stigmatized
and ostracized and have little access to justice. That
is why we should join forces to environment sure
that, while fully respecting the sovereignty of the
States concerned, national institutional capacities,
particularly health-care, judicial and social welfare
systems, can be developed and strengthened in order
to provide appropriate, timely care and rehabilitation
to the women and child who are the victims or fruit of
such violence.

We believe it is important that the issue of sexual
violence be considered in peace processes and ceasefire
agreements, as well as in all demobilization and
reintegration processes involving the United Nations.
The mediators and special envoys dealing with such
processes should possess the information and training
necessary to gauge the most relevant ways to address
the issues based on the specific circumstances. We
must also continue to work to improve preparation
for all staff deployed on the ground and to increase
the presence of gender experts and women protection
advisers on mission staff. We appreciate the work being
done by the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and
Sexual Violence in Conflict, and we also believe that
information and awareness-raising campaigns can have
a positive effect on communities by enabling them to
understand their rights and the ways in which they can
demand justice.

My country supports the zero-tolerance policy of
the United Nations on incidents of sexual violence that
have occurred or may occur in any of its operations.
The Organization should be firm and consistent
regarding the importance of accountability for staff
who commit such offences. In that regard, compliance
with the provisions of resolution 1325 (2000), as well
as ensuring women's participation in preventing and
settling conflicts, is particularly essential. We believe
that women's participation at every level, stage and
area related to political missions and peacekeeping
operations will produce a more appropriate, assertive
and comprehensive approach to the issue.

In conclusion, 2015 is significant because it is a year
in which some important mechanisms are coming due
that will enable us to renew our commitments and act
decisively to combat such barbarities. The sustainable
development agenda, the twentieth anniversary review
of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action,
the strategic review of peacekeeping operations and
the global review of the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) are all opportunities that we should sieze
in order to arrive at a more accurate picture of the issue
and help to adopt appropriate measures for addressing
it.

