Mr. McNee (Canada): I would like to express
Canada's appreciation to you, Mr. President, and to
Ghana for convening this open debate on women and
peace and security, an annual tradition commemorating
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).

Canada, as Chair of the Group of Friends of
resolution 1325 (2000), would like to suggest that this
year the Security Council begin a new tradition of
assessing the implementation of this important
resolution in a deliberate and concerted way
throughout the year.

The United Nations System-wide Action Plan,
alongside national implementation strategies,
represents an important first step towards meeting the
need for effective monitoring of and accountability for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
However, the ongoing obstacles to its implementation,
both for the United Nations and at the national level,
are now familiar to us all. The main challenge is that
the tenets of the resolution have not been
systematically institutionalized and accountability
mechanisms are not in place.

We need only look at the situation of sexual
violence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
understand the urgent need to implement resolution
1325 (2000) systematically and to monitor its
implementation. The international community is well
aware of the difficulties in reliably quantifying such
violence, and the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
no exception. Large areas of territory in the volatile
eastern areas of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
are beyond the reach of the civil authorities,
humanitarian agencies or relief services. This leaves
many victims unaccounted for. Despite thousands of
women having been raped, the prevailing culture of
impunity allows the problem to continue unabated with
virtually no prosecutions. The scale of the problem,
including the lack of prevention, protection and
punishment, is so immense that the social fabric of
entire communities is being torn apart.

The Security Council can make a genuine
difference here. It has a crucial role to play in the
effective, timely and systematic implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). Over the past few years, many
Member States have stressed the need for an effective
monitoring mechanism. That point has been made
repeatedly and convincingly in today's debate. We
could not be more in need of a monitoring mechanism
than we are today.

Canada has previously called on the Council to
establish a mechanism to monitor its own actions in
integrating resolution 1325 (2000) and other related
resolutions into its daily work. Canada calls on the
Council to establish such a monitoring mechanism in
the form of a committee or working group with a
mandate to regularly and actively monitor progress in
implementing 1325 (2000) throughout the Council's
work.

In his 2007 report (S/2007/567), the Secretary-
General concluded that without concerted efforts by
Governments and civil society at the country level,
implementation of the resolution would continue to
lag. In order to ensure a focus on women's rights and
equality issues within the Security Council's country-
and region-specific work, Canada calls upon the
Council to commit itself to regular consultations with
representatives of women's organizations in the
countries that are on its agenda. We recommend that it
also make fuller use of the analytical support and
guidance available from the specialized United Nations
entities working on the issues encompassed by
resolution 1325 (2000), ranging from women's
political participation to the elimination of violence
against girls and women.

(spoke in French)

Canada joins others in stressing the importance of
such a monitoring mechanism and the essential nature
of the systematic collection of data that is cross-
classified by sex, presenting information separately for
women and men, girls and boys, in order to facilitate
the proper functioning of such a monitoring
mechanism. The Security Council needs to ensure that
information on grave violations of women's and girls'
human rights and their participation in peace and
reconstruction processes is produced and utilized in the
Council's work. The Security Council should ensure
that information on violence against women and girls,
including sexual violence, be included in all reports of
the Secretary-General to the Council on the situations
in individual countries, and in thematic reports.
Additionally, there is a clear need for specific reports
on sexual violence in conflict, as well as other aspects
of resolution 1325 (2000), in order to better inform
Council deliberations.

The creation of a monitoring mechanism and the
regular presentation of disaggregated data and status
reports will increase the Council's capacity to design
and implement peace support mandates to better
respond to such violence and to ensure the integration
of to prevent gender-based violence in the work of
United Nations country teams.

In conclusion, Canada will continue to support
the Council's implementation of its commitments,
including in country-specific contexts, and to support
efforts to enhance Council and wider international
action in this area.

