Mrs. Andelie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this important
debate. I also thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Bangura, and
Ms. Rhoda Misaka for their statements.

We take note of the report (S/2014/181) of
the Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual
violence, submitted to the Security Council for the
information of its members, as well as the analysis and
recommendations contained therein.

We recognize and welcome the fact that this
year the Security Council will be more focused on
consolidation efforts aimed at the implementation of
its resolutions 2106 (2013) and 2122 (2013). That will
be a genuine contribution to the global commitment to
end sexual violence in conflict. We are fully committed
to addressing all forms of violence against women
and girls, including sexual violence in conflict. The
protection of women in conflict situations and ending
impunity remain our utmost priorities.

In our efforts to end impunity we acknowledge the
active advocacy efforts of the United Nations, inter
alia with Governments, in addressing sexual violence
in armed conflict, particularly of the mandates of
the Secretary-General's Special Representatives for
Children and Armed Conflict and Sexual Violence in
Conflict. We shall continue to cooperate closely with
them in the future as well.

We are also committed to the provisions of the
Declaration of Commitment to End Sexual Violence in
Conflict adopted by the Foreign Ministers of the Group
of Eight in London on 11 April 2013.

We believe that the prosecution of sexual violence
crimes, as well as national ownership and responsibility
in addressing the root causes of sexual violence in
armed conflict, are central to the prevention of such
acts in the future. Sexual violence in armed conflict
cannot be accepted as a cultural phenomenon. It is not
an inevitable consequence of war or a lesser crime.
Therefore, we advocate the importance of the victim's
access to justice in conflict and post-conflict settings.

In that context, we want to underline the
importance of rulings of the international
tribunals - the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda - which defined sexual violence
as an instrument of warfare and rape as a crime against
humanity. In the Akayesu case, sexual violence was
recognized as an element of genocide. The impact of
those two rulings was that hundreds of victims got the
courage to testify against perpetrators throughout the
world.

Women's political, social and economic
empowerment, gender equality and the mobilization
of men and boys in an effort to combat all forms of
violence against women are essential in long-term
efforts to prevent sexual violence in armed conflict
and post-conflict situations. Therefore, we fully
support the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
and subsequent resolutions on women and peace and
security. As a member of the Executive Board, we shall
continue to support all the efforts of UN-Women in this
area as well.

We are aware that States bear the primary
responsibility to respect and ensure the human rights
of all individuals within their territory. Addressing the
injustices of sexual violence in armed conflict is critical
on two levels. First, it provides support to persons
who are survivors of such atrocities; and, secondly, it
furthers the transformation from a State affected by
violence to one of lasting peace.

Sexual violence is a form of psychosocial torture
where the suffering of the victims extends to their
families, and through families reflects the entire
society, while the suffering does not cease after the act
of violence is committed. The victims very often have
to fight the outside factor - the stigma of society where
the victim is blamed and penalized but the perpetrator
is free to have a normal life. That is why we strongly
believe that an effective national strategy to end sexual
violence must include programmes to challenge the
existing culture of impunity for these crimes. It must
emphasize the role of all, men and women, as active
contributors to change.

We have a track record of definitive action in
implementing resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security. We were the first country in South-
East Europe to develop a comprehensive national action
plan for its implementation.

For example, our national action plan mandates that
the topics of gender equality and the prohibition of sexual
harassment, gender-based violence and discrimination
be incorporated into curriculums of policy academies.
It requires that a zero-tolerance approach be applied to
any form of illicit sexual behaviour of peacekeeping
mission personne. And it calls for the creation and

improvement of programmes to provide psychosocial
support and economic empowerment to women who are
survivors of trafficking or sexual violence.

With the aim of improving the overall situation of
women victims ofrape, we are making efforts to finalize
the process of developing our second action plan for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) for the
period 2014-2017, which contains important provisions
for survivors of conflict-related sexual violence. We are
also working on a programme for improving the status
of women victims of wartime rape, sexual violence and
other forms of torture for the period 2013-2016.

Involving women in conflict prevention and
mediation and the deployment of women's protection
advisers to United Nations peacekeeping and special
political missions is crucial to building and reinforcing
peace. We have been working on additional efforts
to advance this issue and have adopted a policy that
one third of nominated candidates for peacekeeping
missions must be women.

This year, Bosnia and Herzegovina presented a
candidate for the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women (CEDAW). If elected,
our candidate will place her priority on prevention
and raising awareness of these most important issues.
She will continue fighting against prejudice and
impunity. My country attaches great significance to
this candidature and thus hopes to advance the CEDAW
agenda.

With regard to the provisions of the report of
the Secretary-General and to the visit of Special
Representative Zainab Bangura to Bosnia and
Herzegovina in June 2013, our authorities provided
comments and additional remarks to the Office of the
Special Representative.

Finally, I should like to point out that the
international community must permanently work on
strengthening United Nations efforts to address sexual
violence in armed conflict. Bosnia and Herzegovina
stands ready to contribute to those efforts.

In addition, I should like to inform the Council that
Bosnia and Herzegovina aligns itself with the statement
delivered today by the delegation of the European
Union.

