Mr. Tin (Myanmar): Allow me to express our
appreciation to the Nigerian presidency of the Council
for organizing this open debate.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
made by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam on
behalf of the members of the Association of Southeast
Asian States.

Let me join the preceding speakers in condemning
all forms of sexual violence against women and girls
in conflict and non-conflict areas. We also commend
the efforts of the United Nations in developing a broad
spectrum of norms on women and peace and security
for the prevention of sexual Violence against vulnerable
groups of women and girls across the world.

My delegation also wishes to thank Ms. Zainab
Bangura, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, for soliciting
our views while preparing the Secretary-General's
report (S/2014/181) on conflict-related sexual violence
and for incorporating some of our responses. We hardly
need to stress the importance of the accuracy and
objectivity of the information. We feel that reporting
could be more balanced if it highlighted not only the
problems but also the measures taken by the State
concerned in response to those problems.

In Myanmar, sexual violence is a crime strongly
abhorred by our traditional values and strictly forbidden
by law and by our culture. As such, severe legal action
is taken against the perpetrators of any reported case,
whether by civilians or the members of security forces.
The existing penal code strongly prescribes a severe
penalty for those who have committed acts of sexual
violence.

As conflict naturally breeds violence, we recognize
the importance of addressing the reported problems of
sexual violence that may occur in conflicts. However,
incidents committed by unruly individuals cannot be
construed as the policy ofa given institution. The most
important point is to refuse to condone any act of sexual
violence.

In Myanmar, all criminal cases filed with authorities
were properly investigated and the perpetrators were
punished according to the law. There have been a
number of cases where military personnel have been
prosecuted for committing acts of sexual violence.
The accusations that have been made in some quarters
suggesting that the State Constitution grants immunity
from prosecution to military personnel who commit
criminal offences are therefore totally groundless and
appear to be politically motivated. With the reformist
Government now paying greater attention to promoting
democratic values than ever before, members of the
armed forces have been clearly instructed not to
commit any crimes, including those of sexual violence.
A series of capacity-building workshops has been held
to educate them on human rights, and the curriculums
in military training schools also include instruction on
the laws relating to the prevention of sexual violence.

As a State party to the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women, Myanmar has taken steps to eliminate
discrimination and violence against women, in line
with the Convention's provisions, and we are currently
implementing a 10-year national strategic plan for the
advancement of women. Myanmar's three-year-old
democratic reforms have also created an environment
more conducive to the protection of women and girls.
Our new-found freedom of expression and of the media
has emboldened everyone to file complaints about any
wrongful acts without fear. Any abuse of rights can
be reported to our national human-rights commission.
The issue of the protection of women has also attracted
the attention of the legislative body, and a law banning
violence against women is being drafted with the
assistance of the United Nations. That important
legislation is expected to be finalized for enactment
very soon.

On 31 October 2013, Myanmar organized for the
first time an open day on women, peace and security,
commemorating resolution 1325 (2000) on women and
peace and security. The event, designed to promote
awareness of the issue, was attended by more than 200
participants, including senior Government and United
Nations officials, parliamentarians, development
cooperation partners and civil society. The Government
has also conducted surveys and research projects aimed
at obtaining reliable data for facilitating effective
measures against sexual violence. Seminars on
violence against women are being organized in various
towns across the country and counselling is also being
made available to women in need of such services.
In Myanmar, civil society and non-governmental
organizations are now actively engaged in activities
to raise awareness and prevent sexual violence. In that
regard, we are also working with UN-Women and the
United Nations Population Fund to implement projects
designed to protect women and girls from sexual
violence.

Myanmar is also making great progress in its
strenuous peacemaking efforts to end its 60-year-long
conflict, which have produced ceasefire agreements
with almost all ethnic groups. The expected forthcoming
signing of a nationwide ceasefire agreement will be a
watershed in our peacebuilding process as it helps to
create the conditions needed to end violence.

As much as we all condemn the use of sexual
violence as a weapon of war, we should also deplore
the exploitation of this sensitive issue by certain groups
as a tool for achieving their own political goals. The
problem of sexual violence cannot be solved by an
approach of naming and blaming. The international
community should rather take a constructive approach
by sharing information on Violations and assisting
Member States in their efforts to address the issue. In
that regard, my delegation has noted with interest the
recommendations and framework elements presented
in the Secretary-General's report. We also wish to
stress the importance of national ownership, leadership
and responsibility in preventing sexual violence in
conflict. In its exercise of that responsibility, Myanmar
would welcome assistance from the United Nations in
enhancing its efforts and capacity to protect women
and girls from sexual violence.

