Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
Bolivia would like to thank the presidency of the
United Kingdom for having taken the initiative of
holding this debate. First and foremost, we would also
like to thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres; the
Executive Director of United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC), Mr. Fedotov; and Mr. Kevin
Hyland, Independent Anti-slavery Commissioner, for
their respective briefings.

According to the 2016 UNODC Global Report
on Trafi'icking in Persons, 79 per cent of the victims
of human trafficking are women and children, with a
clear example being the Yazidi women and girls who
were submitted to various kinds of slavery and torture
by the so-called Islamic State. Due to that situation, a
lot of them have had to leave their countries of origin
to find more favourable living conditions. Similarly,
against the backdrop of the sixty-first session of the
Commission on the Status of Women, which is now
under way, we are deeply concerned to note that,
according to the UNODC report I just mentioned, 20 per
cent of the victims of forced labour and 72 per cent of
those of sexual exploitation are women - a situation
that clearly cannot be ignored.

On the one hand, the economic asymmetries
between the North and South that are reflected in the
way in which wealth is concentrated in some countries,
together with the neoliberal economic and financial
system, are some of the structural causes of poverty
and lead to large migration flows. On the other hand,
because of war and armed conflict, many people are
forced to leave their countries of origin and become
displaced persons or refugees. In many cases, those
conflicts and wars are the result of regime-change
policies, which mostly do not lead to peaceful and
democratic transitions, but instead involve deep-seated
structural changes and also result in violence because
of a lack of political stability. The upshot of this is
the forced displacement of tens of millions of people
around the world since the end of 2015, increasing by
6 million as compared to the previous year.

It is undeniable that armed violence and terrorism
are closely linked to human trafficking and associated
crimes. International criminal groups and terrorist
groups, which the Council and all States Members of
the Organization are combating, such as the so-called
Islamic State, Al-Shabaab, Boko Haraam and Al-Qaida,
among others, are those that benefit from human
trafficking and use those economic gains to finance
their terrorist activities. It is clear that terrorism and the
threat of violence, the crisis of capitalism, repression
and poverty have reduced the freedom and civil and
political rights of millions of citizens around the world.
In that connection, the responsibility of the countries of
all Members of the United Nations is to first recognize
a historic debt towards those people who are suffering
because of actions often perpetrated through conflicts
that were initiated, promoted and led by certain military
and economic Powers.

That is why we believe that as some countries close
their borders, build walls, criminalize immigration and
deny access to refugees they are not only promoting
human trafficking, but they are also promoting
xenophobia, discrimination and racism. That is also
serving to fuel the rhetoric of terrorist groups that we
all want to fight, including intolerance to different
religious beliefs and the terrible way in which this is
becoming associated with terrorism. In that regard,
there is no justification for violating the basic principles
of human rights. The international community cannot
turn its back on this reality.

It is also important to mention the economic benefits
resulting from human trafficking. They form part of the
global financial system through money laundering and
tax havens, which tend to diminish or eliminate the
regulations, especially in the area of investment of the
service industry. These things are used by organized
crime to legitimize their profits. In that regard, it would
be important to look into access to these tax havens by
terrorist or criminal groups.

In my own region of Latin America and the
Caribbean, we are no strangers to the evils of human
trafficking. My country, too, is a victim of such crimes,
in particular sexual exploitation and forced labour. In
that regard, it is important to call for the establishment
of various mechanisms at the regional level to reinforce
the fight at the regional as well as national levels. In
Bolivia, since 2002, there has been a comprehensive
law against trafficking in persons the aim of is to fight
that scourge. Moreover, the State is also providing
the necessary resources to ensure the effectiveness of
that campaign.

On the other hand, through this forum, as President
Evo Morales Ayma proposed, I would like to point out
that Bolivia has proposed that we work together on
the concept of universal citizenship, thereby making
it possible for everyone wherever they are to be able
to move freely, which would contribute to eliminate
trafficking in persons. As a result of that proposal, the
World Conference of the Peoples for a World without
Walls towards universal citizenship will be held in
Bolivia on 20 and 21 June, with representatives from
all continents attending. We invite not only States but
fundamentally social organizations to participate in
that summit.

I reiterate clearly for the benefit of the Security
Council that while human trafficking is a problem that
we have only taken on recently, it is relevant to the
principles governing this organ with regard to dealing
with international peace and security. It is therefore
essential that we combat that scourge, which affects
human rights and life itself.

I will end my statement by recalling what Stephen
O'Brien told us a few days ago in the Council (see S/PV.7897). At the beginning of the year, we were
facing the greatest humanitarian crisis since the
founding of the United Nations, but at the same time I
believe that it is important to remember that the world's
population is living in a time that is witnessing the
greatest level of inequality in its history. Those two
facts - the humanitarian crisis and that inequality - are
not unrelated or inseparable.

