Mr. Rogachev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): In the five years since the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), we have managed to
accomplish a great deal. We note with satisfaction that
the range of issues under discussion today are being
given greater attention not only in the Security
Council, but also within the framework of the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and its
functional commissions, particularly the Commission
on the Status of Women. The process of gender
mainstreaming is being pursued in all aspects of United
Nations activities. Useful recommendations in this area
were made by the High-level Panel on Threats,
Challenges and Change (A/59/565)and in the report of
the Secretary-General entitled "In larger freedom:
towards development, security and human rights for
all" (A/59/2005).

Nevertheless, there is still much to be done. A
particularly difficult situation continues to prevail on
the African continent, where the status of women has
become dramatic in some cases. That shows that we
need to make even greater efforts to achieve the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), We have
scarcely exhausted the resolution's potential as an
important guide in defining the roles of women in
conflict prevention and settlement and in post-conflict
reconstruction. That is made particularly clear by
States' commitment to the full and effective
implementation of the resolution, as reaffirmed in the
outcome document (resolution 60/1) of the 2005
summit.

In a so-called era of fulfilling commitments, we
need to make practical use of the resolution's
provisions by establishing equal opportunity for active
participation by women in all efforts to maintain and
promote peace and security and by enhancing women's
role in decision-making. We believe that, in the near
future, gender perspectives must be given their
appropriate place in the activities of the Peacebuilding
Commission, whose mandate should be elaborated with
a view to the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). On the whole, the centre of activities in this
area should be shifted from the Security Council to
specific everyday situations in international life. Of
course, reliable results will be achieved only in the
context of naturally developing processes.

A good basis for mobilizing the efforts of United
Nations agencies is being established through the
system-wide action plan for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), set out in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2005/636). We welcome the
plan's detailed identification of concrete activities that
will enable us to focus the Organization's activities on
implementing a system-wide strategy for dealing with
problems in the area of women and peace and security.

We note the opportunities that the plan provides
for strengthening inter-agency coordination and
structural accountability. In that connection, it is
important that gender mainstreaming in the field not be
merely a declared intention, but rather that it produce
concrete results that protect and enhance the situation
of women and girls in conflict and post-conflict
situations. We also welcome the intention of the
Secretary-General, as reflected in his report on the
implementation of the summit outcome, to ensure
policies of zero tolerance with regard to sexual
exploitation by United Nations personnel.

Bearing in mind that women are able to play and
are already playing a greater role in all aspects of
conflict prevention and settlement, we support the
elaboration of a strategy to ensure full participation by
women in peace negotiations and in elections. In the
context of post-conflict reconstruction, we must make
greater use of the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women as an essential
document.

Moreover, we should devote greater attention to
gender mainstreaming in the work of United Nations
programmes and funds aimed at overcoming poverty in
post-conflict situations. We are thinking in particular of
strategies for enhancing women's participation in
decision-making on social and economic issues and in
the establishment of national frameworks for achieving
the Millennium Development Goals.

In conclusion, I should like to reaffirm our
conviction that the issue of women's participation in
peace processes will receive comprehensive and
priority consideration in the bodies of the United
Nations system.

