Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
was deeply shocked by the fatal shooting of the Russian
Ambassador to Turkey and by the terrorist incidents that
have occurred in other countries, including Germany
and Yemen. We offer our deepest condolences to the
victims and strongly condemn those acts of terrorism.
China takes a firm stand against all forms of terrorism
and supports the international community's counter-
terrorism efforts and actions.

China commends Spain's initiative to convene
today's open debate. We welcome Mr. Mariano Rajoy
Brey, President of the Government of Spain, who is
presiding over today's meeting. I thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon, Executive Director Fedotov,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Bangura, and the representatives of civil society for
their briefings.

Resolution 2331 (2016), unanimously adopted today
by the Security Council, will help the international
community combat trafficking in persons in conflict
areas and protect the rights and interests of women and
children in ajoint endeavour. Today, we are witnessing
the swift emergence ofproblems in regional hotspots, the
start of new conflicts and the continuance of protracted
ones, which all pose a serious threat to the survival and
dignity of the people in conflict situations, in particular
vulnerable groups such as women and children, making
them easier prey to violence and crime. It is incumbent
upon the international community to build synergies
to enhance the protection of the rights of women and
children in areas of armed conflict and strive to end the
trafficking of persons in such areas.

First, we must eradicate the root causes of conflict.
While fighting transnational organized crime with great
intensity and providing safety assurances for women
and children in conflict situations, the international
community should pay close attention to addressing the
root causes of conflict. It should intensify the political
approach used based on the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations in order to resolve
differences through dialogue and consultation. We
should focus on helping conflict torn countries boost
their economic and social development, embark on
sustainable development and steer clear of conflict
and war.

Secondly, we must step up the fight against terrorism
and transnational organized crime. Trafficking in
persons in areas of armed conflict has become the
source of funding for terrorist organizations and
transnational organized crime groups. The international
community should take coordinated, harmonized
action, apply uniform standards and employ political,
economic and cultural means in an integrated manner
in order to obstruct the channels of financing for
terrorist organizations and firmly suppress all forms of
terrorism and transnational, organized crime.

Thirdly, we should help conflict-torn countries
to strengthen their capacity-building. They bear the
primary responsibility for protecting the safety of their
women and children and combating human trafficking.
On the other hand, they are likely to be dealing with
practical difficulties such as a lack of resources and
capacity. While respecting national sovereignty,
the international community should provide these
countries, at their request, with constructive support,
focusing on assisting their capacity-building in the
areas of the fight against terrorism and border control.

Fourthly, we should deepen international
cooperation. The issue of human trafficking in conflict
situations involves countries of origin, transit and
destination. Those concerned should improve their
cooperation in areas such as border enforcement,
financial regulation and judicial assistance. The
United Nations and its subsidiary bodies, including the
Security Council, the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, should all leverage their
particular advantages, strengthen their coordination
and work together to address the issue.

China will continue to strengthen its cooperation
with Governments and the relevant international
organizations in order to effectively protect the rights
and interests of women and children, to combat
human trafficking in conflict situations and to jointly
safeguard international and regional peace, security,
stability and development.

