Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation would
like to express its appreciation to you, Mr. President,
and your delegation for convening this open meeting of
the Council on this important subject.

We also commend Namibia for its constructive
role in highlighting this subject, particularly in the
context of the Namibia Plan of Action on
"Mainstreaming a Gender Perspective in
Multidimensional Peace Support Operations". Given
the involvement of women in the twin issues of peace
and security, the Council's consideration of the subject
today is not only pertinent, but timely.

We would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his introductory remarks and also take this
opportunity to thank Assistant Secretary-General, Ms.
Angela King, the Special Adviser on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women, and Ms. Noeleen Heyzer, the
Executive Director of the United Nations Development
Fund for Women (UNIFEM) for their important
contributions. Their presentations were rich both with
ideas and proposals and with passion and commitment.

The Council has clearly acknowledged in several of its
resolutions and Presidential Statements the harmful
impact of conflict on women and children and the
grave implications of this, not only for peace and
security but also for socio-economic development.
Perhaps more than any other organ of the United
Nations, the Council is mindful of the fact that nearly
all of today's conflicts occur within national
boundaries, and that over 80 per cent of the victims are
civilians, mainly women and their children. In many
conflict situations, they are the most vulnerable
members of the population, often targeted with
impunity, but also often the most neglected.

Previous speakers have underscored the
importance of the Beijing Conference on Women in
highlighting the plight of women, particularly in
conflict situations. I will therefore not repeat what has
already been said other than to stress the importance of
the Beijing Platform for Action and the need for
sustained follow-up actions, particularly in the context
of women in situations of armed conflict.

Numerous reports have suggested that gender-
based abuses are not just an accident of war, nor
incidental adjuncts to armed conflict. Rather, these
forms of persecution reflect the inequalities and
indignities that women face in their everyday lives,
even in peacetime. The Special Rapporteur on violence
against women has suggested that gender-based crimes,
such as rape in situations of armed conflict, are not just
sexual but aggressive acts, because of the humiliation
and helplessness inflicted on the victims. The abuses
are used as instruments to punish, intimidate, coerce,
humiliate and degrade. They are inflicted both to cause
physical hurt to the victims as well as to humiliate a
community, an ethnic group or an enemy nation.

Events in conflict situations, such as in Kosovo,
Rwanda and Sierra Leone, have highlighted the
excesses that occurred, especially those affecting
women, in time of war. It is a matter of serious concern
that the same kind of atrocities take place all over the
world, wherever there is armed conflict, and that in
those situations, women and children are subjected to
grave violations of their human rights.

Owing to massive population dislocations in
conflict situations, women often become separated
from their children. Some have been forcefully
conscripted as combatants, while others have been
tortured, maimed, raped, or had their limbs amputated.
They have been subjected to other unspeakable crimes,
crimes against humanity. Most of these women become
highly traumatized because of the atrocities to which
they have been subjected or that they have witnessed.
In spite of all this, they try to cope with their scars -
real and psychological. Overnight they become heads
of households and have to take care of orphans, the
disabled and the aged. Most of them continue to
shoulder this burden while residing in displaced
persons and refugee camps with very meagre means for
survival.

In times of conflict, women play a significant role
in maintaining order in the family and society. Yet their
contributions as peace educators within the family and
their communities go unrecognized. Women are hardly
ever considered to be an integral and essential element
in political decisions, conflict resolution, peace-
building and peace processes.

Despite the important perspectives women have
with regard to conflict situations, peacemaking and
peacekeeping, they are under-represented in decision-
making positions at all levels. They are still
significantly under-represented in positions of political
decision-making and are unlikely to be involved in
decisions concerning State security. In some conflict
situations, such as in Sierra Leone, for instance, some
women who had worked with the rebels, in time came
to realize, often through dialogue with other women,
the futility of the conflict and especially their role in it,
and many of them could be used as channels to bring
peace. However, their role as channels of access and
communication between the warring groups are often
ignored in official peace-mediating initiatives. In the
post-conflict phase, the emphasis on the more formal
levels of establishing systems of governance through
political parties frequently leaves out the role and
voices of women, who, at the informal and community
levels, may have much to contribute in helping define
terms for peace and security.

Although the problems have been recognized,
more needs to be done in terms of follow-up actions.
Several remedial actions have been identified in a
number of important initiatives on women, such as the
Namibia Plan of Action, as well as the 1996 Machel
Report and the 2000 Machel Review. Many of these
have been highlighted by Ms. King and Ms. Heyzer, as
well as by other previous speakers. For reasons of
brevity I shall not repeat them, other than express
Malaysia's support for many of them and our intent to
work constructively both in the Council, as well as in
other organs of the United Nations.

An increase in the number of women in decision-
making positions, as well as in peacekeeping, is
crucial, but this is not all that is required. Gender
impact must be a central concern in all decisions and
actions with regard to peace and security and also in
programmes of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of ex-combatants.

Gender mainstreaming as the process for
assessing the implications for women of any planned
public action in any area, including security, peace-
building, peacemaking and peacekeeping, has been
endorsed by the Beijing Platform for Action, as well as
by the Commission on the Status of Women. Thanks to
the Namibia Plan of Action, among others, a study
assessing the extent to which a gender perspective is
included in all stages of peacekeeping operations is
now being undertaken within the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations. Clearly, important steps have
been taken in giving substance to the role of women in
peace and security. All of these measures must be
followed-up and sustained. Today's meeting of the
Council and the resolution that will be adopted
contribute substantively to these efforts and I should
like to congratulate the Namibian Presidency for the
success of this debate.

May I conclude with something, which I think is
most appropriate on this occasion, to acknowledge the
role of women, including the two outstanding guest
speakers who have addressed the Council.

I believe that Ralph Waldo Emerson said that a
sufficient definition of civilization is the influence of
good women. I am not sure that it was he who said this
but I would like to believe that it was said by a good
and reasonable man.

