Mrs. Samarasinghe (Sri Lanka): On behalf
of my delegation, let me first express our heartfelt
gratitude to all those delegations that have extended
their condolences and support to the Government and
people of Sri Lanka at this difficult time, as we face an
unprecedented challenge.

We congratulate Germany, as President of the
Council for the month of April, on having organized
this debate, especially as we approach the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000). We also thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2019/280) and the briefers for their
valuable comments.

As a troop-contributing country, Sri Lanka has
taken many steps with regard to sexual exploitation
and abuse in United Nations operations, including by
joining the Secretary-General's Circle of Leadership,
signing the Secretary-General's voluntary compact on
preventing and addressing sexual exploitation and abuse
and contributing to the United Nations Voluntary Trust
Fund for Victims of Trafficking in Persons, Especially
Women and Children.

The long, drawn-out conflict that Sri Lanka
experienced has left deep-seated scars on our society.
Women were major Victims. Orphans, war widows,
single mothers and women-headed households were
the legacy of that conflict. Heightened vulnerabilities,
especially during conflict, render women and girls
far more susceptible to violence, and my delegation
strongly condemns violence, intimidation, harassment
and abuse directed towards women in all its forms and
manifestations, whenever they occur.

As Sri Lanka engages in rebuilding our society and
healing our communities through reconciliation and
justice mechanisms, we are committed to addressing
the immediate concerns of women and girls by
empowering them, providing them a safe space in which
to speak out and making them equal participants in all
areas of peacebuilding and peacekeeping. Sri Lanka's
Administration has approved a set of recommendations
presented by the Prime Minister on preventing sexual
and gender-based violence. Those recommendations
include the formulation and enforcement of laws to
combat violence against women and girls and the
introduction of social protection measures.

With regard to allegations of sexual violence
during the period of the conflict, the Government
has established mechanisms to ensure the right to
justice. In 2016, Sri Lanka endorsed the Declaration
of Commitment to End Sexual Violence in Conflict.
Noting the concerns raised regarding alleged sexual
violence, a series of directives have been issued by
the President of Sri Lanka with regard to alleged
human rights violations. Action has also been taken
to prosecute the perpetrators of reported incidences of
rape by individual members of the security forces.

There are several action plans that focus on sexual
and gender-based violence in the country. In line with
the underlying principle of zero tolerance for sexual
and gender-based violence in Sri Lanka, the policy
framework and national plan of action to address sexual
and gender-based violence, launched in November
2016, provide a holistic policy guideline to address the
issue of violence against women.

Awareness-raising programmes have also been
conducted by the Government, as well as civil
society organizations, on zero tolerance for gender-
based violence, legal protections and institutional
mechanisms for women at the grass-roots level. The
Ministry of Women and Child Affairs has its own
units in former conflict areas. Women development
officers and counsellors have taken a keen interest in
providing victim-centred rehabilitation for victims of
violence. Psychosocial counselling as a healing process
is available and given to women victims of violence by
the Office of National Unity and Reconciliation.

One recent phenomenon that has emerged regarding
sexual and gender-based violence is the request made
by civil society organizations to take measures to
address the biases that operate against victim survivors
as a result of the stigma associated with the incident.
They have also requested that the Government develop
guidelines to encourage stakeholders to take the
initiative to act with responsibility in order to enable
victim survivors and their families to participate in
society as equals.

