Ms. Olamendi (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): In
this forum many initiatives have been negotiated to
promote international peace and to preserve human
dignity. In the Council Chamber revolutionary
resolutions have also been adopted on crucial issues
such as the promotion of disarmament, the protection
of civilians in armed conflict and the promotion of
democracy. Many countries have overcome war and
hunger thanks to efforts made in this Chamber.

Today, we are meeting to mark the fourth
anniversary of the adoption of the Council's resolution
1325 (2000), which was the result of the determination
of members to tackle the troubling issue of violence
against women in armed conflicts, as well as the
marginalization of women in decision-making
processes relating both to prevention and to
reconstruction. Unfortunately, despite that
determination, there have been many obstacles to
implementing resolution 1325 (2000), and today we are
confronting the sad fact that progress in carrying out
the actions set out in that important initiative remains
very limited.

In that connection, my country would like
explicitly to acknowledge all the actors in the
international community that are committed to this
issue, particularly the United Nations Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) for its significant
work in mainstreaming a gender perspective into its
daily work. Without a doubt, the most tangible results
in achieving the objectives of the resolution have been
obtained in that sphere.

Similarly, we cannot fail to congratulate the
United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM) for all its work through these years to
promote and realize the precepts contained in the
resolution. UNIFEM's work in all corners of the world
is admirable and provides a role model. The recent
Conference on Gender Justice in Post-Conflict
Situations, held from 15 to 17 September 2004, whose
report identifies the major obstacles remaining to the
inclusion of women in the process of reconstruction,
thereby guaranteeing lasting peace, is only one
example of UNIFEM's important work.

As can be noted, the tools and work plan are at
hand. Unfortunately, we cannot achieve our objectives
if we continue to work in an isolated and fragmented
fashion. We urgently need an integrated and
coordinated strategy and we must begin to forge it
here, within this Organization.

It is of paramount importance that the gender
perspective permeate each and every body in our
Organization. The content of resolution 1325 (2000)
must be ingrained in the daily work of the Main
Committees of the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council and the Secretariat. Our strategy
must include internal reform, reflected in greater
inclusion of women in key United Nations posts, such
as special representatives of the Secretary-General. The
reform must also be outward-looking, with the
systematic inclusion of the principles of resolution
1325 (2000) in the resolutions adopted by the various
bodies of the United Nations and ongoing coordination
with regional organizations, Governments and civil
society, with a view to ensuring that those principles
are recognized even in the world's most marginalized
communities.

Another crucial issue is the need for follow-up
machinery to monitor international and national
progress - or backsliding - in implementation of the
resolution. Adopting the right decisions is not enough;
they must be implemented.

Women are increasingly a target of war, both
because of their civilian status and for the humiliation
that victims are made to feel because of the attitudes of
the societies in which they live. That situation can be
tolerated no longer.

We would like to reiterate that true accountability
cannot exist without the formulation and strict
implementation of laws that provide for punishments
commensurate with the crimes committed. In that
connection, we welcome the fact that gender-based
violence has been recognized as a crime against
humanity in international law. The challenge we now
face is to reflect that status in our national legislation.

We are strongly committed to securing the
objectives set forth in resolution 1325 (2000) in all of
their aspects, and we will continue to work actively to
that end, as we have in the past. However, we believe
that full implementation does not reside solely in the
formulation of laws and mechanisms, but will also
require a change in our mindset. Many continue to
believe that women are not valid interlocutors; that is
clearly reflected in women's very limited participation
in conflict prevention and peace processes. That is why
the education and training of women, men and children
is indispensable. While that is a long-term project,
there can be no doubt that it will produce sound results.
We should emphasize that the effort must be
coordinated, and we appeal to the international
community to strengthen the work of the United
Nations International Research and Training Institute
for the Advancement of Women in that connection.

Next year will provide another opportunity for us
to revitalize our work to promote women's rights. The
debate on possible reform of the Organization and the
follow-up to the Fourth World Conference on Women
provide platforms for demonstrating our political will
to take concrete action. We hope that this debate will
not remain mere lip service and that we take specific
decisions today to arrive at our destination.

