Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened this
high-level open debate on sexual violence in conflict.
I appreciate your efforts as President of the Security
Council for this month and wish you every success. I
also want to thank the Secretary-General, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and the briefers for their statements.

I congratulate the Security Council on its adoption
ofresolution 2467 (2019), on sexual violence in conflict.

Our world is experiencing an unprecedented wave
of violence and conflict, which various extremist
groups, such as Da'esh, Boko Haram and others, have
used as a tool to sow terrorism and terrorize societies,
in particular the most vulnerable and marginalized
groups, especially women and girls. We have seen
in Iraq, Syria, Myanmar and other countries serious
violations and heinous sexual violence being committed,
which have led to social and psychological trauma that
threatens the fabric of our societies and international
peace and security.

The coordinated and prompt response of the
international community and the United Nations
system is very essential to address the needs of women
survivors of violence and to rehabilitate them in their
societies and in areas of conflict. The role of civil
society organizations and local communities to that
end is also pivotal, without forgetting the importance
of collective international efforts in strengthening
accountability and laying the groundwork for justice.
Those are all extremely important factors in combatting
sexual violence in areas of conflict.

Jordan has always sought to be a major driving
force for peace and security. In spite of the challenges,
the lack of resources, the flow of refugees and our
geographical position in an area that has suffered from
conflicts, we have managed to transform many of
those challenges into opportunities to offer health care,
education and jobs, as well as to involve our men and
women in building, development and relief efforts.

The Syrian refugee crisis, as a result of which
we have hosted 1.3 million refugees, the majority of
whom are women and girls, demands joint efforts with
security and humanitarian organizations at all levels
in order to provide the refugees with services. This
flow of refugees has put various pressures on the host
communities and led to changes in attitude and social
behaviour that threaten peace and security in the host
communities and the refugee camps. Those changes
have had an impact on the situation of women and girls,
such as early and forced marriages, sexual and physical
Violence and a loss of civil and legal rights.

The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan has tackled those
challenges, in coordination with its various institutions,
in line with its national assistance plan for the Syrian
refugee crisis. To that end, we have established and
implemented mechanisms and measures such as
awareness-raising campaigns in local host communities
and refugee communities. Furthermore, we have
provided a wide range of education, health care and
legal services for the protection and empowerment of
women and girls, as well as to strengthen their resilience
and their ability to adapt. In addition, we have launched
job and rehabilitation programmes to allow male and
female refugees to earn a livelihood, be rehabilitated
and work so that they will be able to return voluntarily
and safely to their country and communities.

Based on my country's conviction that women play
an important role in establishing and building national,
regional and international peace and security in line
with resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace
and security, the Jordanian National Commission for
Women, with the broad participation of civil society
actors, launched a 2018-2021 national plan to implement
resolution 1325 (2000). The plan is based on four
main pillars: participation, protection, assistance and
recovery. The plan also meets the strategic goals for
armed conflict set out in the 1995 Beijing Declaration,
including strengthening the participation of women in
operations to prevent conflicts, building and enhancing
peace, security and stability, resolving conflicts,
decision-making and participating in peacekeeping
operations. The national plan also takes into account
our Kingdom's commitment to the 2030 Sustainable
Development Goals and focuses on the role of youth and
men as partners in supporting women's participation
and strengthening efforts to prevent and resolve armed
conflicts. The plan also reflects Jordan's commitment
to respecting human rights and promoting the principles
ofjustice, equality and participation.

As a pioneer among countries that combat terrorism
and violent extremism, Jordan seeks to address
terrorism and fight violent extremism. It is also keen
to protect women and girls from the danger of violent
extremism. We stress the key and pivotal role ofwomen
in guarding societies against extremism and promoting
a culture of peace. We underscore our collective
responsibility to establish peace as a priority and to
combat all attempts to sow sedition, hatred and sexual
violence. In that regard, we underline the importance of
ensuring the necessary funding for the implementation
of our national, regional and international plans.

