Mr. Kerim: May I begin by thanking Secretary
Rice for having convened this important meeting on
sexual violence in armed conflict situations. I would
also like to express my gratitude to Ambassador
Khalilzad for his invitation to address the Security
Council today.

Today's debate focuses on a security issue that
has deep social consequences. As Secretary Rice
rightly pointed out in her introductory remarks, the
effectiveness of national institutions should be
measured by their ability to protect the most vulnerable
members of society, particularly women and children. I
would like to add, in the same context, that the
effectiveness of international institutions should also
be measured by the degree of protection they afford to
the most vulnerable members of society - women and
children - and that applies especially to the United
Nations.

During the General Assembly thematic debate on
human security, held in May, member States
emphasized the importance of more effectively
integrating human security perspectives into the peace
and security work of the United Nations. That is
particularly important as this year we are marking the
sixtieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights.

Comprehensive, integrated and people-centred
solutions at the crossroads of security, development
and human rights must be at the heart of our efforts to
fight gender-based crimes against women and girls in
conflict situations.

To that end, the Assembly adopted a
groundbreaking resolution during that session urging
all member States to take special measures to eliminate
rape and other forms of sexual violence in conflict
situations. Among other measures, the resolution calls
on the United Nations system to integrate programmes
to eliminate violence against women throughout its
work.

The Security Council took a principled view of
some of those issues in 2000 by adopting resolution
1325 (2000), which, for the first time, specifically
addressed the impact of war on women. It also
acknowledged that women's contribution to conflict
resolution had been undervalued and underutilized.

While some progress has been made in a number
of areas covered by the resolution, several reviews
have revealed that much stronger and more coordinated
efforts are needed to fully implement its provisions.

We all have to do more to prevent human rights
violations against women and girls in situations of
armed conflict, to do more to punish the perpetrators
and to end the impunity of those who commit war
crimes.

Armed conflict has a disproportionately negative
impact on women. Sexual violence against women is
not only an affront to our human dignity but an
inherent and grave threat to our human security. When

it is authorized and perpetrated as an instrument of war,
one cannot express in words the utter indecency of it.

It is my strong belief that women must be
guaranteed equal and full participation in conflict
resolution and peacebuilding processes and be
represented in the structures and institutions born of
any peace dividend in order to ensure that it lasts.

The interconnected nature of the issues we are
discussing today were highlighted at the General
Assembly's recent high-level debate on human
trafficking, which also considered aspects of sexual
violence against women and girls. Our discussions
illustrated that in many instances human trafficking for
sexual exploitation is intrinsically linked with conflict
situations. Human trafficking thrives against the
backdrop of conflict, poverty and discrimination.
Members of the General Assembly all committed
themselves to do more to put the existing normative
framework into practice globally.

I would also like to highlight the General
Assembly's work on the rights of the child, which lead
to the establishment of the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, and the Security Council's
working group on this issue, which demonstrates that
together we can effectively tackle issues that span
security and human rights.

It is clear that when the General Assembly and
the Security Council take a principled stand and
increase our visibility and coordination on cross-
cutting issues, such as sexual violence in armed
conflict situations, the overall effectiveness and
credibility of the United Nations is strengthened.

I hope that we can continue to engage in a
productive policy dialogue on this and other human
security issues that affect our work and our common
mission.

