Ms. Bakuramutsa (Rwanda) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to thank the French presidency
for convening today's important debate.
(spoke in English)

We are also grateful to all the briefers this morning for
their insightful remarks.

It has been almost exactly 17 years to the day since
the international community recognized the urgent
importance of mainstreaming a gender perspective
into peacekeeping and multidimensional peace support
operations. On this anniversary, we must take stock of
the progress we have been able to make and of what
still remains for us to accomplish, individually and
collectively. My delegation welcomes the Secretary-
General's efforts to mainstream this agenda within
the ongoing reforms of the United Nations peace and
security architecture and recognize the collaborative
advantage that it will confer on the Joint United Nations-
African Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security.

The participation ofwomen in peace and security is
not only the right thing to do but also the smart thing to
do, as it is a proven fact that when women are involved
in conflict prevention and efforts to achieve unity and
reconciliation, as well as peacebuilding, sustainable
outcomes are achieved. Women contribute added
value in addressing especially critical issues, such as

protecting children's rights, combating gender-based
violence and promoting human rights.

After listening to the briefers for today's debate, it
is clear that blocking women's rights and empowerment
has direct negative effects on society as a whole.
During the genocide in Rwanda against the Tutsi, rape
and other forms of violence were primarily directed at
women not just to degrade them individually but also to
strip the humanity from the larger community of which
they were a part. As situations of armed conflict and
violent extremism continue to prevail in many parts
of the world, with women and children bearing the
primary burden, we must work steadfastly to empower
women and encourage their participation in the entire
spectrum of peace processes and in the promotion of
the rule of law, good governance and mediation.

As a regional initiative, the East African
Community, in collaboration with the African Union,
has developed a regional implementation framework
to enhance women's leadership in conflict prevention,
peacebuilding and mainstreaming gender in security
policymaking, and to ensure that women's rights are
protected in humanitarian crises, transitional contexts
and post-conflict situations. It is important to note that
the action plan also ensures that activities related to
women and peace and security are not seen as stand-
alone efforts but rather as an integral part of regional
peace and security discussions that are in line with
promoting gender equality.

Nationally, the Government of Rwanda, bringing
to bear strong political will, has made great strides
in empowering women to fully participate in all
sectors and fields, an approach complemented by
the fact that private-sector, civil-society, religious
and non-governmental organizations are also taking
ownership of the part they play in the empowerment and
advancement of women. In addition, we have adopted
a national action plan in order to fast-track existing
national mechanisms and frameworks for implementing
resolution 1325 (2000). The plan is based on two pillars,
the first being that of promoting the equal participation
of women and men in all peace initiatives at all levels,
and the second of integrating gender perspectives into
peace and security efforts.

Individually and collectively, we have a long way
to go, but we can achieve the meaningful and long-term
changes we seek if we continue to put women at the
centre of our agenda. In conclusion, Rwanda stands
ready to work with Member States, the Secretary-
General and the United Nations as a whole, particularly
UN-Women, to make this agenda a success.

