The President (spoke in Spanish): Sadly, we must
once again open a meeting by reiterating our firmest
condemnation of the cruel terrorist attacks that have
occurred in recent days, adding to the painfully long
list of such attacks. On Sunday, terrorist attacks were
carried out in Aden and Karak, Jordan, followed
yesterday by attacks in Berlin and Ankara, the latter
against His Excellency Mr. Andrey Karlov, Ambassador
of the Russian Federation to Turkey. I offer our sincere
condolences to the families of the victims and wish the
injured a speedy recovery.

In demonstration of the pain we share with all the
victims of terrorism and our firm rejection of these
cowardly terrorist attacks, I would now ask Council
members to rise and observe a minute of silence.

The members of the Council observed a minute
ofsilence.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Maintenance of international peace and security
Trafficking in persons in conflict situations

Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of measures to counter
trafficking in persons (S/2016/949)

Letter dated 2 December 2016 from
the Permanent Representative of Spain
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2016/103l)

The President (spoke in Spanish): I wish to warmly
welcome the Secretary-General, Ministers and other
distinguished representatives present in the Security
Council Chamber. Their presence today underscores
the importance of the subject matter under discussion.

In accordance with rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium, Brazil,
Cambodia, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Cote d'Ivoire,
Eritrea, Germany, Greece, Haiti, Hungary, India,
Indonesia, Ireland, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel,
Italy, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg,
Mexico, Morocco, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, the Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia,
Slovakia, South Africa, Thailand, Turkey and Uganda
to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Yury Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime; Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict; Ms. Ameena Saeed Hasan, civilian
activist for Yazidi women's rights; Ms. Nadia Murad
Basee Taha, Goodwill Ambassador for the Dignity of
Survivors of Human Trafficking and recent Vaclav
Havel Prize and Sakharov Prize winner; Mr. Ashraf
Nour, Director of the International Organization for
Migration Office to the United Nations; His Excellency
Mr. Gonzalo Koncke, Permanent Observer of the
Organization of American States to the United Nations;
and Mr. Emmanuel Roux, Special Representative, Office
of the International Criminal Police Organization.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Myria
Vassiliadou, Anti-Trafficking Coordinator of the
European Union, to participate in this meeting.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document 8/2016/949, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of measures
to counter trafficking in persons. I wish to also draw the
attention of Council members to document S/2016/103l,
which contains a letter dated 2 December 2016 from the
Permanent Representative of Spain to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept paper on the item under consideration.

I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, to whom I now give
the floor.


