Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt): At the outset, allow me
to pay tribute to Jordan for taking the initiative to
convene this meeting. We would also like to express
our appreciation to Ms. Zainab Bangura, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, and her team for the preparation
of the informative report before us (S/2015/203). Egypt
also commends the activities of United Nations Action
against Sexual Violence in Conflict and the activities
of the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict.

Our meeting today is very timely, falling one month
after of the adoption of the political declaration of the
Commission on the Status of Women, which reflects
the international community's firm commitment
to tackling the challenges and remaining gaps in
implementation in all 12 critical areas of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action - including, inter
alia, Violence against women, and women and armed
conflict.

This year's report of the Secretary-General on
conflict-related sexual violence highlights several
emerging concerns, including the perpetration of sexual
violence not only as a tactic of war but also as a tactic
of terror and extremism. In response to those concerns,
the report sets out important recommendations,
including on the need to promote gender equality and
the empowerment of women in order to address the root
causes of conflict-related sexual violence, transform
harmful social norms and counter the rise of extremism.

In that regard, Egypt would like to highlight
several points. First, the threat of terrorism, both in its
magnitude and diversity, remains one of the gravest
challenges not only to international peace and security,
but also to human dignity. It has affected all aspects
of our life. It threatens the security and sovereignty
of States, the rule of law, freedom and developmental
aspects of our societies.

Secondly, sexual violence in conflict is a serious
Violation of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. In that regard, Egypt
stresses the importance of zero tolerance for sexual
violence, ensuring the accountability of its perpetrators
by all possible means, whether they have committed,
commanded or condoned those crimes.
Thirdly, to eliminate conflict-related sexual Violence,
efforts must be made to diminish the capacity of
non-State terrorist groups in Iraq, Syria, Somalia,
Nigeria, Mali, Libya and Yemen that perpetrate sexual
violence. The international community must be fully
committed to using all means to combat those non-State
terrorist groups.

Fourthly, more financial resources have to be
secured for the expeditious implementation of the
agenda on women, peace and security, with special
attention given to conflict-related sexual violence.

Egypt also believes that it is of utmost importance
to address the issue of sexual Violence during the early
stages of peace processes, through mediation efforts
and ceasefire and peace agreements, particularly in
security arrangement provisions, transitional justice
and reparations. Due attention must be given to the
survivors of conflict-related sexual violence as an
integral part of States' obligations towards them,
including by implementing mechanisms aimed at
preventing the recurrence of such crimes, as well
as providing them with all required services and
assistance, including rehabilitation and reintegration
efforts.

