Mr. Nkosi (South Africa): At the outset, I would
like to thank and commend you, Mr. President, and
the Permanent Mission of Germany for organizing this
important and pertinent debate. Like other speakers,
I also want to take this opportunity to express South
Africa's condemnation of the recent terrorist attacks in
Sri Lanka and to express our solidarity with the people
and Government of Sri Lanka as they mourn their
deaths and their loss.

I would like to express South Africa's gratitude to
Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and his Special
Representative, Ms. Pramila Patten, as well as to our
distinguished briefers, Dr. Denis Mukwege, Ms. Nadia
Murad, Ms. Amal Clooney and Ms. Inas Miloud, for
their extremely informative and enlightening briefings
and for the heart-wrenching testimonials that we heard
this morning.

I also associate my delegation with the statement
to be delivered on behalf of the 54 member States of
the African Union (AU) on this very important subject.

South Africa believes that violence against
women is a serious crime that warrants more urgent
and decisive action by the international community.
Sexual violence, wherever it occurs, fundamentally
dehumanizes its victims and irreparably damages their
human dignity. Sexual violence in conflict is often used
as an act of war to achieve psychological, military and
political objectives and control. In areas rich in natural
resources such as our continent, sexual violence is used
to depopulate, displace and terrorize communities. The
devastating effects of sexual violence have a lasting
impact on survivors, who have to deal with post-
conflict challenges that include trauma, revictimization
and stigmatization in their communities.

While we know that anyone can fall victim to
sexual violence, we find it deeply disturbing that
women and girls continue to be disproportionately
affected. Many also live through the prolonged
trauma of raising children born of rape, who are often
rejected by society and deprived of their rights and
access to social services. That is why gender-sensitive
responses and programmes must be tailored to be
survivor-oriented. South Africa firmly believes that
the survivors of sexual violence must be provided with
essential services, in line with our long-held position
that sexual and reproductive health services are not
only an important component of the right to health
but are critical to women's empowerment generally.
In the context of sexual Violence in conflict, a lack of
access to such services threatens the most sacrosanct of
all human rights, the right to life itself. In spite of the
lateness of the hour, South Africa still hopes that the
Council can agree on a consensus draft resolution that
protects survivors, holds perpetrators accountable and
metes out appropriate punishment to the perpetrators of
sexual violence in conflict.

To effectively address sexual violence in conflict,
South Africa believes that we need an integrated and
comprehensive approach. That includes providing
multisectoral services to ensure reintegration support
for survivors, including shelters. We must develop
appropriate economic livelihood programmes.
That is an integral part of societal prevention
mechanisms, conflict resolution, transitional justice
and peacebuilding. In line with the Framework of
Cooperation between the United Nations Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict and the African Union
Commission, South Africa acknowledges accountability
mechanisms as an important aspect of ways to prevent
sexual violence in conflict. The Framework is aimed at
assisting AU member States in combating impunity for
sexual violence in conflict and enhancing the capacity
of criminal justice systems in countries in conflict and
post-conflict to respond to suspected cases of sexual
violence in conflict.

The Council must show that it can make a perceptible
transition from rhetoric to reality when it comes to
dealing with the challenges that victims are confronted
with in their daily lives during armed conflict. We
need to strengthen accountability for perpetrators, with
survivors at the heart of our efforts.

South Africa supports the more frequent use of
measures under Chapter VI of the Charter of the United
Nations and the capacity-building of States to address
the matter at a national level in an integrated manner.

South Africa commends the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and the Team of Experts on the
Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict. We call
for the strengthening of their capacity so that they
are able to deliver on the mandate given to them by
the Council.

South Africa supports the recommendation of the
Secretary-General to strengthen our efforts aimed at
addressing sexual violence in armed conflict. That
includes, inter alia, first, sexual Violence as part of the
designation criteria for sanctions; secondly, addressing
the nexus between trafficking in persons and conflict-
related sexual Violence, in accordance with resolutions
2331 (2016) and 2388 (2017); thirdly, using field visits
to draw attention to concerns about sexual violence;
and, lastly, putting in place constitutional, legislative
and institutional arrangements to comprehensively
address conflict-related sexual violence.

The security sector of conflict and post-conflict
countries must be reformed so as to prevent and better
respond to sexual violence. In order to build effective,
non-discriminatory and representative security
institutions, it is essential that we provide personnel with
effective and sustainable gender training and capacity-
building. Access to justice for survivors of sexual
violence would also significantly contribute to a well-
functioning and gender-sensitive security framework.

Given the inextricable link between sexual
violence in conflict situations and gender inequality,
South Africa therefore advocates for the equal and
meaningful participation and full involvement of
women in all efforts for the maintenance and promotion
of peace and security. In that regard, Member States
must continually look at measures to strengthen the
full and effective implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) on women and peace and security, pioneered by
the sister Republic of Namibia, to whom we pay tribute
today. The resolution provides the basis for forming
partnerships with civil society, the private sector and
community-based organizations.

Finally, South Africa looks forward to continuing
this debate during our presidency in October as we
prepare for the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000) in 2020.

