Mr. Plasai (Thailand) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to to congratulate France on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.
Thailand welcomes the French initiative to hold
this open debate to hear the views of Member States
with regard to how to respond to sexual violence and
trafficking in persons in conflict situations. We also
thank the Secretary-General for his detailed report
(S/2016/361) on conflict-related sexual violence, as well
as all the briefers for their respective presentations.

The prevalence of human trafficking in conflict
situations is alarming, be it for sexual purposes, to
finance criminal or terrorist activities or to attract
or reward fighters. This complex issue raises grave
concerns and requires our immediate response and a
holistic approach.

States have the primary responsibility for prevention
and for protecting their citizens and persons under its
jurisdiction from falling victim to human trafficking.
States must build their operational capacity to detect,
investigate and disrupt human trafficking and migrant
smuggling. One of the priorities is to tackle the root
causes of conflict.

Focus must be placed on those most at risk,
including undocumented refugees and displaced
persons, as well as unaccompanied women and children
affected by conflict. They are in most cases victims
of sexual violence and human trafficking prior to and
during their flight, in exchange for crossing borders,
passage to camps or shelters, and access to personal
documentation and refugee status. Such crimes are
often committed by Government officials. States must
ensure that preventive measures are in place and strictly
enforced and that those involved are prosecuted.

The sharing of intelligence among States of
origin, transit and destination, as well as with regional
and international organizations, is crucial in the
fight against sexual violence and human trafficking.
Civil society, particularly networks of women's
organizations, can play an active and efficient role in
preventing such crimes. States must work closely with
them and other stakeholders so as to address this issue
in a more integrated manner.

The use of sexual violence as a tactic of war and
terror constitutes a war crime and a crime against
humanity. Perpetrators must be brought to justice.
Putting an end to impunity is one of the most urgent
tasks at hand.

The Security Council should strengthen its regime
of targeted sanctions against individuals and entities
involved in conflict-related sexual violence and
human trafficking. After sanctions are imposed, it is
also necessary to put in place effective monitoring
mechanisms to ensure that sanctions are fully and
effectively implemented.

The presence of female peacekeepers helps create
a safer environment for women and girls. Given the
importance of reporting and monitoring mechanisms
in addressing conflict-related sexual violence, female
peacekeepers can also be a trusted channel for reporting
and information-sharing. This is crucial to enable
victims to gain access to legal assistance and medical
treatment and to allow the authorities to identify and
prosecute those who have committed sexual violence or
are involved in trafficking networks.

Against that backdrop, Thailand has made
consistent efforts to train Thai female peacekeepers
to address conflict-related sexual violence and human
trafficking, as well as to increase their number in the
contingent. We also support the efforts of the United
Nations to appoint more gender adviser and women
protection officers, as well as to integrate a gender
perspective into the implementation of peacekeeping
mandates, both at the policy and operational levels.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that the
international community can count on Thailand's
commitment to and active engagement in this
important issue.

