Ms. Quintos Deles (Philippines): History has not
failed to remind us about the scars and wounds of war,
deeply etched in humankind's soul, with war's trail of
blood that always leads to a bleeding woman's doorstep
and a weeping child's nightmare. The time has come
for all Governments to ensure that women are given a
greater role in preventing armed conflict or, once it has
broken out, in resolving it and ensuring its enduring
and inclusive peace dividends.

In the Philippines, we are now striving to
accomplish both. Our current endeavours draw their
context from long decades of an internal armed conflict
involving various armed fronts, and our current peace
agenda involves five peace tables. The signing by
the Philippine Government of the comprehensive
agreement on the Bangsamoro with the Moro Islamic
Liberation Front on 27 March 2014 was historic, not
only because it signalled the end of a long-standing
war in the Southern Philippines, but also because it is
the first agreement of its kind in the world to bear the
signature of a total of three women, who accounted for
one half of the negotiating panel of the Government and
about one fourth of the total number of its signatories.
It is the first such agreement to bear the signature of a
woman as chief negotiator, Ms. Miriam Coronel-Ferrer.

Moreover, 69 per cent of the secretariat of the
Government panel, including its head, and 60 per cent of
the legal team, including its head, are women. The heads
of those bodies are under the ages of 35 and 30 years,
respectively. The Government panel has committed to
enforce the right of women to "meaningful political
participation and protection from all forms of violence"
in its source document, the framework agreement,
which yielded concrete, gender-sensitive provisions in
the agreement's four annexes, as well as in the draft
Bangsamoro basic law, now pending approval in our
Congress. Today, women representatives in Congress
are among the staunchest champions of the proposed
law, while, on the side of the executive branch, a
woman co-chairs the joint normalization committee,
which oversees multiple security, transitional justice
and socioeconomic interventions aimed at ensuring
that peace will endure - not only in the law, but on
the ground.

In 2010, the Philippine Government adopted our
national action plan on women and peace and security,
becoming the first country in Asia to do so. Initiated by
civil society and peace and women's rights organizations,
the Philippine national action plan rests on four pillars.
There are two targeted outputs, briefly identified as
protection and prevention, and empowerment and
participation; and two cross-cutting support processes,
namely, promotion and mainstreaming, and monitoring
and evaluation.

The story of the Philippine national action plan may
be best told through the metaphor of weaving, more
specifically, mat-weaving, which is common to most
Asian countries. Just as weaving is not learned overnight,
but goes back generations, the Philippine national
action plan benefits from decades of consciousness-
raising and organizing on the part of women, peace
and human rights advocates. The Philippine national
action plan condenses time. But, like a good mat, in
which all the fibre strands are pulled tightly together,
it also condenses space. Building on civil society's
energies, wisdom and experience, it wagers on the
Government and its instrumentalities - in a word, the
bureaucracy - to be the bearers of gender equality and
women's empowerment.

Today, the Philippine national action plan has been
anchored and provided a legal basis by Philippine law,
led by the Magna Carta of women and recent legislation
that has adopted human rights and international
humanitarian standards. We also have an earlier
law that requires all Government agencies and local
Government units to allocate at least 5 per cent of their
budgets to a dedicated gender and development fund,
thereby ensuring the availability of funds for immediate
start-up and mobilization needs.

It has not been left to one agency to implement
the national action plan, but rather strands of the
Government bureaucracy are woven in with the
establishment of a national steering committee, initially
composed ofthe heads ofnine Government agencies, to
which eight additional agencies were added. They are
involved in implementing the Government's PAMANA
programme, which provides development and good
governance interventions in conflict-affected areas.
Altogether, PAMANA operates in over half of our
provinces.

From the beginning, we did not want the national
action plan to end up as just another document that
might be good to read and display on the bookshelf, but
is neither implemented nor practiced. In the same way
that mats have a history of long, hard and sometimes
rough use in Philippine households, we intend for the
national action plan to be a felt presence, making a
difference in women's lives.

The implementation of the Philippine national
action plan is a painstaking process, because we want
to cover all of the bases, including policy, planning,
implementation and monitoring mechanisms, as well
as budget considerations. Modest initial results are
being reported. Among the outcomes already being
gleaned are the increased presence of women in peace
negotiations and the implementation of peace accords,
the establishment of women-friendly spaces that
provide the necessary measure of private and safe space
for internally displaced women and girls in evacuation
centres, the adoption of explicit gender-equality policies
and mechanisms as an integral part of the governance
of the armed forces of the Philippines, culture-sensitive
trauma-healing programmes for Muslim women, the
inclusion of women and peace and security issues in
the training programmes for foreign-service officers,
and the plan to establish a dedicated team of public
prosecutors for cases of sexual- and gender-based
violence in conflict-affected areas. Additionally, local
Government units in those areas have been given the
means to issue their local versions of the national
action plan, which complements major funding support
from their own resources. And, just two weeks ago,
we launched the first Government executive course on
women and peace and security, in partnership with a
leading national university.

The past five years have enabled us to
weave a meticulous overlay of legal frameworks,
implementation structures, institutional mandates and,
of course, as always, personal passions and inclusive
and intergenerational intentions. We must ensure
that the national action plan that we have begun to
weave will endure the forthcoming transition to a
new Administration in 2016. Its strands, emanating
from strategic programmes of national and local
implementing agencies, must be strengthened and
enhanced in both protecting and empowering women,
with the aim of bringing all Philippine internal armed
conflicts to a peaceful,just and lasting end. The national
action plan should be useful. It should be durable. It
should make a difference one can feel on one's skin.

Wejoin the urgent call for all United Nations States
Members to adopt a national action plan and weave it
tightly and strongly to truly make a felt difference in
the lives of women and children caught in the middle of
today's most violent conflicts.

