Mr. Ben Mustapha (Tunisia) (spoke in French):
I would first of all like to express our appreciation to
you, Mr. President, and to Ambassador Andjaba, for
turning the attention of the Security Council to such an
important subject as the one before us today.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
declare my country's interest in any exchange of views
in the Council having to do with humanitarian concerns
resulting from conflict situations. We welcome the fact
that the Council has given particular attention in recent
years to such varied aspects of conflict situations as the
plight of refugees and displaced persons, the protection
of children in armed conflict, the protection of civilians
during armed conflict and the protection of
humanitarian personnel.

All these topics having been considered and
debated in recent months, it is certainly worthwhile to
underscore the importance of today's topic of debate:
women and peace and security. The Council's

participation in this area is particularly valuable, as the
struggle to eliminate all forms of discrimination against
women - and in particular in conflict situations -
and to promote their rights is far from over, and should
mobilize us all.

As has just been eloquently stated by the
Secretary-General, Ms. King and Ms. Heyzer, women
and girls were, and continue to be, the primary targets
of all sorts of discriminatory violence. Indeed, they are
among the first victims of armed conflict and are often
reduced to the role of human shields in the hands of
belligerents. Along with children, women represent 80
per cent of refugees and displaced persons, and are the
first to suffer the worst acts of sexist violence, in
particular rape and other forms of sexual abuse. They
also constitute the majority of the victims of anti-
personnel landmines, and are the most exposed to the
scourge of HIV/AIDS because of increased sexual
violence and the failure of health systems. As new
conflicts erupt and tension and warfare intensify in
various parts of the world, the number of poor and
defenceless women suffering the horrors of violence
and displacement increases, their traditional role is
often changed overnight and their workload increases
considerably.

The rights of women and girls constitute an
inalienable, integral and indivisible part of universal
human rights. Their suffering in armed conflict is a
violation of international law on the protection and
rights of civilians, which is fully applicable to women
and girls, in particular the 1949 Geneva Convention
and the obligations under its Additional Protocol of
1977 and the 1989 United Nations Convention on the
Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocol of 25
May 2000. In this regard, we join the appeals made to
the parties to every armed conflict to scrupulously and
fully respect international law. We also believe that it is
up to States to put an end to impunity and to punish
those found guilty of crimes, including extortion and
acts of sexist violence, against women and girls.

We encourage the mainstreaming of a gender
perspective in all multidimensional peace operations,
both at the national and international levels. We also
encourage the undertaking of an analysis of gender
equality in order to promote gender mainstreaming
during the planning of policies, strategies and
programmes for peace and security.

In addition to Tunisia's commitment to gender
equality and its policy of fostering the rights and
improving the status of women, we recognize the
important role women can play in all areas, including
in conflict prevention, the maintenance of peace and
peace-building. In this connection, we support the
participation of women in peacekeeping operations and
in disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes. As women are the ones most exposed to
the devastating effects of anti-personnel landmines, we
stress the importance of educating them about the
dangers of mines and about the intensive use of mine-
detection techniques.

I would also like to draw attention to the adverse
effects on women and girls of sanctions, which
increase their vulnerability. Recent experience has
indeed shown that sanctions have extremely negative
consequences on civilians, and in particular on children
and women.

Apart from their role in the economic and social
spheres, women are increasingly playing an active role
in the area of peace. In this regard, we would like to
express our appreciation for the leading role played in
the United Nations system by the United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM), one of
whose top priorities is the elimination of all forms of
violence against women. UNIFEM. must continue its
efforts to promote the effective implementation of
international conventions, particularly the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
Against Women.

In that regard, we support UNIFEM's efforts to
promote women's participation in the decision-making
process at all levels of peace-building, as well as its
efforts in developing women's capacity-building in the
area of conflict prevention and resolution. Moreover,
the multidimensional nature of peacekeeping
operations - in particular with regard to their political
aspect, the protection of children, the holding of
elections, refugee reintegration, humanitarian
assistance and the protection of humanitarian workers,
demining, institutional capacity-building at the local
level and human rights - offers women an opportunity
to contribute to peace and security, which will
definitely help to improve the protection of women and
young girls in situations of armed conflict.

We believe that women's commitment to peace is
crucial in ensuring that peace agreements signed by
political and military factions hold. We are also
convinced that there must be real change not only in
the words of the laws themselves, but also in people's
mindsets and in social practices.

We hope that today's debate will help break that
silence and that it will lead to a denunciation of
violence against women in all its forms- physical,
psychological and moral - especially in armed
conflict. We wish also to express our support for
initiatives and institutional measures to protect women
and ensure their safety and security, particularly in
armed conflict; we appeal to all States to cooperate to
that end.

Finally, we emphasize the importance of
implementing appropriate preventive measures to
resolve conflicts, especially the use of dispute-
settlement mechanisms set up by the United Nations
and by other organizations such as the Organization of
African Unity. We stress further the importance of the
effective contribution that women can make in this
regard.

