Mr. Savua (Fiji): We align ourselves with the
statement made by the Permanent Representative of
Samoa on behalf of the Pacific Islands Forum. We
thank the Secretary-General for the action plan on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on women
and peace and security across the United Nations
system, contained in document S/2005/636 of 10
October 2005. The report is very comprehensive and
written with a View to strengthening commitment and
accountability at the highest levels and to allowing for
improved accountability, monitoring and reporting on
progress of implementation of the United Nations
system.

Over the years, we in Fiji have always been
mindful of the role of women in our society. We do not
question their importance or the critical role they play
in the development of our nation. The Secretary-
General's action plan is most welcome, as it has
opened new avenues for the consideration of issues
that may have been bypassed or regarded as too
difficult.

Women in Fiji have served alongside their men in
peacekeeping operations. They have moved away from
their traditional roles of working only in the logistics
supporting areas to front-line operations. These women
are volunteers and like to serve in the promotion of
international peace and security.

Most senior posts in United Nations
peacekeeping operations are occupied by men. We
would like to see some women become the holders of
senior posts that would reflect their contributions. It is
high time that we extend our gratitude for their
contributions to peacekeeping and other areas.

One such area should be a commitment to
develop a national action plan for the coordinated
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). Such an
action plan should be public and be drawn up in
consultation with civil society. It should also contain
specific and time-bound activities, targets and
monitoring and reporting mechanisms.

Fiji and some of its neighbours will implement
the action plan with the assistance of the United
Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM),
which over the years has been supportive of the
launching of national policies and strategies to promote
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We expect
little change as a result of the efforts of UNIFEM. and
civil society this time around. However, as has been
stated, there must be some form of monitoring
mechanism to ensure that national action plans are
updated and that a review of the implementation of the
action plan is conducted annually, starting in October
2006.

For five years, the Security Council has been
seized of the issue of women and peace and security.
Now that we have an action plan, we ought to move
forward and establish a focal point and an expert-level
working group to ensure the integration of resolution
1325 (2000) into the Council's work. The plan is
another milestone with regard to the issue of women
and peace and security, and the journey continues.
There will be other milestones. For example, we would
support a request that the Secretary-General make
recommendations to the Security Council by October
2006 on various means by which the Council could be
more systematically informed of the use of gender-
based violence by parties to armed conflict, paying
special attention to the machinery already developed to
monitor and report to the Council on violations against
children in armed conflict. We would also wish to hear
about various means by which the Council could do
more to hold parties to armed conflict accountable for
those violations by considering, for example, the
imposition of targeted sanctions against such parties.

Women and peace and security is an issue that
should be of interest to all of us, regardless of where
we come from. Indeed, all issues concerning women
should receive appropriate and equitable responses.
The action plan is, in our View, appropriate to the issue
in question. It is now incumbent upon all of us to
ensure that it is implemented fully in all its aspects.

