Mr. Vrailas: I speak on behalf of the European
Union (EU) and its member States. Croatia, Turkey, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia, Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Ukraine and
Georgia align themselves with this statement, the full
version of which is being circulated in the Chamber.

I thank the Secretary-General, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, the representative on Women's
Initiatives for Gender Justice and the Special Envoy of
the Office ofthe United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees for their statements delivered earlier today.

Today's debate addresses the root cause ofrecurring
and pervasive sexual violence in conflict - the often
predominant culture of impunity that allows these
crimes to go unrecorded, unpunished and, at worst,
tolerated by the community. We cannot combat sexual
violence and ensure effective conflict resolution and
peacebuilding without tackling this gap at all levels.
Such actions must include the following.

With regard to ensuring adequate information, fact-
finding and documentation, sexual violence in conflict
remains universally underreported. Inter alia, that is the
result of the threats faced by those who come forward
to report this crime. We reiterate the need to take all
measures for the protection of survivors, human rights
defenders and journalists, who contribute to collecting
information on sexual violence.

With regard to ensuring the prosecution of
crimes of sexual Violence and punishing perpetrators
of crimes against women and girls under national
and international law, we emphasize the significant
advancement in international law made by the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
which includes sexual violence in the definition of
crimes, in particular as a crime against humanity,
and note that the ICC, as well as the non-permanent
International Criminal Tribunals, continue to be
important mechanisms in combating sexual violence
in conflict. We furthermore acknowledge the national
efforts to implement the Rome Statute. The crimes
of sexual violence must be excluded from amnesty
provisions in conflict-resolution processes. We support
the continued application of targeted and graduated
measures by the relevant Security Council Sanctions
Committees aimed at perpetrators of sexual violence
in conflict, as well as other measures at its disposal
including referrals to the ICC and steps towards the
systematic monitoring of commitments by parties to
conflict under resolution 1960 (2010).

With regard to ensuring women's leadership and the
participation of women in peace processes and conflict
resolution, those processes should also recognize
explicitly the need to address crimes of sexual violence,
as they lay the foundation for future institution-building
and political and legal reforms.

There is a need to ensure the availability of
reparations as a form of transitional gender justice, as
well as accessible services, including health, education,
psychosocial, legal and economic support.

We must raise awareness and combat the
normalization of sexual violence, including beyond
the end of the conflict, to counter stigmatization,
shame and fear of social exclusion, which perpetuate
the underreporting of sexual violence. We continue to
underline the importance of the continued deployment
of women's and child protection advisers.

The European Union continues to implement its
dedicated policy on women and peace and security, as
well as to support initiatives to strengthen international
criminal justice and the rule of law. The EU now has
gender advisers and/or human rights focal points in
each of its crisis management missions and operations.
The EU supports the swift deployment of human
rights observers in Mali by the African Union and the
United Nations and provides financial support for the
deployment of observers. The EU training mission in
Mali includes training on gender and human rights for
the Malian armed forces.

We continue to support the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and of the Team of Experts on
the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict.
We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/335) and the recommendations contained
therein. We also welcome the Council's adoption of
resolution 2106 (2013) today as an expression of the
Council's continued determination to keep this issue
under close scrutiny.

