Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
South Africa for convening today's meeting. We are
also grateful for this morning's important, detailed and
inspiring briefings.

Peru is firmly committedto the women andpeace and
security agenda, as we are convinced that the leadership
and active participation of women as agents of peace
in all phases of conflict have a significant impact. The
statistics consistently confirm the advantages that the
presence of women on the ground brings, particularly
in interactions with host societies and in the effective
implementation of peaceful ways of settling disputes.
That is why we have been discussing the issue since
2000 with a view to establishing a progressive agenda
and generating good practices in this area, from the
historic original resolution 1325 (2000) to resolution
2493 (2019), which we have just adopted by consensus
today. In that connection, we commend and highlight
the efforts of the South African delegation to contribute
to implementing the international commitments linked
to this agenda. Nevertheless, we believe that there are
still barriers and challenges to the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda, and in
that regard, we would like to highlight five central
points on which we believe the Council should take
sustained action.

First, it should continue to promote greater
participation and empowerment of women in peace and
national reconciliation processes through its mandates
and to monitor compliance with them. The evidence is
clear and shows that women's significant participation
at all levels of political life reduces the probability of
conflict and renders peacekeeping and peacebuilding
operations and efforts to defend women's rights far
more effective.

Secondly, it is essential to pay due attention to
the root causes of conflicts associated with gender
inequality and violence, as it facilitates a comprehensive
approach to conflict situations. It is also important to
take into consideration the different effects of conflict
on the protection of women and girls.

Thirdly, with regard to the Secretary-General's
recommendations in his latest report (S/2019/800), we
must redouble efforts to integrate gender specialists into
political and peacekeeping missions in order to apply
that perspective across every level of policy analysis,
planning and implementation, including on economic
empowerment. We are convinced of the advantages
inherent in increasing the number of women Blue
Helmets in peace operations, and we are committed to
that cause.

Fourthly, it is important to highlight and promote
active collaboration between missions and women's
civil-society organizations. That also implies increasing
the participation of women speakers from civil society
in our meetings, as well as making detailed analyses of
information from the field in cases that come under the
Council's agenda.

Fifthly, we must encourage the effective use of the
information and recommendations from the Informal
Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security,
which will enable us to better monitor and coordinate
implementation activities, in line with resolution 2242
(2015). Peru is honoured to have held the responsibility
of co-chairing the Group since 2018 and to have shared
it with Sweden and Germany this year.

In conclusion, I want to affirm Peru's belief that in
the current state of affairs, there is no more effective
instrument for the promotion of peace and international
security than the empowerment of women, which
involves recognizing their leadership, promoting
their participation in peace processes and ensuring
that commitments are given concrete expression on
the ground.

