Mr. AlMunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank the French presidency
for convening this important debate. I would also like to
thank Ms. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, Chef de Cabinet
of the Secretary-General, and Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-
Ngcuka, Executive Director of UN-Women, as well as
Ms. Charo Mina-Rojas and Ms. Michaelle Jean, for
their important briefings.

The women and peace and security agenda has
become a key pillar of international relations and a
crucial took for strengthening United Nations efforts
to prevent and resolve conflicts and to provide
humanitarian assistance. This agenda allows us to
fulfil two essential conditions of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.

Seventeen years have passed since the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000). In adopting it, the international
community reaffirmed the important role of women in
preventing and resolving conflict. I would like to take
this opportunity to reaffirm my country's commitment
to the principles set out therein. My country is firmly
convinced that gender equality and the empowerment
of women, as well as the protection and promotion of
women's rights, are important elements in sustainable
development and conflict prevention.

The meaningful participation ofwomen in resolving

conflicts, in humanitarian efforts and in peacebuilding
are crucial to sustaining peace. In this regard, I would
like to thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for
his annual report on the implementation of resolutions
1325 (2000) and 2122 (2013), on women and peace and
security (S/2017/86l). The report highlights recent
developments in the implementation of resolution
2242 (2015) by focusing on the contributions that
women can make in terms of implementation. We
also welcome the recommendations contained in the
report, as gender equality and women's empowerment
are sine qua non prerequisites for conflict prevention
and the implementation of the 2030 Agenda, including
Sustainable Development Goals 5 and 16, as outlined in
the report. This will allow us to effect genuine change
in the context of the three pillars of the United Nations,
security, human rights and development.

My country is committed to involving women
in development plans, decision-making and civil
society. Moreover, women in Kuwait participate in
decision-making at the highest levels and occupy
high-level posts. They are ministers, deputy ministers,
members of parliament, and ambassadors and
representatives in diplomatic missions worldwide.
We call for further efforts to be made for women's
empowerment and their inclusion in society.

We have also undertaken efforts to promote the
role of the United Nations, and, in cooperation with the
Organization, we have developed a number of projects
for women's empowerment. We have also reviewed and
updated all legislation relating to women in Kuwait.
Thus we have put an end to all forms of discrimination
against women and established a mechanism to protect
women from all forms of violence, both in society and
within the family, and established a national centre for
that purpose.

The eight resolutions adopted by the Security
Council in this area have made clear that this
agenda requires greater commitment in order to be
comprehensively implemented. We will undertake
additional efforts to integrate these resolutions in the
global agenda of the United Nations and in the work of
the Security Council in particular. The past two decades
have made clear that the meaningful participation of
women can strengthen protection, economic recovery
and peacebuilding efforts.

To conclude, I would like to reiterate Kuwait's
commitment to acting in favour of women's
empowerment and promoting the role of women in
sustaining peace and security. Participation by women
and girls must be at the top of our priorities.

