Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Allow me to begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on Viet Nam's
assumption of the Security Council presidency.

Australia was an original sponsor of resolution
1325 (2000), and we value the opportunity today to
address the Council on the issue of responding to the
needs of women and girls in post-conflict situations for
sustainable peace and security. Women can be, of
course, as we know and as we have heard, powerful
agents of change for peace and security. The historical
comments on the Baroness von Suttner and her
influence in inspiring the Nobel Peace Prize, which we
have just had recalled for us by our colleague from
Singapore, have eloquently reminded us of that fact.
Early recognition of and response to the special needs
of women and girls post-conflict, obviously, as we
know, helps to lay a solid foundation for sustainable
peace. Australia is itself very alert to that reality.

We welcome the Secretary-General's report
(S/2009/465). We also welcome the deployment by
UNDP of senior gender advisers, including to Papua
New Guinea, Timor-Leste and Nepal. We were
particularly encouraged by the report's focus on the
vital issue of access to social services such as
education and health, including maternal and
reproductive health.

We endorse all of the Secretary-General's
recommendations and would like to address just a few
of them today. First of all, we would value the
convening in 2010 of a high-level event to
commemorate the tenth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000). This would provide a very useful opportunity
to take stock of our implementation and assess, at the
highest levels - and this does need to be done at the
highest levels - what remains to be done to capitalize
on recent momentum towards enhanced
implementation. We congratulate those 16 countries
that have formulated national action plans. Australia
itself needs to do better on this. We need to accelerate
our own efforts, and we would bring to a high-level
event concrete advice on further, practical measures
beyond those we have already undertaken to further
implement resolution 1325 (2000).

Secondly, we agree that impunity for gender-
based crimes must not be tolerated. We congratulate
the Council for its adoption last week of resolution
1888 (2009). As our Finnish colleague has just said,
this was a major step forward, and we must now do
absolutely whatever we need to ensure its
implementation. I should say that my own country is
deeply concerned with the reported high prevalence of
rape and other forms of grave sexual violence in
Myanmar. The absence of effective judicial and
security institutions to ensure accountability, prevent
violence and combat impunity remains a pressing
challenge in many post-conflict societies. Formal
justice systems must provide accessible recourse for
women.

Thirdly, women's equal and full participation in
all efforts toward the maintenance and promotion of
peace and security, as well as reconciliation, is critical.
We agree that increasing women's role in decision-
making bodies is an obvious key. In post-conflict
situations, women need to be represented, of course,
early, integrally and at all stages during peace
negotiations, and this will bolster the priority given to
women's recovery needs and should build a more solid
peace. Improved electoral participation is also
essential, and we note with appreciation, in particular,
the report's focus on the efforts of Timor-Leste and its
partners to enhance the quality and quantity of
women's representation and participation in village
council elections, which were held earlier this year.
This sets a helpful precedent in promoting gender-
responsive reconstruction and local development
agendas.

Fourthly, we agree with the Secretary-General
that an accurate, more coherent system of data
collection is necessary to monitor progress, address
gaps in implementation and better facilitate the sharing
of best practices. When developing such tools,
consideration should be given to collecting and
analysing information on areas including female heads
of households, women's land use patterns, access to
credit, membership in agricultural cooperatives,
participation in formal employment, reproductive
health and educational status.

Finally, we welcome the General Assembly's
recent progress towards establishing a composite
United Nations gender entity, and we very much look
forward to further strengthening of United Nations
coordination on gender issues, including on women
and peace and security matters.

Women's capacity for peacebuilding must be
strengthened, particularly where women are themselves
mobilizing to end conflict and foster peace and
reconciliation in their own communities.

Australia is partnering throughout the Pacific and
Asia to build local and regional capacities. We were
pleased to be involved in the International Women for
Peace Conference held in Timor-Leste in March and to
support the travelling road show exhibition of that
Conference, which strengthened, locally, women's
roles in peacebuilding and conflict resolution. In the
Pacific, we are also pleased to support the regional
women's community media network on women and
peace and security, which raises awareness of and
supports the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
through media initiatives in Fiji, Tonga, Solomon
Islands and Bougainville, Papua New Guinea.

The role of civil society organizations is, of
course, also essential. We are encouraged by the
sustained and concerted efforts of many individuals
and organizations worldwide that campaign in this
field. Australia was particularly pleased to support the

"Peace Talks" initiative of the International Women's
Development Agency, which raised awareness on
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in the
Pacific through training for civil society organizations
from Solomon Islands, Tonga, Fiji and Bougainville.

To conclude, while we recognize that there have
been improvements in our united efforts to respond to
the needs of women and promote the role and voice of
women in post-conflict societies, very clearly, we all
must recognize that further very determined efforts are
required. As we approach the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000), Australia certainly recommits
to this compelling objective, an objective, as I said,
that we must all ensure is achieved.

