Mr. Cardi (Italy): I would first of all like to thank
the Angolan presidency for having organized this
important debate on the crucial role that women can
play in African peace processes, and, of course, the
briefers for their contributions.

Italy aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union and wishes to add
the following remarks in a national capacity.

There is clear evidence that no sustainable and
lasting peace is possible without women's active
involvement in peace processes. This is why Italy
has always been at the forefront in supporting the
women and peace and security agenda, welcoming
and co-sponsoring resolution 1325 (2000) and, more
recently, resolution 2242 (2015).

I wish to draw the Council's attention to the
following four points.

First, concerning the inclusion of women in
prevention so as to combat radicalization, I would stress
that in Africa more than elsewhere, there is a strong
need not only for peacekeeping, but also for positive
engagement in mediation and peacebuilding to support
national reconciliation and post-conflict reconstruction
and combat the rise of violent extremism. Women can
greatly help in these processes because they can give an
invaluable contribution to preventing the radicalization
of youth and young women. As an example, women
in Africa are often the first, and sometimes the only,
teachers of future generations, on whom we can rely for

building peace and stability. They are the first medical
assistants of family members. They often act as silent
CEOs in family governance.

Resolutions 2250 (2015) and 1325 (2000) can
mutually reinforce each other; that is why Italy
decided to co-sponsor the Commission on the Status of
Women side event on the complementarities between
women and peace and security, and youth and peace
and security a few days ago. Young women and girls
in Africa often take on crucial, burdensome roles, and
their leadership should be supported and encouraged.
Italy was proud to be a European Union facilitator
and to have co-sponsored resolution 70/138 on the girl
child, presented by the Southern African Development
Community and adopted at this session of the
General Assembly.

Secondly, gender-based issues and perspectives
should be included at all negotiating tables, including
when discussing strategies covering non-proliferation
and disarmament, and conventional arms and small
arms and light weapons, and, more evidently, in
United Nations peace operation mandates, including
pre-deployment training, an area of established
Italian expertise.

Since 2005, through the Centre of Excellence for
Stability Police Units, in Vicenza, we have been training
more than 8,000 police personnel units, many of which
are deployed in peacekeeping operations in Africa. In
this regard, the Centre introduced new modules such as
gender protection in peace-support operations in order
to improve and update its training programmes.

To that end, we are currently revising our second
2014-2016 national action plan on women and peace and
security for a third edition, which encourages women's
employment in the national armed forces and State
police, as well as their participation in peace operations
in conflict areas.

Thirdly, women's involvement in peace processes
must be seen through the prism of the Sustainable
Development Goals. On a long-term basis,
economically empowered women can contribute much
more effectively to sustainable development and to
sustainable peace and security. Working on this two-
pronged objective in our partnership with African
Union countries, also in the framework of the Addis
Ababa Action Plan and Africa's Agenda 2063, is thus
one of our priorities. We have to bolster women's access
to quality education and health, and work to end all
forms of gender-based violence and discrimination,
including harmful practices such as female genital
mutilation and child, early and forced marriage.

Lastly, concerning our future, the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) and the Sustainable Development Goals are our
most valuable tools for action. It is for this reason,
we believe, that issues pertaining to both Africa
and women are constantly referenced in most of the
recommendations. Africa and women have something
in common: they represent our hope for a better future.

