Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French):
My delegation thanks the Secretary-General and the
Executive Director of UN Women, Ms. Mlambo-
Ngcuka; the representative of the NGO Working Group
on Women, Peace and Security, Ms. Balipou; and
Ms. Pillay, the High Commissioner for Human Rights,
for their contributions to this debate.

We fully align ourselves with the statement of
the European Union. We would like to make a few
additional remarks in our national capacity.

Belgium welcomes the theme chosen for today's
debate. We also sponsored resolution 2122 (2013),
adopted today. The rule of law and transitional justice
in relation to gender have not yet received sufficient
attention, despite the fact that they are key to the
promotion and protection of women's rights in post-
conflict situations. My country welcomes the fact that
this debate is also focusing on the rebuilding ofjustice
mechanisms that guarantee women non-discriminatory
access to justice in post-conflict societies.

Indeed, improving the legal framework and the
rules of procedure to ensure women better access to
justice at both the national and the international levels
is one of the aims of the second national action plan for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) that my
country recently finalized for the period 2013-2016. To
attain that goal, we believe that it is critical, on the one
hand, to support the initiatives that facilitate access to
justice for women and girls so as to ensure that their
rights are protected, and, on the other, to incorporate
the gender dimension into documents relating to the
rule of law and transitional justice and to support
transitional justice mechanisms that have a real impact
on gender parity.
Belgium continues to give political and operational
priority to the fight against all forms of violence
against civilians during and after armed conflict, with
particular focus on sexual violence. In that regard,
my country encourages States to include the fight
against sexual violence in their transitional justice
mechanisms and penal law, and to consider the fight
against sexual violence as their responsibility. We also
reiterate our call on all countries to apply the broadest
possible definition of the concept of sexual violence, as
identified by the International Criminal Court.

In conclusion, I take this opportunity to welcome
the publication by the Democratic Republic of the
Congo of a report on sexual violence in that country.
The report demonstrates the importance of the Human
Rights Council's decision to convene at its twenty-
fifth session a high-level dialogue on the lessons
learned and the remaining challenges in the campaign
against sexual violence in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. The report also reflects the need to allow
countries in conflict and post-conflict situations to
share their relevant experience.

