Mrs. Kazragiene (Lithuania): Let me begin by
expressing our appreciation to the Nigerian presidency
for convening an open debate on conflict-related sexual
violence, an issue that plagues and exacerbates many
contemporary conflicts.

We thankthe Secretary-General forhis comprehensive
report (S/2014/181) and recommendations, including
the country-specific ones, and the updated annex on
suspected perpetrators. We also sincerely commend
Ms. Zainab Bangura, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
and her team all over the world for their hard work and
dedication, as well as the members of the United Nations
Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict, the Friends
of 1325 and the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security. Our sincere congratulations go
to Ms. Bineta Diop, the first African Union Special
Envoy on Women, Peace and Security, on her recent
appointment.

At the outset, Lithuania aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered by observer of the European
Union.

Despite all of the efforts of the international
community and the establishment of legal and normative
frameworks, including seven Security Council
resolutions, conflict-related sexual violence is on the
rise. It is getting more complex. It is used to displace
civilian populations, to seize land and property and to
illicitly extract natural resources. Children are sexually
assaulted and suffer from stigma when born out of
rape. Young girls are trafficked, forced to marry rebels
and used as messengers. Boys and men are subjected
to sexualized violence. Sexual violence has become
a tactic and weapon of war and impunity prevails.
The only way to effectively address this scourge is a
comprehensive and integrated approach which entails
prevention, early warning, justice, accountability,
the participation of women in political processes and
economic empowerment.

The inclusion of provisions on sexual Violence
in the Arms Trade Treaty is just one of the recent
encouraging examples of action in that regard. In its turn
the Security Council, in resolution 2106 (2013) a the
fourth resolution focused on conflict-related sexual
violence - has reaffirmed the centrality of gender
equality and women's political, social and economic
empowerment to preventing sexual violence and further
developed the operational framework on conflict-
related sexual violence. Among other operational
provisions, it calls for the further deployment of women
protection advisers and gender advisers to the relevant
United Nations peacekeeping and political missions, as
well as humanitarian operations.

The Security Council has also recognized the
need for more systematic monitoring and more timely,
objective, accurate and reliable information as a basis
for prevention and response. The Security Council's
support of the monitoring, analysis and reporting
arrangements on conflict-related sexual violence has
contributed to a better understanding of the scope and
roots of the problem and facilitated a more proactive
stance of United Nations teams on the ground. Having
more robust monitoring and reporting mechanisms,
the Security Council could also consider developing a
procedure that would ensure systematic monitoring of
the implementation of its decisions and commitments
taken up by parties to conflict.

At the same time, the lack of adequate national
capacity and expertise to prevent, investigate
and prosecute violence remain among the main
impediments in combating sexual violence and ensuring
accountability. We are encouraged by the United
Nations efforts to assist the strengthening of national
capacities. We welcome the extremely important work
of the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict, which is being rapidly deployed in
situations of particular concern with respect to sexual
violence in armed conflict to assist national authorities
in strengthening the rule of law.

Another concrete and laudable example is the joint
UN-Women/Justice Rapid Response training, roster
management, and deployment mechanism established
upon a request of the Secretary-General to ensure that
each commission of inquiry is provided with expertise
on investigations of sexual and gender-based violence.
It is also of paramount importance that peacekeepers
continue to be trained to prevent and respond to
conflict-related sexual violence, and that special
training materials be prepared, preferably in the native
languages of peacekeepers. Peacekeeping forces must
ensure that internally displaced persons camps are
free of alleged perpetrators. The United Nations Blue
Helmets themselves must strictly follow the rules of
conduct.

Lithuania strongly supports the Group of Eight
declaration on preventing sexual violence in conflict,
and we are glad to learn that over 140 States have already
endorsed the declaration of commitment that was
introduced in New York in September 2013. Lithuania
looks forward to the global summit in London in June
this year, where specific actions are to be identified and
agreed.

However broad and strong it may be, international
assistance will not provide sustainable results unless
it is complemented by national commitment. National
political leaders have a major role to play in ensuring
that international law is transposed into national
law and implemented. National ownership and
responsibility should be key priorities. We welcome the
facilitation of national responsibility efforts through
the joint communiques between the United Nations
and the Governments of the Central African Republic,
Cote D'Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Guinea and Somalia, as per the Secretary-General's
report.

We note with appreciation that women, peace and
security issues are included in the Secretary-General's
country-specific reports under a separate heading.
The Security Council could also consistently include
the women, peace and security agenda in the terms
of reference of its visiting missions. As the Council
continues to horizontally integrate the issues of sexual
violence into its work, including in the drafting or
renewing mandates of United Nations peacekeeping
and special political missions, relevant sanctions
committees must review their listing and de-listing
guidelines, add sexual violence to their lists of criteria,
harmonize designation criteria for listed individuals
by including any relevant charges from international
justice mechanisms, consider sanctioning parties
identified by the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict. The
Council at its disposal has and should actively consider
other means to ensure accountability, such as a referrals
to the International Criminal Court, special tribunals
and commissions of inquiry.

The International Commission of Inquiry on the
Central African Republic should provide all relevant
information to the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2127 (2013) in order to list the perpetrators
and send a strong signal that all offenders will be
held accountable. The capacity of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic to monitor and report
human rights violations, including sexual violence,
must also be enhanced.

The sexual violence in Syria against women and
men, including in Government detention facilities;
non-State armed groups targeting female family
members of Government forces; and more than 300
cases of gender-based Violence in three health clinics in
Damascus and Rural Damascus alone are clear violations
of international humanitarian law and resolution 2139
(2014). We support referral of the situation in Syria to
the International Criminal Court. Only by using all
available tools at our hands will we be able to prevent
further violence and end this vicious cycle of impunity.
The experience in combating conflict-related sexual
violence in the Central African Republic, Syria and
many other countries, as reported by the Secretary-
General, shows that the United Nations has to find
meaningful ways to engage non-State actors.

Finally, let me touch upon the issue of survivors.
Care for and protection of survivors of sexual violence
are another vital issue to address in order to fight
stigmatization and reprisals and prevent violence and
impunity in the future. We believe that reparations
could significantly contribute to restoring justice,
especially when other means are not feasible.

Twenty years after the end of the Balkan War, an
estimated 20,000 survivors of crimes of sexual violence
have not seen justice. The alleged perpetrators enjoy
positions of influence while victims and their children
born of rape are left to suffer stigmatization and shame.
Women were excluded from the peace negotiations,
even though women's organizations were the first to
initiate meetings with people from the other side, trying
to find common ground and ways to stop the violence.
That is the probable reason why the Dayton peace
accords did not include the provisions recommended
in the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women and the Beijing
Platform for Action.
Indeed, our toolbox is full of useful instruments
but it is now time to take matters into our own hands,
consolidate our actions on the ground and deliver
together and in close cooperation with all humanitarian,
diplomatic, justice, security and civil society actors.

