Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I was struck
by the words of the Foreign Minister of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in the General Assembly last
week. He said that acts of sexual violence committed
against women and girls in the east of his country
constituted the most shameful and serious crimes
experienced by humanity in the twenty-first century.

Those words were a powerful reminder of the
challenge this Council faces as it takes forward work
on the agenda set last year by resolution 1820 (2008).

Sexual violence is a crime for which individuals
can - and must - be held responsible, however senior
they are. Perpetrators of sexual violence know that one
result of their crime is to destroy local communities and
make lasting peace harder to achieve. That is often their
intention, as continued conflict leaves the men of
violence - and it is invariably men - in a position of
dominance.

You saw that challenge first-hand during your
visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Madam
President. We are grateful for the strong leadership that
you personally and that the United States has given on
this agenda. The Secretary-General's presence here
today signals his personal engagement. He has taken
up the issue with passion, and I encourage him to
persist.

And as Minister Joyandet reminded us, the
Security Council mission to Africa in May made
forceful representations to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo leadership and we welcome the steps taken
to bring to account officers of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo armed forces who have been involved in
sexual violence.

The United Kingdom welcomes the resolution we
have unanimously adopted today. It further strengthens
our collective commitment to end impunity for sexual
violence. The resolution gives new coherence to United
Nations efforts through the initiative, UN Action
Against Sexual Violence in Conflict. It provides new
leadership to combat sexual violence, through the
creation of a special representative of the Secretary-
General. It creates new steps to name and shame
parties to armed conflict that perpetrate sexual
violence. It calls on the United Nations to boost its
support of national efforts to strengthen the rule of law,
by deploying teams of experts in situations where
sexual violence is occurring with apparent impunity.
And it improves the information flow to the Council on
patterns of sexual violence to allow us to develop
specific, actionable responses.

In combination, these measures give us new tools
to act on sexual violence. We welcome and support
them, alongside the General Assembly's recent
decision to form a composite United Nations gender
entity. The key now will be implementation.

The Council has come a long way since the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) nine years ago. It
has taken time, too much time, for the United Nations
to address the issue of systematic sexual violence in
conflict. I would like to pay tribute to the pioneering
work of Dr. Denis Mukwege and his colleagues at the
Panzi Hospital in Bukavu, and Dr. Jo Lusi and his
colleagues at the HEAL Hospital in Goma, where the
women and children who have been raped and brutally
defiled are given treatment and care.

I also commend the work of the many people
around the world who have campaigned to raise the
issue of sexual violence onto the political agenda: Eve
Ensler, Lisa Jackson and the non-governmental
organization, Women for Women, led by Zainab Salbi,
have all played particularly valuable roles. And
resolution 1820 (2008), making systemic sexual
violence a war crime, was a landmark step forward.

But the problem persists, not just in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, but in conflicts
across the globe. The events in Guinea this week are a
cruel reminder of how rape and political repression go
hand in hand.

The message from today's meeting should be that
women can never be truly empowered while they
remain threatened by sexual violence, and that peace
cannot take root when half the community - the
female half - lives in fear and trepidation. The
Security Council must take up its responsibilities and
never again relegate the question of systematic sexual
violence to being a secondary issue. It is not. The
measures we have adopted over the last two years,
including today's resolution, now have to be pursued
and implemented.

