Ms. Grignon (Kenya): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this very important debate on women
and peace and security during your presidency of the
Security Council this month. The Kenyan delegation
greatly appreciates this opportunity to share Kenya's
experiences on the subject, and we thank you for the
concept note (S/2015/243, annex). My delegation also
expresses its gratitude to the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report on this agenda item (S/2015/203),
which, inter alia, showcases the key sectors where
tangible progress has been made by countries. Kenya
is particularly grateful that Member States are
increasingly providing more robust gender and conflict
analysis in their reporting. Please allow me to also
appreciate and thank the panellists this morning for
their inspiring statements.

Kenya is committed to the full implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) on women's participation in
peacebuilding, better protection from human rights
abuses and access to justice and services to eliminate
discrimination. Kenya is a critical and central player
in international peace and security, partly as a result
of neighbouring countries that have witnessed some of
the worst conflicts in the world. Kenya is also a key
player in peacebuilding and peacekeeping and has been
supporting and assisting its regional neighbours in
reforming their security sectors and in reconstruction
and recovery efforts after conflicts. These initiatives
must genuinely involve and include women to ensure
success.

In order to implement resolution 1325 (2000) at
the regional level, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) has developed an regional
action plan for implementation of that resolution.
Members of IGAD, including Kenya, have been using
the regional action plan to reinforce their national
framework to ensure that sexual violence is not used
as a tool to terrorize communities in the region. Kenya,
under the auspices of the National Gender and Equality
Commission, has developed and adopted a national
action plan to augment the regional action plan and
strengthen its own national framework to implement
resolution 1325 (2000).
Mrs. Kawar returned to the Chair.

In today's complex reality, asymmetric warfare
is one of Africa's biggest challenges. Growing terror
organizations like Al-Shabaab and Boko Haram are
quickly spreading acts of terror that are paralysing the
continent. Kenya is still mourning its children who were
senselessly butchered by terrorists at Garissa University
College. For us, the achievement of sustainable peace
is urgent and cannot be achieved without women's
full participation in the prevention of conflict and the
protection of Kenyans. At this juncture, please allow
me, on behalf of my delegation and of Kenya, to most
profoundly and sincerely thank all and everyone here
at the United Nations and beyond for their encouraging
and touching messages of love, courage, support and
solidarity during this trying time for Kenya.

Peace and security are the number one priority
for Kenya, and everyone, especially women, are
intricately involved. We still need to do more to ensure
that women take centre stage in peace negotiations
and peacebuilding institutions at all levels. We need
to ensure that women have opportunities to access
justice and to play their role in shaping policy and
legislation to achieve and sustain peace and security.
The Government of Kenya has formulated policies
and enacted laws to ensure that women participate
in peacebuilding at all levels. Women are also fully
engaged at the highest levels of the executive, the
judiciary and Parliament. In Parliament, women are
responsible for championing laws and policies aimed at
promoting women's involvement in peace and security
issues and advocating for measures that protect women,
children and the elderly.

At all other levels, women work in strategic positions
of decision-making, which has greatly contributed to
gender mainstreaming. The Constitution provides for
women's participation and inclusion at all levels of
Government in both appointive and elective positions.
It also provides for policies that must guarantee
sufficient budgeting allocations for women's issues and
for gender budgeting. Local peace committees follow
guidelines that are in tune with the Constitution. At
operational levels, Kenyan women serve in the police
and in the military, which is key to prevention and
protection processes. Women are also being deployed in
conflict zones to participate in peacekeeping and peace
enforcement missions, just like their male counterparts.

My delegation wishes to underscore the importance
of education, capacity-building and the communication
tools for preventing and combating violence generally.
It is in that connection that my delegation urges the
Security Council, the Peacebuilding Commission and
other key stakeholders to continue prioritizing education
and awareness-creation on the critical role of women
in peacebuilding, peace and security. Issues of peace
and security cannot be addressed in isolation. Women
must have access to resources, entrepreneurial skills,
including job creation and the ownership of property.
We must emphasize a multi-pronged approach to the
elimination of violence against women.

While the Security Council has an important role
to play in dealing with peace and security matters,
States bear the primary responsibility for protecting
their citizens from violence. My delegation calls for
more concerted efforts on the part of the international
community and the United Nations system to support
national efforts to prevent and address issues surrounding
conflicts and Violence, especially of a terrorist nature.
Indeed, countries in conflict and those recently
emerging from conflict have unique challenges and
require everyone's goodwill to safeguard international
peace. More resources and assistance are needed to
ensure that where conflicts are raging, resources and
support are sent with urgency to minimize suffering and
to end the conflict. We must ensure greater coherence
and coordination in addressing women's issues in a
holistic manner in conflict and post-conflict situations.

Finally, my delegation will seek to engage further
with Member States and stakeholders to further
enhance and strengthen mechanisms to ensure the
full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). In
conclusion, I wish to reiterate Kenya's commitment to
implementing resolution 1325 (2000).

