Ms. Plepyte (Lithuania): I have the honour to
address the Security Council on behalf of Estonia,
Latvia and my own country, Lithuania. Our delegations
also align themselves with the statement made earlier
on behalf of the European Union. At the outset, we
commend the French delegation for convening this open
debate. We also thank the briefers for their remarks and
steadfast commitment to this important issue.

The empowerment of women, their inclusive
engagement, the promotion of gender equality and the
mainstreaming of human rights are fundamental for
sustaining peace. We commend the Secretary-General
for his dedication to further advancing the women and
peace and security agenda. Keeping in mind the broad
scope and cross-cutting nature of that agenda, allow me
to focus on priority aspects for the Baltic countries.

The critical role of women in negotiating,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding is often overlooked.
The Baltic countries emphasize the need for the full
and effective participation of women at all stages
and all levels of conflict prevention and resolution
as well as peacebuilding. However, 17 years after the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), far too few women
around the world act as mediators or are engaged in a
decision-making. It is not only a question of equality.
Peace negotiations and agreements set the structure and
direction for post-conflict reconstruction and overall
policies that affect the lives of all women and society
as a whole.

We strongly advocate for the gender perspective to
be fully integrated into all aspects of peace operations.
Increased numbers of women peacekeepers and the
deployment of women's protection and gender advisers,
as well as human rights and gender-awareness training,
have all proven successful and should be further
expanded. In the course of this past year, the Baltic
countries significantly stepped up their contribution
to United Nations peace operations. We are striving to
deploy more gender-balanced peacekeeping troops, and
we continuously encourage female military and police
personnel to apply.

Training is crucial to raising awareness and
improving the implementation of gender aspects in
peace operations. Before their deployment, Estonian,
Latvian and Lithuanian peacekeepers undergo high-
quality training on human rights and gender-related
issues, including the eradication of sexual exploitation
and abuse, as well as the prevention of and response
to conflict-related sexual violence. That training has
moved well beyond abstract concepts towards more
hands-on, scenario-based learning, to which those
working on the ground can relate.

In that regard, the Baltic countries strongly
support the Secretary's-General efforts to bring
sexual exploitation to an end. Therefore, we signed the
Secretary-General's voluntary compact on preventing
sexual exploitation and abuse, and the Presidents
of Estonia and Lithuania have joined the Circle of
Leadership on the prevention and response to sexual
exploitation and abuse in United Nations operations.

The scale and complexity of the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda requires
coherent and comprehensive efforts. The central role of
civil society, including women's organizations, should
be fully recognized. We are pleased that women civil-
society representatives now regularly brief the Security
Council during country-specific meetings. That useful
practice should be continued.

Last but not least, a gender-responsive legal
and judicial system constitutes, as is emphasized in
the Secretary's-General report (S/2017/861), one of
the building blocks of a resilient society. However,
access to justice still faces structural inequalities. In
the absence of credible judicial and security systems,
the perpetrators of crimes against women and girls
will pursue their malfeasance. The Baltic countries
remain committed to securing accountability for
sexual and gender-based violence through national
and international mechanisms. It is equally important
to ensure that victims receive genuine compensation
for the harm they have suffered. In that regard, the
International Criminal Court continues to be an
important mechanism for combating sexual and
gender-based violence in conflict, and should be used
vigorously to pursue accountability.

In conclusion, we would like to emphasize that
gender equality and resilience to conflicts and their
prevention are closely interlinked. We therefore fully
support the Secretary-General's profound commitment
to shifting the focus of all United Nations activities
towards a holistic approach to prevention, including
through the advancement of the women and peace and
security agenda.

