Mr. Sow (Guinea) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, I would like to thank you for your
welcome initiative in holding this public debate on
women and peace and security, and focusing it on the
roles of women in the consolidation of peace. I am
grateful to you for the important concept paper
(S/2006/793, annex) which you have given us as a
guide. I would like to commend all those who have
spoken from the Secretariat and the various bodies
concerned for the richness of their statements.

As we meet following the commencement of the
work of the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Peacebuilding Fund, it is up to us to give new political
and operational impetus to the implementation of the
commitments, strategies and plans of action that have
been adopted and pertaining, inter alia, to conflict
prevention and management and to post-conflict
peacebuilding.

In order to achieve the objectives by the
deadlines, we should fully support the implementation
of the principles highlighted in the background text
provided by the President of the Security Council
aiming, in particular, at achieving the participation of
women on an equal footing in the maintenance and
building of peace and security; protecting women and
girls against violations of their rights, especially sexual
and sexist violence and the trafficking of women, and
taking measures to put an end to impunity; ensuring the
participation of women on an equal footing in
decision-making bodies and in policies, programmes,
budgets and institutional reforms at the local, national,
regional and international levels; and providing
sufficient technical and financial assistance for training
and capacity-building, research and documentation on
women.

Beyond the implementation of these principles,
special attention should be given to certain key aspects
of the follow-up to resolution 1325 (2000) as they
pertain to the complex challenges of peacebuilding.
Therefore, it would be desirable, first, at the national
level, to support women's initiatives and actions in
order to promote peace and reconciliation; to ensure a
smooth transition towards sustainable development; to
guide the Government and all national stakeholders,
especially non-governmental organizations and civil
society, so that resolution 1325 (2000) can spur action
and remain at the heart of the peace and development
process.

In this context, and in order to commemorate the
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), the First Lady
of the Republic of Guinea is organizing today in
Conakry, under the auspices of her foundation, the
Maman Henriette Conte Foundation, various cultural
activities and a conference to promote in Guinea and in
neighbouring countries the spirit of that historic
resolution on women, peace and security.

With the support of the Government, a United
Nations country team and, above all, Ms. Rachel
Mayanja, Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on
Gender Issues and Advancement of Women, the First
Lady of Guinea wishes also to pay tribute to the active
contribution of the Guinean office for the Network of
African Women Ministers and Parliamentarians
(NAWMP) supported by the Manu River Union
Women's Association in conducting negotiations which
foster the restoration of peace, stability and
reconciliation in the subregion.

Secondly, at the regional and international level,
we must take effective steps to compel all those
concerned to conclude partnerships and alliances with
the authorities, groups and women's networks at the
local and national levels, with a View to the
coordinated and complete implementation of resolution
1325 (2000).

We must also work to enhance various types of
women's activities in countries which are emerging
from conflict or which have long been affected by
conflict, by providing sufficient professional technical

capacities, making available the appropriate resources
and providing access to various sources of power and
responsibility.

A review of resolution 1325 (2000) from the
standpoint of peacebuilding represents a source of hope
for the women of Guinea, of Africa and of the entire
world. This hope must not be in vain. It could be
fulfilled if the entire international community
shouldered its responsibilities, demonstrated the
necessary political will and acted in conformity with its
commitments.

Finally, my country would like to take this
opportunity, as a Friend of resolution 1325 (2000), to
reaffirm its full commitment to the complete success of
the current work of the Security Council.

