Mr. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month, and
to thank the United Kingdom delegation, especially
His Excellency Mr. William Hague, Secretary of State
for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, for presiding
over this meeting. It is an important opportunity to
strengthen the Council's efforts on sexual violence
in conflict situations, and to highlight the challenges
faced by States in conflict and post-conflict situations
in addressing that crime.

I also thank the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict for their
valuable briefings and their eagerness to participate in
the meeting.

The latest report of the Secretary-General, entitled
"Sexual Violence in conflict" (S/2013/149), contains
many recommendations and significant information. In
the report, he stresses that the lack of adequate national
capacity and expertise to investigate and prosecute
acts of sexual violence has remained one of the main
impediments to ensuring accountability for related
crimes. He also indicates that Member States bear the
primary legal and moral responsibility for preventing
and addressing conflict-related sexual Violence, and
reiterates the need for national ownership, leadership
and responsibility in that context.

We cannot consider the issue of women, peace and
security without addressing the root causes of their
suffering and insecurity. Consequently, improving
women's protection is not merely a humanitarian
task, but one that requires focused efforts in several
areas - first and foremost, the enforcement of the
laws necessary to protect them in armed conflict,
without discrimination or selectivity, and calling upon
all parties to the conflict to take special measures to
protect women and girls from gender-based violence
during the conflict.

In that context, I reiterate the importance
of ensuring access to health care, social support
services and justice for victims of sexual violence in
conflict-affected areas. I also note the importance of
strengthening cooperation among humanitarian actors,
exchanging experiences and lessons learned, as well as
initiatives to prevent sexual violence in conflict.

It is sad that today, even as we speak, many people
in various countries of the world are being subjected
to acts of sexual violence. In those countries, ongoing
conflict has led to the displacement of populations
and to increased security risks faced by refugees and
internally displaced persons (IDPs), including the risk
of sexual violence. It is clear that our Arab region is
not immune to the dangers posed by armed conflict
and its devastating effects on civilians, irrespective of
their social group or whether they are men, women or
children.

We are deeply concerned by acts of violence that
include kidnapping, rape and sexual violence in the
context of armed conflict. Women bear the brunt of
such acts, which constitute human rights violations.
In our Arab region, as one of the most prominent
examples of this phenomenon is that women in the
sisterly country of Syria, who have not been spared by
the brutal onslaught being waged against the Syrian
people by their own regime, which has adopted a
repressive military solution in addressing the demands
of the people.

In that context, women constitute the majority
of Syrian IDPs and refugees. The regime's officials,
security apparatus, loyalists and thugs subject them to
discrimination, physical and sexual assault, violations
of their right to privacy, arbitrary arrest and detention
as a means of forcing their male relatives to turn
themselves in. Such acts amount to war crimes and
crimes against humanity and their perpetrators must
be held accountable. The Secretary-General stresses
in his report that in Syria, such acts constitute the
main reasons why women and girls have fled conflict-
affected cities, including the high level of insecurity
and access constraints.

I reiterate the State of Qatar's support for all efforts
aimed at strengthening the rule of law and preventing
and responding to sexual violence in conflict situations.
I also stress the importance of continuing to fight
the impunity that hampers access by victims of such
crimes to justice, security and safety. To be sure, the
prosecution and trial of the perpetrators of sexual
violence are key steps contributing to strengthened
efforts to prevent sexual violence and protect women
and girls.

In conclusion, the ongoing global interest in the role
of women in peace and security, and the improvement
we are witnessing in their participation in policy efforts
to prevent and resolve conflicts will have real and
positive impacts on peace and security and will shape
the typical disastrous outcomes in various conflict
regions throughout the world.

