Mr. BiaborOh-Iboro (Congo) (spoke in French):
At the outset, Sir, I would like to express my
delegation's pleasure at seeing you presiding over this
traditional debate on implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). A debate on this issue of universal
importance follows up on the Fourth World Conference
on Women, held in Beijing; it is an issue which today
continues to be of major concern.

I take this opportunity to thank the Secretary-
General for his report on women and peace and
security (S/2008/622), which enlightens us with regard
to implementation of the resolution at all levels. We
also thank Ms. Rachel Mayanja, Mr. Alain Le Roy,
Ms. Ines Alberdi and Ms. Sarah Taylor for their
informative statements.

At the current stage, what assessment can we
make of the effective implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), eight years after it was adopted? My
delegation has studied the Secretary-General's report
with keen interest and wishes to make the following
comments.

In general terms, a reading of the report makes
apparent weaknesses in the statistics that could allow
us to better asses the impact of actions taken with
regard to women's participation in the various areas
studied. For instance, in paragraph 41, there is nothing
to support the assertion that peacekeeping missions
have facilitated the participation of women in the
elections of some countries. Furthermore, there is a
discrepancy between the many measures taken by
Member States and the international community to
increase the participation of women in certain domains
and the actual results that have been achieved. We can
ask ourselves about the relevance of some of the
measures taken.

As for the impact of armed conflict on women
and girls, it is undeniable that sexual violence has
become commonplace, and the general climate of
impunity does not favour the rigorous application of
resolution 1325 (2000). Indeed, in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in Uganda, in the Sudan, in
Burundi, in the Central African Republic and in Haiti,
past and ongoing conflicts have all been characterized
by the massive and systematic use of sexual crimes,
usually committed by armed groups if not by forces of
law and order or even by peacekeeping troops.
Moreover, sexual violence is common in post-conflict
periods as well.

My delegation welcomes the adoption of
resolution 1820 (2008), but we eagerly await the
publication of the Secretary-General's report on that
topic. My delegation also expresses its support for the
principle of zero-tolerance advocated by the United
Nations, which should be more rigorously enforced.

As for the protection and representation of
women, despite efforts made by the United Nations and
the remarkable on-site work of non-governmental
organizations, much remains to be done, particularly in
combating sexual violence and in promoting the access
of women to decision-making positions, especially in
the areas of peace and security. We will need greater
mobilization, by both the international community and
Member States, in order to maintain previous gains
with a view to reducing the inequalities observed at
various levels in the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).

We wish to congratulate the 10 Member States
who have drawn up national plans of action to establish
strategic measures in the framework of the full
application of the resolution. We urge the other
Member States to do the same.

As for measures aimed at capacity-building for
Member States, my delegation notes the efforts made
with a view to managing activities to support gender
equality and the emancipation of women. Nevertheless,
we feel that the international community, including the
United Nations, has an essential role to play in national
capacity-building, in particular as it regards defining
policies and strategies on women, peace and security.
Greater financial and human resources must be
allocated in order to achieve the objectives.

There is no peace without sustainable
development and there is no development without a
lasting peace. In this interplay, the role of women
alongside men must be addressed and must be
promoted and strengthened in all peace processes. It is
regrettable that women are not called on much in the
decision-making on crisis resolution and are generally
skipped over in negotiations or peace agreements
processes.

My country, which has experienced internal
armed conflicts for an entire decade, has not been
spared that situation, but the Government is taking
measures to integrate the gender dimension when we
draw up policies and programmes. At the subregional
level, Congolese women are taking active roles in
activities related to the security and stability of the
Great Lakes region.

In seeking lasting peace, the first ladies of Africa
took stock of the problem in 1997, in Nigeria, by
establishing the Mission of the First Ladies of Africa,
known as MIPREDA. As part of that process, the sixth
conference of that organization was held in Brazzaville
from 12 to 15 February 2008 with the theme "Civil and
humanitarian diplomacy and gender issues in the
maintenance of peace in Africa". At the end of the
conference, the First Ladies adopted, in the spirit of
resolution 1325 (2000), a declaration and a plan of
action for 2008-2010, seeking to increase the
involvement of women in the management, settlement
and prevention of conflicts and in the peacebuilding
process. They also established a continent-wide
network of women involved in peace negotiations.

My delegation hopes that the presidential
statement to be issued at the close of this debate will
contribute to promoting the full implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), which, in our view, is
inseparably linked to other relevant decisions of the
Security Council, particularly 1612 (2005) on children
in armed conflicts, 1625 (2005) on conflict prevention,
1674 (2006) on protection of civilians in armed
conflicts and 1820 (2008) on sexual violence against
women.

