Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in French):
Madam President, I wish to thank you for having
convened this debate.

(spoke in Spanish)

Again, in my native language, I express my thanks
to you, Madam.

When Spain was on the Security Council for two
years, one of our major priorities was the women and
peace and security agenda. However, now that we are
no longer on the Security Council, I can state with
assurance that one of Spain's highest priorities during
the seventy-second and later sessions of the General
Assembly will continue to be the women and peace and
security agenda.

I believe that in order to make progress on this
agenda and ensure its proper implementation, three
things are necessary.

The first is leadership, the leadership of those
around this table, the leadership of members of the
General Assembly, and the leadership of our capitals.

Secondly, we need to strengthen the institutional
architecture. This is something on which we are
currently working in the United Nations, but we are
very far from having reached our goal.

Thirdly, we need to move from the general
to the specific by adopting national plans for the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda. Spain has already adopted its second one.

I will now make four specific proposals that I have
discussed with my very effective adviser, Victoria
Ortega Gutierrez, who is sitting behind me, who has
been the very soul of Spain's work, so to speak, on this
agenda item.
The first proposal touches on an issue that makes
me the proudest of our tenure on the Council: the
creation of the Informal Expert Group on Women and
Peace and Security, established under resolution 2242
(2015). The Group, which meets on a near-monthly
basis and which is currently being presided over, in
an outstanding manner, by Uruguay and Sweden,
receives a tremendous amount of information from
all peacekeeping operations. What I propose we do is
that we rise to the challenge of moving from simple
information-gathering to a process in which the
members of the Council can translate what they have
heard into specific actions aimed at making progress
on this agenda.

The second proposal refers to the debates held
here, in the Security Council Chamber. Spain, when
it was a member of the Council, had suggested that
in debates on country-specific situations, in that case
on Liberia, civil society be invited to address issues
related to women and peace and security. We were able
to achieve this, even though there was some resistance.
I think that Sweden has taken up that baton. I wish to
propose to the members of the Council that with respect
to the participation of civil society in Security Council
debates on a given country, members of civil society,
when advisable because of circumstances, should be
invited to describe the situation on the ground.

The third proposal relates to sanctions. The Security
Council has a large number of sanctions committees, over
which which I was fortunate enough to preside. Those
committees have so-called listing criteria. I believe
that today, at a time when, unfortunately, violence in
conflict is one of the major evils besetting humankind,
a truly shameful one, we should consider making the
perpetrators of sexual violence in conflict the potential
subject of sanctions by the relevant committees. This
would represent an important advance.

The fourth proposal relates to the Women, Peace
and Security Focal Points Network. I do not know if
members will recall that it held its first meeting in
Alicante, Spain, in which I had the good fortune to be able
to participate along with a large number of delegations
and high-level Secretariat staff. The second round was
held recently in September, organized by Germany,
Namibia and Spain. It really was very successful.

I shall now make two concrete proposals in
this respect.

First, Germany has offered to host it in 2018, and
Namibia in 2019. This covers some parts of the world,
but I would really like a Latin American country to put
forward its candidature to host the meeting in 2021,
or perhaps an Asian country. I think it is important
to ensure predictability in the holding of these
important meetings.

The second proposal relates to the fact that the
Network currently has 63 friends. It seems to me that
given the importance of the women and peace and
security agenda in the United Nations, 63 is a relatively
low number. It is true that we began only in 2015, but
I believe that we need to set slightly more aggressive
benchmarks. I would be pleased if these 63 focal
points increased to 80 in Germany. Let us break the
barrier of 100 in Namibia, and let us after that achieve
numbers that represent near-universality in terms of the
Members of the United Nations.

I would say by way of conclusion that we are all
following attentively the very complex process of United
Nations reform, which I acknowledge can be difficult.
My fear is that this reform process will affect the three
fundamental pillars and that the women and peace and
security agenda will not have the place it should in the
new United Nations structure. All committed States
must work to ensure that the remaining States and
the Secretariat clearly understand the need to create a
robust institutional architecture in the Organization so
that we can continue making progress on this front.

