Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank you, Mr. President, for convening and
presiding over this important meeting. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2004/814) and thank Under-Secretary-General
Mr. Guehenno, Mrs. Arbour and Ms. Obaid for their
briefings.

Women have become the most directly and
hardest hit victims of many of the conflicts that we see
today. There is now a broad consensus on providing
effective protection to women in conflicts and allowing
them to play an adequate role in conflict resolution and
post-conflict reconstruction. Some positive progress
has been made in that regard. However, much more
needs to be done to achieve our common vision.

First, efforts need to be intensified in the areas of
conflict prevention and conflict resolution. Early
warning mechanisms need to be strengthened to defuse
conflicts in their early stages and prevent them from
escalating into large-scale violence. Secondly, there is
a need to strengthen legislation to punish sex offenders,
using existing mechanisms to bring the perpetrators to
justice and to help countries complete their legal
frameworks, build capacity and intensify efforts to
prosecute gender crimes. Thirdly, increased
contributions to humanitarian assistance are required.
The international community should join efforts to
provide timely assistance to the victims of conflicts.
Donor countries can contribute greater resources.
Fourthly, women need assistance to become fully
involved in peace negotiations and to ensure that the
relevant peace agreements include the protection of
women's rights and interests. Fifthly, the positive role
played by local women's organizations should be
valued and supported and the necessary assistance
should be provided. Sixthly, the representation of
women in peacekeeping and peace-building should be
increased. The Secretary-General might consider
appointing more women as special representatives and
promoting women to other high-ranking positions, as
appropriate to specific situations. Member States may
also wish to provide more women officials to
peacekeeping operations.

Protecting women's rights and interests and
giving them a greater role to play requires coordinated
efforts on the part of the international community.
Member States, international organizations and civil
society should support and complement each other's
work. United Nations bodies and agencies should carry
out their respective duties and optimize the use of
resources to achieve maximum synergy. In fulfilling its
responsibilities, the Security Council should enhance
its efforts to defuse and resolve conflicts and thus keep
women out of harm's way by removing the root causes.

The international community should provide
timely help to countries in conflict and war so that they
can restore stability, develop their economies,
strengthen the rule of law, carry out institution-building
and promote integrated social development. Only in an
environment of peace and security can we achieve the
best possible protection for women's rights and
interests and can women play a greater and more
constructive role.

