Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): We want to thank you,
Madam President, for taking the initiative to convene
this seminal briefing and for the concept note that you
provided to guide our deliberations. We want to thank
Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson for setting the
tone for our debate this afternoon. Our appreciation also
goes to Executive Director of United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yuri Fedotov, and Mr. Grono for
sharing their perspectives on an issue of grave concern
and considerable contemporary significance.

The testimony of Ms. Nadia Murad Basee Taha is
heartrending, to say the least. It is better imagined than
experienced. We appreciate her courage.

In an increasingly evil international environment,
conflict situations expose civilians to very grave risks.
Human trafficking and sexual exploitation are some of
those risks. Terrorist groups, such as the Islamic State
of Iraq and the Sham and Boko Haram, operating with
total disregard for international humanitarian law, have
brazenly introduced a new dimension to trafficking in
persons and the sexual exploitation of women and girls
in conflict situations. Those groups have committed
outrageous horrifying acts of depravity that constitute
war crimes and crimes against humanity.

The Nigerian State assures the international
community of its unwavering determination to contain,
degrade and defeat Boko Haram with the support of our
contiguous neighbours: Cameroon, Chad, the Niger and
Benin. Indeed, the military establishment has rescued
a significant number of women and girls held hostage
by Boko Haram and will not rest on its laurels. We are
assured that all hostages will ultimately be rescued.

In very broad terms, eradicating human trafficking
and other forms of modern day slavery is beyond the
capacity of any single State. It requires concerted
international action by a broad range of stakeholders,
including nation States, international organizations,
civil society, non-governmental organizations and
community leaders. We appreciate the efforts of
humanitarian actors that are undertaking advocacy
campaigns to publicize the risks of trafficking, the
tactics employed to coerce and traffick victims, and
what victims could do to protect themselves.

In addition to taking preventive measures, States
must engage in the protection of victims. The Palermo
Protocol specifically requires States to protect the
human rights of victims and to provide measures for the
physical, psychological and social recovery of victims
of trafficking. Laws and procedures that protect
victims will encourage them to come forward, as Nadia
has done today, and testify against traffickers and their
organizations.
Protection is also an integral part of the process of
rehabilitation and the reintegration of the victims. In
this connection, there is a need to support the laudable
work of various stakeholders, including national and
international non-governmental organizations, striving
to provide rehabilitation for victims of trafficking.

The fight against human trafficking is a national
priority for Nigeria. The National Agency for the
Prohibition of Trafficking in Persons, which was
established in 2003 - I think Nigeria was one of the
first States in the world to establish an organization
of that nature - is the principal institution charged
with the responsibility of leading this fight. Since its
inception, the Agency has provided an effective and
comprehensive legal and institutional framework for
the prohibition, prevention, detection, persecution
and punishment of crimes of human trafficking. The
Agency, with the active collaboration of international
partners, has made very significant contributions to the
fight against human trafficking.

Some of the achievements of the Agency include
securing convictions against human traffickers and
facilitating the rescue and reintegration of trafficked
persons. In recognition of the new trends in human
trafficking and the need to further strengthen the
institutional framework. The Trafficking in Persons
Prohibition, Enforcement and Administration Act 2015
was enacted by the legislature. That underscores the
unwavering commitment of the Nigerian Government
to the fight against human trafficking.

We believe the Security Council, for its part, should
play a more central role in the global fight against
human trafficking. One way to achieve this would be
for the Council to specify the trafficking in persons in
the context of conflicts as a stand-alone thematic issue
on its agenda. I believe you mentioned this, Madam
President, at lunch this afternoon. The Council should
also strengthen and enhance its engagement with the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
International Organization for Migration and other
relevant actors with experience in counter-trafficking
activities. Regular briefings by those agencies would
permit the Council to stay abreast of developments in
conflict zones as they concern trafficking in persons.

The Council should also consider expanding
the protection of civilians mandate of peacekeeping
missions to include a counter-trafficking dimension.
That could be particularly helpful in conflict
situations where displaced persons are at great risk of
being trafficked. That would, of course, involve the
specialized training of peacekeeping and humanitarian
personnel to work with victims and potential victims
of trafficking. In post-conflict situations, initiatives
aimed at the rehabilitation of victims should be
integrated into United Nations-led transitional justice
and accountability processes.

The link between human trafficking and
international peace and security is evident from what
I have heard today, and what needs to be done to
combat human trafficking is clear. States must meet
their obligations under the Palermo Protocol. The
Security Council must demonstrate greater leadership.
Indeed, all hands must be on deck. On our part, we
remain committed to collaborating with all actors at
the national, regional and international levels in our
common fight against trafficking in human persons.

