Mr. Akram (Pakistan): I would like to join
colleagues in congratulating the United Kingdom
presidency on having convened this open debate on
women, peace and security, as we mark the fourth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).
We express deep appreciation for the thoughtful
presentations by Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie
Guehenno, High Commissioner Louise Arbour and
Executive Director Thoraya Obaid.

History bears witness to the fact that women and
girls suffer disproportionate violence and exploitation
in conflict situations. Resolution 1325 (2000) made a
landmark contribution to the normative framework
being developed for the protection of women and girls
in armed conflict.

We are grateful to the Secretary-General for his
follow-up report (S/2004/814) on the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). The report
graphically illustrates just how much ground we have
covered in implementing the resolution and how far we
still have to go before our goals can be fully realized.
The report highlights the "major gaps and challenges
[that] remain in all areas" (para. 4). The Secretary-
General says that our collective response remains
inadequate. He regrets our collective failure in
preventing such violence and protecting women and
girls.

Murder, systematic and widespread rape and
other forms of gender violence continue to be reported
from various ongoing conflict situations. This morally
unacceptable scourge of gender-based violence persists
because of a culture of impunity which pervades
situations of armed conflict. Most acts of violence
against women are never investigated because of
indifference, inaction or complicity on the part of the
relevant authorities. The perpetrators are rarely, if ever,
prosecuted and the victims often have little or no
access to the justice system. This must all change if we
seriously want to stop gender-based violence.

The first priority must be to end impunity. In
previous debates on this item, my delegation has called
for the adoption of a declaration whereby the targeting
of women - especially the use of rape as an
instrument of war - will be considered a war crime,
and be subject to national and international
punishment. The proposed declaration would send an
unambiguous message to perpetrators that they will
have to account for such insidious acts.

The second priority should be to demand from all
parties to conflicts full respect for and compliance with
international humanitarian law and other relevant
instruments on the protection of women. Pakistan
earlier proposed initiating a study of recent and
ongoing conflict situations to identify crimes
committed against women, with a view to seeking
redress and compensation for the victims.

The third priority should be to build the
wherewithal for "gender justice" in post-conflict
situations, incorporating gender perspectives across the
broad spectrum of reconstruction efforts. This would,
inter alia, require the reforming and rebuilding of the
judicial, legislative and electoral sectors, as well as the
economic, social and political empowerment of women
within a culturally sensitive framework.

The Secretary-General has noted in his report
(S/2004/814) that the most significant progress in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) has been
made in the peacekeeping arena.

As the largest troop-contributing country,
Pakistan fully recognizes the important role of women
in peacekeeping operations. We are proud of our
female military officers who have served as doctors
and nurses in difficult and dangerous operations in
Africa and the Balkans. We fully support the
mainstreaming of gender perspective in peacekeeping
operations and believe that the appointment of gender
advisors in the field and at Headquarters has served a
useful purpose.

Pakistan is equally conscious of the importance
of gender sensitization of peacekeeping troops and is
complying with this important aspect by incorporating
the two United Nations Standard Generic Training
Modules in its training doctrine.

Pakistan proposed in the debate last year that
peacekeeping operations monitor and regularly report
to the Security Council on the situation of women and
girls in their mission areas. We are therefore glad to
support the intention of the Secretary-General to
include specific monitoring and reporting mechanisms
in his comprehensive strategy and action plan for
mainstreaming gender perspectives in peacekeeping
operations.

Despite the best intentions and ongoing efforts,
the wider implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
remains a formidable challenge in its goals of both
protecting women and increasing their participation.
Fundamentally, in our view, three requirements remain
indispensable: first, universal awareness about
resolution 1325 (2000) and the obligations it entails;
secondly, the sustained and long-term political
commitment of the Security Council, Member States
and national and international stakeholders; and
thirdly, the commitment of substantial human and
financial resources.

For their part, the Security Council and the
United Nations system could do much more to advance
this process for the protection and participation of
women. We propose the following ten measures.

First, the United Nations must develop a
comprehensive strategy for conflict prevention and
resolution, with special emphasis on the protection of
women and girls. Secondly, it must continue to
strengthen provisions in its resolutions to ensure full
compliance with international humanitarian law, end
impunity, and demand accountability for the
perpetrators of crimes against women. Thirdly, the
Council must persist in including gender perspectives
in its resolutions. Fourthly, systematic efforts must be
undertaken to address the so-called "gender deficit" in
the disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration
processes. Fifthly, the United Nations and its agencies
should develop ways to address the special needs of
women and girls affected by conflict, including health
and psychological care. Sixth, the Council and the
United Nations system must work to ensure the fullest
possible participation by women in peace processes, as
well as in post-conflict peace-building activities.
Seventh, the Council must continue its practice of
conducting a yearly review of the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). Eighth, the issues of women
and peace and security should be included in the terms
of reference for all Council missions. Ninth, the
Council and the United Nations must strengthen the
partnership with civil society and hold Arria-formula
meetings on resolution 1325 (2000) at least once every
six months.

Finally, the Council should enhance its
coordination with the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council, with a view to evolving
a composite approach, particularly with regard to the
economic, social and political empowerment of women
and their participation in post-conflict reconstruction.

