Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): We applaud you,
Sir, for organizing this open debate on so important a
topic. We also thank the Secretary-General for
according it importance through his presence yesterday
and his opening remarks.

Bangladesh deemed it a privilege to have been
the delegation to propose in the Council, during its
presidency in March 2000, that a statement be issued
on women, peace and security. The presidential
statement contained in press release SC/6816 of 8
March 2000 recognized some of the following
premises.

First, peace is inextricably linked with equality
between women and men. Second, the equal access and
full participation of women in power structures and
their full involvement in all efforts for the prevention
and resolution of conflicts are essential for the
maintenance and promotion of peace and security.
Third, while entire communities suffer the
consequences of armed conflict, women and girls are
particularly affected. Fourth, women constitute the
majority of the world's refugees and internally
displaced persons. Fifth, although women have begun
to play an important role in conflict resolution,
peacekeeping and peace building, they are still
underrepresented in decision-making in regard to
conflict. Sixth, if women are to play an equal part in
security and in the maintenance of peace, they must be
empowered politically and economically and
represented adequately at all levels of decision-making,
both at the pre-conflict stage and during hostilities, as
well as at the point of peacekeeping, peace-building,
reconciliation and reconstruction. Seventh, there must
be no impunity for war crimes against women and
girls. Eighth, it is important to promote an active and
visible policy of mainstreaming a gender perspective
into all policies and programmes while addressing
armed or other conflicts.

Two years later, those premises remain valid. We
worked further on those objectives with fellow Council
members. The outcome was the landmark resolution
1325 (2000), with Namibia taking the lead. That
resolution provided the legislative mandate for
immediate attention and for defining further actions.

I wish now to refer to the report of the Secretary-
General, which we deeply appreciate; in particular, the
proposed set of 21 actions. We are also in considerable
debt to Angela King, Carolyn Hannan and others for
the very substantive inputs they provided in defining
the tasks. Acknowledgement is further owed to the
contribution of Noeleen Heyzer and the Inter-agency
Task Force on Women, Peace and Security in
connection with the process.

Bangladesh hopes that the Security Council will
examine those proposals with a View to approving
them. The Secretary-General should have the necessary
mandate for their early implementation. We also place
emphasis on a few specific areas.

First, the Security Council must demand of all
parties to armed conflict that they comply fully with
international law applicable to the rights and protection
of women and girls. The legal obligation must also
extend to women and girls under occupation in
Palestine and in other occupied Arab territories.

Secondly, the Security Council must add its voice
to ensuring that there is no impunity for gender-based
crimes. There have been allegations of violence against
women, including rape, as weapons of war.

Thirdly, the Council should consider, where
appropriate, the establishment of gender advisers or
units in multidimensional peacekeeping operations.

Fourthly, to facilitate greater contact with
women's groups and networks, a database of gender
specialists, as well as of women's groups and networks,
in countries and regions in conflict has to be
established.

Fifthly, it is heartening to learn that some
progress has already been achieved in incorporating
gender perspectives into peacekeeping operations -
the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo and the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor, to
cite a few.
Finally, efforts are needed to achieve greater
representation of women in formal peace negotiations.
We have seen the positive contribution of women to the
inter-Congolese dialogue that set an example.

The experience of gender advisers and gender
units in United Nations missions in East Timor,
Kosovo, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Bosnia
and Herzegovina and Sierra Leone have amply
vindicated our conviction about the role of women in
peace and security. Not only in peacekeeping missions,
but also at the grassroots and community levels,
women have organized resistance to militarization and
have created space for dialogue and moderation. By
bringing their experience to the peace table, women
can inject into the peace process a practical
understanding of the various challenges confronted by
women in times of conflict.

Amartya Sen has warned, "When a nation allows
a lower status for its women in any sphere of human
activity, it does so at its own peril". In consonance with
Bangladesh's positive attitude towards the effective
mainstreaming of gender in all walks of life and as part
of our commitment to strengthening the role of women
in peace and security, we have begun to associate
women with United Nations peace operations across a
broad spectrum of missions.

Bangladesh is a member of the Group of Friends
of resolution 1325 (2000), formed at the initiative of
Canada. We remain engaged in the implementation of
that resolution. We look forward to a positive decision
on the Secretary-General's recommendations. We see
those as a forward movement, not just in gender
equality - though also that - but mainly in the forging
of a harmonious cooperation between the sexes to
advance the interests of this Organization and the
aspirations common to all humankind.

