Mr. Liden (Sweden): Let me start by associating

myself with the statement just made by the

Ambassador of Portugal on behalf of the European
Union (EU).

The adoption of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000) seven years ago underlined the importance of
ensuring that the goal of gender justice and gender
equality permeates the work of the international
community in conflict prevention, conflict resolution,
reconstruction and peacebuilding processes. As we
have so often seen, the nature of modern armed conflict
is such that the civilian population and women are
particularly affected. Women must be involved in
resolving the armed conflicts affecting them, their
families and their communities. Women should take
full part in the creation and implementation of peace
agreements, and they must be able to participate
equally in political decision-making process. Efforts
such as security system reform should have a gender
and human security perspective.

We urge the Secretary-General, the Security
Council and all Member States to contribute to the
effective implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
including by increasing the number of women in senior
positions at field level.

Last year, Sweden launched a national plan for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). The
approach of the Swedish Government to resolution
1325 (2000) is based on a holistic view of security,
development and human rights. Agencies, ministries
and Government offices are working together to
achieve the goals of the resolution. As an active
Member of the United Nations and the European
Union, Sweden has an obvious interest in and
responsibility for the full implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) in United Nations peace support activities,
as well as in the European Union's external relations.
The EU's contribution to the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) enhances its effectiveness and
credibility as an actor in crisis management. The EU
handbook on gender for the planning and conduct of
operations, as well as the fairly new feature of gender
advisers in EU missions, are some concrete measures.

The United Nations system has made
considerable efforts to implement resolution 1325
(2000). However, more needs to be done both in the
field and at Headquarters. Concerted and concrete
efforts by the Peacebuilding Commission and the

Peacebuilding Support Office are called for. We are
also looking forward to new initiatives coming from
the Security Council, and we should like to have seen a
request for a special report on the situation of women
and girls as victims in armed conflicts.

We believe that the United Nations system needs
to redouble its efforts to counter violence against
women in conflict. It is also important to underline that
such violence rarely stops once the conflict is over. In
some cases, violence against women even increases.
The efforts to stop this kind of violence must not end
with a peace agreement or even after democratic
elections have taken place. The transition period
should be an opportunity to strengthen the rule of
law - and the law must protect women. For that to
happen, women must also be guaranteed full access to
justice. That very matter will be discussed today in a
meeting organized by the Partners for Gender Justice
Initiative, co-chaired by South Africa and Sweden.

In last year's open debate on resolution 1325
(2000), Sweden underlined that we all have a
responsibility to provide ideas, initiatives and good
practices, and not to simply ask for reports and
proposals from others. The focus of the Partners for
Gender Justice initiative that I mentioned has been on
empowering women to participate in, and gain
improved access to, the justice sector. That work is an
important element for implementing resolution 1325
(2000). Sweden calls on other Member States and the
United Nations to carry it forward by initiating
concrete programmes in the area of women and justice.

More attention should also be paid to the pressing
issue of effectively incorporating women into
demobilization, disarmament and reintegration
measures. Experiences from Sierra Leone and Liberia
show that women who are former combatants or have
been associated with fighting forces face more
difficulties in being accepted back into their
communities than men.

I will finish my statement by once again
underlining that we all have a common responsibility
to contribute to the experience-sharing that is needed
for the further implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). Sweden attaches great importance to taking
into account gender perspectives in all areas of work,
nationally and internationally. It is my hope that this
debate will be a catalyst for further efforts in the
struggle to recognize and act on the legitimate
demands of women for full equality, justice and
opportunity, not only in armed conflicts, but in life
itself.

