Mr. Bonser (Canada) (spoke in French): Canada
welcomes this debate on sexual violence in conflict,
which focuses in particular on trafficking in human
beings, in anticipation of the commemoration of
the International Day for the Elimination of Sexual
Violence in Conflict, which will take place on 19 June.

Unfortunately, we know that sexual violence
affects women, men and children in conflict situations
throughout the world. Canada unreservedly condemns
such practices and seeks to end them, to help victims and
to hold those responsible accountable for their actions.
We also know that women and girls are the main victims
of rape, slavery, forced marriages and trafficking in
human beings, including the most flagrant violations
committed by such extremist groups such as the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham and Boko Haram.
Sexual violence in all its forms is highly detrimental
to the ability of women to make a useful contribution
to the life of their communities and their country, yet
the contribution of empowered women is an essential
precondition for lasting peace and prosperity.

(spoke in English)

We welcome the recent report of the Secretary-
General on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2016/361)
in some 19 countries, in which he makes important
recommendations to the Security Council and the
Member States. We also welcome the testimony of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and thank her for her
tireless work in assessing situations of grave concern
around the world, including in the Middle East, and her
work as Chair of United Nations Action against Sexual
Violence in Conflict. We are pleased to be supporting
the work of her Office with a contribution of $3 million
over three years. We also note the important work
done by experts deployed through the partnership
between UN-Women and Justice Rapid Response in
investigating and documenting sexual violence. Canada
is also pleased to support this work.

As a leading advocate in raising international
awareness of the costs of child, early and forced
marriage, Canada is especially concerned by reports
of increased rates of such marriages in situations of
conflict and displacement. To better understand the
reasons for this increase, Canada funded research by
the Women's Refugee Commission on how traditional
practices associated with these types of marriages
change during conflict and displacement. The study
determined strategies for integrating the prevention of
and response to child, early and forced marriages in
conflict and emergency situations.

Canada also believes that human trafficking, an
affront to human rights and dignity, should be confronted
with the full weight of domestic and international law.
Traffickers view their victims not as human beings, but
as commodities to be exploited for their own financial
gain. Women and children are particularly vulnerable
to human traffickers, and even more so in times of
conflict. Refugees and migrants also face great risks.
As one of the first countries to ratify the United Nations
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in
Persons, Especially Women and Children, Canada takes
very seriously its obligations under Protocol to prevent
human trafficking and prosecute the perpetrators, and
calls on all Member States to do the same.
Sexual violence committed by peacekeepers also
causes serious harm to vulnerable populations and
threatens the effectiveness and credibility of United
Nations peace operations. Every effort must be made to
support the implementation of the United Nations zero-
tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse.

(spoke in French)

Finally, I note that the Government of Canada
has launched a review of its international assistance
to determine the best way to help the poorest and
most vulnerable, to support fragile States and align
our priorities in international assistance with the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1). We want to know how the
empowerment women and girls and the protection
and promotion of their rights through action in favour
of gender equality can be integrated into Canada's
international aid activities. Recognizing the importance
of the participation of all concerned, we invite the
differentactors-Canadianandinternational-interest
in international assistance to participate in the review.
They have until the end of July to submit comments.

