Ms. Mayanja: It is an honour for me to introduce
the report of the Secretary-General on women and
peace and security (S/2008/622). I welcome the
leadership shown by the People's Republic of China in
holding this open thematic debate during its
presidency, a testimony to its commitment to gender
equality and the full involvement of women in all
peace processes. I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for affording me this opportunity to
address the Council on the critical theme of women's
equal participation and full involvement in all efforts
for the maintenance and promotion of peace and
security.

The report before the Council (S/2008/622)
provides an assessment of the progress and challenges
in the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
measures taken by Member States, United Nations
entities and civil society, including best practices, to
improve the capacities of Member States.

Over the past years, some important progress has
been made in mainstreaming a gender perspective into
the overall peace and security architecture, making it
more sensitive to women's needs and concerns. This
Council has addressed various aspects of women and
08-57476
peace in its thematic debates and discussions of
country-specific conflict situations on its agenda. The
adoption of resolution 1820 (2008) earlier this year
marked a new milestone in fighting sexual violence in
situations of armed conflict. The Council recognized
sexual violence as a security problem that requires a
systematic response.

I commend the Council for its efforts in ending
sexual violence. We must maintain and build on the
momentum created by resolution 1820 (2008); by
General Assembly resolutions 62/133 on the
elimination of all forms of violence against women and
62/ 134 on eliminating rape and other forms of sexual
violence; by the Secretary-General's Unite to End
Violence against Women campaign, launched on
25 February 2008; and by many other initiatives of the
United Nations system.

There have been undoubted gains in many of the
broad areas for action set out in the resolution, namely,
awareness of the importance of gender equality,
development of national action plans, gender
mainstreaming, capacity-building and support for the
greater participation of women in decision-making and
nation-building, including in elections and governance.
Significant gains have been made in gender
mainstreaming in peacekeeping and humanitarian
assistance.

More attention to gender equality is being paid in
peacebuilding. Civil society has been active in the
national implementation process, holding governments
accountable and injecting new dynamism into
societies. However, a noticeable gap between policies
and implementation of the resolution remains, in
particular, at the national level. We have a long way to
go in ensuring women's equal participation and full
involvement in all efforts for the maintenance and
promotion of peace and security.

Only ten Member States have developed specific
national action plans for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and five more are in the process
of developing such plans. The capacity of the United
Nations system to provide coherent, timely and
demand-driven support to Member States must be
significantly enhanced.

The report (S/2008/622) contains a number of
action-oriented recommendations to fill those gaps,
calling for more gender-sensitive conflict prevention
and early warning, stronger focus on means to prevent
08-57476
or deter sexual Violence, dispatch of missions of the
Council to assess situations where sexual violence is
being used as a tactic of war and consideration of
targeted sanctions on individuals or parties to conflict
carrying out widespread or systematic sexual violence.

The report also recommends strengthening the
mandates of peacekeeping operations to prevent sexual
violence in conflict and post-conflict situations,
providing peacekeeping operations with adequate
resources, more systematic gender mainstreaming in
security sector reform and the rule of law, and
increasing the use ofArria formula meetings.

Allow me to make a few comments on women's
equal participation and full involvement in all efforts
for the maintenance and promotion of peace and
security, as mandated by resolution 1325 (2000).
Women are most affected by armed conflict and post-
conflict situations. They experience war and conflict in
different ways compared to men; as victims of rape,
trafficking, sexual slavery and forced prostitution as
well as, in some instances, as perpetrators of violence
and participants in conflict.

But they are also a driving force for the prevention
and management of conflicts. They are peacemakers and
advocates for peace and national reconciliation. They are
single heads of households and principal caregivers.
Drawing on shared values of security, women come
together around shared concerns - obtaining wells and
schools, community health, nutrition and care for
children and the elderly. They engage in confidence-
building programmes across communities and play a
key role in fostering reconciliation, both during
conflict and after.

Women's networks mobilize women across party
lines and are sometimes able to build consensus around
peace proposals. Women are among the strongest
advocates of transparent and accountable governance.
In addition, they increasingly create national coalitions
and international networks for peace and democracy,
building blocks for sustainable peace and gender
equality.

However, despite their successes, women
continue to be marginalized and ignored. How can we
harness the full force of women's agency in the peace
and security sphere? That may be done first, by
increasing women's representation at higher levels of
decision-making, and secondly, by ending gender-
3
based violence against women. As the Secretary-
General's report clearly stated,

"Only when the basic need for personal security
is met can one begin to consider participation in
public life ..." (S/2008/622, para. 5)

Thirdly and perhaps most importantly, that force can be
harnessed by breaking out of our old peace paradigm to
make the peace process more accountable and inclusive
of women and their concerns. We cannot afford to have
more than half of the world's population continue to be
excluded from the strategies of peace and security. To
engage those resources requires a fundamental shift in
our thinking. It must become unthinkable not to have
women integrally involved in every stage of peace and
post-conflict reconstruction processes.

It is our duty and indeed our obligation to
millions of women in conflict areas to use the
opportunity offered by Security Council resolution
1325 (2000) to set in motion perhaps one of the most
promising approaches to conflict resolution of the new
century - a comprehensive approach based on
inclusive values and gender equality.

