Ms. Freimane-Deksne (Latvia): Latvia aligns itself
with the statement of the European Union and would
like to make a few remarks in its national capacity.

I thank the Secretary General for his report
(S/2013/525), as well as the Under-Secretary-General
and Executive Director UN Women, High Commissioner
Pillay and Ms. Balipou for their statements.

Latvia welcomes today's adoption of the resolution
2122 (2013) on this very important topic and looks
forward to the high-level review in 2015 on progress and
obstacles in implementing resolution 1325 (2000). We
believe that a global study highlighting best practices,
implementation gaps and challenges and priorities for
further action on women and peace and security will
greatly contribute to that end.

There are three main issues that I would like
to address today: first, women's participation at all
levels of decision-making in conflict and post-conflict
settings; secondly, United Nations gender expertise;
and, thirdly, coordination within the United Nations
and outside on women and peace and security in order
to minimize costs and to maximize the impact on the
ground.

Turning to the first topic, let me emphasize that
women should be involved and participate in the
whole crisis cycle, from the prevention and resolution
of conflict to reinstating justice and the rule of law
in post-conflict settings. Women play a particular
role in voicing women's rights and concerns early
on and in preventing backsliding on women's rights
in post-conflict governance. There is no justice
without women's participation at all levels of public
decision-making, and there is no participation without
women's economic security and full access to public
services. All aspects of women's participation should
be addressed equally, and greater attention should be
paid to the full range of human rights violations that
women experience in both conflict and post-conflict
settings. Latvia, as one of the countries that endorsed
the declaration of commitment to end sexual violence
in conflict and sponsored resolution 2106 (2013), on
the same topic, earlier this year, welcomes the progress
made in the monitoring, prevention and prosecution
of gender-based violence in conflict. However, efforts
should be continued in that regard and the protection of
women and girls should be carried out on a larger scale.

There can be no real impact on women's rights
on the ground if the United Nations and other
international partners are not leading by example.
Women should be adequately represented at different
levels in peacekeeping and special political missions.
Appropriate training on gender-specific issues should
be provided for military, police and civilian personnel
deployed to international peace operations. United
Nations gender expertise is crucial for capacity-building
and the increased engagement ofwomen in peacemaking
and peacebuilding processes. In that regard, Latvia
welcomes the review commissioned by UN Women, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and
other United Nations institutions on the deployment
and coherence of gender expertise across the United
Nations system in post-conflict contexts and encourages
building on its recommendations. Initiatives launched
by UN Women and DPKO, as well as early and active
involvement by the Special Envoys of the Secretary
General for Sahel and the Great Lakes Region, show
that, through common efforts, real results on the women
and peace and security agenda can be achieved.
Finally, let me underline the importance of
gender mainstreaming and coordination within the
United Nations and between different international
organizations active on the issue of on women and
peace and security. Recent intergovernmental outcomes
identified gender equality and women's empowerment
both as a thematic priority and a cross-cutting
issue in promoting development. The quadrennial
comprehensive policy review provided new political
impetus to coordination and accountability for gender
mainstreaming in the United Nations system, already
launched by the United Nations system-wide action
plan on gender equality and the empowerment of
women. We welcome the fact that resolution 2122 (2013)
provides for more regular briefings to the Council
on women and peace and security issues and for the
Council's increased attention to those issues in other
thematic areas of work, as well as while establishing
and renewing the mandates of the United Nations
missions.

We fully agree that, in order to effectively address
threats to the security of women and girls, the links
between the United Nations work in political, human
rights and development fields should be strengthened.
Moreover, better coordination should be ensured among
all organizations on the ground. It is time to consolidate
knowledge and expertise and choose the most effective
ways to deliver the best results for women and girls in
conflict and post-conflict settings.

In conclusion, let me reiterate Latvia's commitment
to the promotion and protection of women's rights at all
levels and in all contexts, as well as our readiness to
actively contribute to common efforts in the effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

