Mr. Christian (Ghana): I join previous speakers
in commending the delegation of the United States for
convening this timely open debate, which seeks to
address the grave sexual violence in situations of
armed conflict. We welcome the presence of United
States Secretary of State Rice and Deputy Secretary-
General Asha-Rose Migiro.

This gathering reinforces our shared belief in the
inherent dignity of every human being whether in time
of peace or in time of conflict. Indeed, the inclusion of
a range of sexual violence offences in the Statutes of
both the International Criminal Court and the ad hoc
international criminal tribunals was itself a strong
affirmation of our shared value that there should be no
tolerance for impunity.
As expressly set out in the concept paper
prepared by the United States (S/2008/364, annex),
there are practical challenges that we have to grapple
with in order to make meaningful progress in dealing
with gender-based and sexual violence, which remain
an important part of resolution 1325 (2000),

considering the almost daily and disturbing reports on
rape and other forms of sexual abuse emanating from
several of the conflict situations in the world,
particularly in Africa.

Improving the response to the scourge of sexual
and other forms of violence against women poses a
great challenge, particularly to developing countries,
which are the major troop contributors. This challenge
calls for fresh thinking aimed at finding more
appropriate measures to enable the United Nations to
discharge its mandate more effectively and with
maximum flexibility and efficiency. As the
representative of a major troop-contributing country,
allow me to briefly share my Government's
experiences and its perspective on ways to improve the
response of peacekeeping personnel to the scourge of
sexual and other forms of violence against women in
situations of armed conflict.

We wish to emphasize that women peacekeepers
serve as role models and encourage girl soldiers and
victims to embrace programmes to disarm former
combatants and generally have a salutary and positive
impact on security sector reform, electoral support and
gender mainstreaming in broken societies where
women are even more marginalized.

Troop-contributing countries must take
responsibility for deploying well-trained peacekeepers.
The term "well-trained" must be redefined to include
having gender awareness. Gender training should also
take place in national staff colleges; it should be
realistic and based on exercises, case studies and split-
second decision-making.

Greater representation by women is therefore
required not only as a matter of principle, but also as a
practical matter, in order to strengthen the effectiveness
of peacekeeping. In this respect, Ghana has made
concerted efforts to increase the integration of women
in its armed and security forces and would endeavour
to deploy more women as peacekeepers. One
innovative strategy Ghana endorses is fostering closer
coordination between public institutions that deal with
peacekeeping and those that deal with women's affairs.
We must put security institutions in closer working
relationships with women's organizations.

We underscore the importance of security sector
reform as an essential element of peace and security.
But to be sustainable, such reform must be gender-
sensitive. Women are the glue that holds families and
communities together, even in the midst of war. There
is a need for greater recognition of the roles women
play in peace consolidation, and they should must be
consulted in all activities undertaken on their behalf
and be equitably represented in strategic responses to
violations.

Better liaison with women's constituencies can
improve access to operational intelligence and can
serve as force multipliers in the achievement of
mission objectives. Increasing women's voice in
security and governance structures can help weed out
the root causes of violence and discrimination. Gender-
sensitive protection efforts should be recognized and
rewarded to help ensure that peacekeeping forces
accord high-priority to the protection of women and
girls.

Failure to prosecute is a licence to rape.
Consistency in prosecutions and in referrals to justice
mechanisms shows that the Security Council takes this
matter seriously. All perpetrators and would-be
perpetrators must know that the international
community, particularly the Security Council, is
watching and is ready to act to end impunity for sexual
violence. States should review and, when necessary,
revise or create applicable laws to ensure that sexual
violence against women is always criminalized.

Bolstering the role and capacity of both the
United Nations and regional security institutions is also
essential. Our region, for example, has benefited from
action at the regional level. The African Union has
demonstrated its zeal in helping to end conflicts on the
continent, and cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union has been positive and should
continue to improve and give meaningful protection for
women.

Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) is
premised on the twin pillars of protection and
empowerment. National-level responses must
ultimately aim at reducing women's economic
vulnerability and dependence as well as their exposure
to exploitative relationships and sexual abuse. In that
connection, protection should not only be a reactive,
band-aid solution; efforts should be made to empower
women and girls in the long term.

As clearly stated by the Secretary-General in
February 2008, at the launch of a multi-year campaign
to end violence against women, Member Governments,
the private sector and civil society can effectively

support increased actions on the ground to end such
violence, prevent this affront to humanity and ensure
that women and girls have the right to a life free of
violence.

Ghana, for its part, will do all that is possible at
the diplomatic, policy and operational levels, as we
have done since the dawn of United Nations
peacekeeping, to bring about the desired change and
impact on peacekeeping operations, aimed at ending
sexual violence against women. We also take note of
the provision to strengthen access to justice and
services for survivors of sexual violence as well as the
emphasis on regional cooperation.

Ghana believes that the draft resolution to be
adopted at the end of this debate constitutes a good
basis for our work, and we support the
recommendations contained therein. We are
particularly pleased to recognize the emphasis on the
role and conduct of peacekeeping missions, including
related recommendations for troop-contributing and
police-contributing countries.

