Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): I wish
to express my delegation's sincere appreciation to the
United Kingdom presidency for choosing the topic
"Trafficking in persons in conflict situations" for this
debate. This topic is most timely, as today our world
is experiencing an unprecedented crisis of conflicts,
marked by complexity and the massive flows of people
that they have generated, reaching a record level of
59.5 million people. That has significantly increased
the risk of human trafficking. There is a need, therefore,
to reflect together so as to seek ways and means of
strengthening action on the part of the international
community, not only to combat the scourge, but also,
first and foremost, to promptly resolve conflicts and
build lasting peace.

Trafficking in persons is one of the most heinous
crimes possible and one of the phenomena most
profoundly undermining the human person, as it strikes
against the most precious part of the human being,
namely, his or her dignity and human value. Nothing
could be more humiliating than to be a victim of that
scourge. The link between conflicts and trafficking in
persons is clear, as indicated by the Special Rapporteur
on trafficking in persons, especially women and
children, in her latest report to the Human Rights
Council (A/71/303). The phenomenon develops not only
during a human or natural disaster, but also as a direct
consequence of humanitarian crises, although the loss
of life garners greater attention.

The reason is simple. Conflicts create situations
bringing vulnerability, both for affected persons
through violations of their rights, as well as in terms
of the loss of public institutions and essential services.
Traffickers use those highly vulnerable contexts to
perpetrate their despicable acts with impunity, thereby
transforming those fragile places into countries of
origin and transit for trafficking.

However, conflict situations are not the only causes
of trafficking deserving our attention. Democracy
gaps, political instability, economic, social and
institutional crises, civil unrest, systematic human
rights violations, corruption, impunity, the absence of
the rule of law, non-compliance with election results,
and the imprisonment of dissidents and political leaders
all constitute a fertile breeding ground in which human
trafficking can plant its roots.

The Security Council identified the issue of
human trafficking as a priority. In December 2015
(see S/PV.7585), the international community heard
for the first time the moving testimony and cry of
alarm expressed by Ms. Nadia Murad, a survivor of
exploitation and sexual slavery at the hands of Da'esh.
That stirring testimony was followed by the Council's
adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2015/25,
which demonstrated the Council's commitment to
preventing, criminalizing, investigating and prosecuting
those involved in human trafficking, leading towards
the reversal of that harmful trend.

Nevertheless, the Security Council must bolster
its action to combat the scourge on several levels,
notably through, first, improved coordination of the
international community's response to crisis. That
requires taking into account, from the outset, all aspects
of the conflict, in particular collective, humane and
responsible management of displacements. Secondly,
improved political will is necessary in order to resolve
conflicts and build lasting peace, taking into account
the specific needs ofthe affected persons and victims of
trafficking, with particular emphasis on socioeconomic
development. Thirdly, special focus is necessary on
conflict-prevention tools for the strengthening of
democracy, the rule of law, justice, public services and
national institutions for the promotion and protection
of human rights. Fourthly, strengthened international
cooperation is necessary so as to address the cross-
border nature of the human trafficking scourge.

Mindful of the need to combat that heinous crime,
Morocco has ratified all relevant international treaties,
including the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children,
supplementing the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime. Furthermore, Morocco
has updated its legislative framework to prevent human
trafficking and combat human rights violations, notably
through the adoption, in June 2016, of Law 27-14 on
the fight against trafficking in human beings. That law
includes, inter alia, broad definitions of trafficking
in human beings and the concepts of exploitation and
the victim.
The law also includes sentencing and preventive
measures to protect victims and convict the perpetrators,
with strengthened sentencing against the perpetrators
of crimes against children, pregnant women and people
in fragile situations. It also contains provisions on
institutional measures to combat the phenomenon, with
the creation of an advisory commission reporting to the
Head of Government.

