Mr. Braun (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would first like to thank the Secretary-General and
this morning's briefers for contributing to today's
open debate with their testimonies and call for action.
Our thanks also go to you, Sir, and to Germany for
convening this debate under your country's presidency
of the Security Council.

Luxembourg associates itself with the statement
delivered this morning by the observer of the
European Union.

Last month, at the initiative of Her Royal Highness
Grand Duchess Maria Teresa of Luxembourg, my
country hosted the international conference Stand
Speak Rise Up!, which is aimed at ending sexual
violence in sensitive regions. Ms. Pramila Patten,
Dr. Denis Mukwege and Ms. Nadia Murad enriched
the conference with their participation just as they
have contributed to today's debate. It was the first
international event of its kind to focus primarily on
survivors and thereby helping to humanize the subject
that brings us together today.

The tenth anniversary of the establishment of the
mandate ofthe Special Representative ofthe Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict should be
duly marked. Resolution 1888 (2009) established key
monitoring mechanisms, including the Team of Experts
on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict,
which carries out vital work on the ground to combat
impunity and support women, men, girls and boys
who have survived sexual violence. Luxembourg has
supported and will continue to support the important
work of Ms. Patten and her team.

How can we strengthen accountability for those
who commit acts of sexual violence? We are following
the efforts to find innovative solutions with interest.
Technological and financial innovation can be a
powerful ally of women's equality and rights on one
condition, which is that we must never assume that
technical solutions can solve political problems. The
challenges that persist are those facing us on the ground.
They are social, security-related, infrastructural
and institutional in nature. Any effective solution
will require the initiatives of national authorities in
cooperation with community organizations in the
countries concerned. We must redouble our efforts to
support them. In that regard, we believe that we must
continue to consider new ways to support survivors.

The adoption of the Rome Statute marked an
important step in the fight against impunity in general,
but more specifically in the fight against sexual and
gender-based crimes. The International Criminal Court
nevertheless represents a legal channel of last resort,
while the responsibility for investigating such crimes
belongs first and foremost to national legal systems. With
the implementation of its national action plan on women
and peace and security, adopted in 2018, Luxembourg
will continue to support the development of capacities
to strengthen the fight against impunity. We are a long-
standing partner of Justice Rapid Response and UN-
Women, which work together to provide specialized
expertise that can be rapidly deployed to carry out
investigations and assist victims of sexual and gender-
based violence in conflict situations. Male and female
survivors deserve both reparations and justice, as well
as the assurance that crimes will not be repeated. The
responsibility to protect requires that we support them.
That responsibility falls to all of us, and Luxembourg
will continue to play its part in that effort.

