Ms. Mabunda Lioko (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this debate on women and peace and
security, and sexual violence in conflict. I also thank
Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed;
Mr. Adama Dieng, Acting Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict;
and Ms. Mina Jaf, Executive Director of Women's
Refugee Route, as well as you, Mr. President, for your
statements this morning.

We also wish to congratulate Ms. Pramila Patten
on her nomination to serve as Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in
Conflict, as successor to Ms. Bangura, to whom we
pay a sincere tribute for her exemplary work in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in the rest ofthe
target countries.

As the President remarked, this debate is the
appropriate venue for sharing our experiences and
efforts with the United Nations since 2013 in the
framework of the technical assistance provided. In that
regard, while there is a link between the lack of physical
security and sexual violence, history will never forget
that eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo faced a
decade of conflict and its attendant phenomenon of the
rape of women. That has been the spark for our debate
to this day. We will recall that rape, used as a war tactic,
was often accompanied by other atrocious acts, as in
the case of Walikale, mentioned this morning and to
which I will refer later.

Two years ago in this forum, my country launched
an initiative to strengthen the situation of Congolese
women, and I am pleased to note that the killing of
women by Congolese citizens has gradually declined
since 2013. Our country has engaged in this struggle
by decreeing a zero-tolerance policy, which is no
longer a mere slogan, and by setting an example at the
highest level. Even the President of the Republic of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo has sought to
indicate this political will by creating the office I have
led since 2014, which is an observatory to coordinate
and facilitate various initiatives to counter sexual
violence. We note that, despite the residual challenges,
a defining turning point has been reached by our
country, as recognized in resolutions 2277 (2016) and
2348 (2017) and in successive relevant reports of the
Secretary-General since 2015.

But we can take nothing for granted. How do we
go from past horrors to a beginning of post-confit
normality? With the help of the United Nations, since
the signing of thejoint communique of 30 March, 2013,
our Government has designed and deployed a plan of
action to combat sexual violence. It has mobilized all the
energies ofthe nation, especially the Ministries ofJustice
and National Defence, the defence and security forces,
the General Auditorate, civil society organizations,
and religious and traditional leaders. Much of this
normalization programme is based on prevention, the
fight against impunity and the socioeconomic response
that I will address in this statement. Beyond technical
principles and terms known to us all, these are lessons
of humanity, experiments in living together, stories
of distress or hope that we champion on a daily basis,
claim as our own, and refuse to deny or stigmatize.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo has enacted
the law of 20 July 2006 and applies the Rome Statute,
which punishes sexual violence. Consequently, the
Forces armees de la Republique democratique du
Congo adopted a campaign plan, led by the internal
Specialized Commission for the Fight against Sexual
Violence, which has been carrying out awareness-
raising activities in all military camps for three
years. The Commission is supported by the United
Nations system.

The implementation of this plan of action has
enabled the developmenet and signing of acts of
solemn commitment by 218 commanders, including
generals and colonels as well as 13,585 trained soldiers
throughout all of the military camps in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We are not only concerned about
the eastern part in conflict, but about the 26 provinces,
in order to ensure the sustainability of the culture of the
fight against sexual violence. The Congolese national
police is part of that dynamic, thereby reinforcing
police capacities.

In order that women lead that fight, as they have
been agents ofchange since 2014, four women have been
promoted to the rank of general, which is extraordinary
in Africa. One of them heads the army's civic education
unit. In the wake ofthat a campaign known as "Breaking
the Silence" was launched with a toll-free number
to enable 22 million Congolese telecommunication
subscribers in rural areas to report rape cases. From
the outset of the campaign, more Congolese men
were calling to denounce cases affecting their nieces
or neighbours, which shows that Congolese men are
supporting the women in eradicating the scourge.

Is that enough? Most certainly it is not. Yet it is
a significant step. Such prevention efforts would be
insufficient if not accompanied by pedagogical value.
But the fight against impunity has been a triggering
factor in our progress. Since 2015, our office, in
collaboration with the Ministry of Justice, has
supported regular annual judicial inspections by senior
judges who assess on the ground the recorded cases
of sexual violence, including the manner and speed
with which they are processed by civil and military
courts throughout all of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo - namely, our 146 territories.

Mobile courts are regularly scheduled by the
Ministry of Justice in rural areas at the scene of the
crime, with the support of the Government and at times
specialized United Nations agencies. I cannot cite all of
them, however the Office of the Special Representative
and the Office ofthe United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights actively participate in mobilizing the
rural courts.

As a result of those rounds, in 2016 throughout
the national territory the military courts achieved
225 convictions, compared to 111 decisions in 2014,
showing an increase of 50 per cent in three years. To
note, the Arusha Criminal Court produced 90 decisions
in 10 years, at the start of the new policy dealing with
war crimes and international crimes.

To clarify any confusion about some of today's
issues, turning to the military justice decisions, it
is important to highlight and note that senior and
other military commanders have been tried and
convicted of rape in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo - for example, the sentencing of General
Kakwavu in November 2014 and that of Colonels
Engangela, known as the "Terminator", and Kibibi
Mutware in 2015. That demonstrates that justice acts
firmly to punish criminals, without regard to rank
or position.

Furthermore, with regard to the emblematic cases
cited in the Secretary-General's report, I will mention
two: the case in Walikale, which was discussed this
morning involving the warlord Ntabo Ntaberi Sheka,
and the case in Kavumu. The case of Walikale concerns
mass rape committed by Sheka and his accomplices,
including Captain Serafin Lionso. Captain Lionso was
arrested and imprisoned in April 2016. We requested
that he be transferred from the high security prison
in Angenga, in the western part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and brought before the military
court in Goma, in the eastern part. The distance between
the place of detention and the crime site is equal to the
distance between the United Kingdom and the Russian
Federation. Such are the challenges we face each day.

On the other hand, with respect to the often cited
rape cases involving the young children of Kavumu,
the accused, a provincial official named Batumike, was
arrested and his parliamentary immunity immediately
waived in August 2016, in order to charge him. No one
should be protected if he is the perpetrator of rape.

Today some Council members recommended that
we document our best practices. I believe it is a good
idea. Indeed, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has just published a compendium of military judicial
decisions from 2010 to 2015, compiled in a document
entitled Bulletin of Decisions of the High Military
Court. That jurisprudence will provide a realistic and
useful overview of the implementation of the fight
against impunity on the ground, and of the challenges.
While seeking to strengthen those achievements, our
country is ready to share its experience with other
countries in conflict affected by this scourge.

By way of example, we took part, along with the
United Nations, in the appointment of a senior Congolese
magistrate, formerly of the general auditor, Colonel
Mutanzini, as Special Prosecutor to the Special Court
of the Central African Republic. Furthermore, recently
the Congolese special police unit for the protection of
women and children was approached by the Government
of the Central African Republic regarding the training
of a special police unit in that area.

It is important to point out that intra-African
solutions initiated by indigenous people are helpful in
furthering progress in the struggle. We welcome the
support of the African Union.

There is no need to punish the executioner; we
must also look after the victims stigmatized by a
socioeconomic response. We are proud to announce that
thanks to the Governments of Japan and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and local non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), for two years we have been able
to offer free apprenticeship training to 1,500 survivors
of sexual violence and returned child soldiers.
The unprecedented coalition of public institutions,
private actors, NGOs and bilateral and multilateral
development partners will ensure that our crusade's
efforts in reaching out to all levels of society will have
every chance of success.

Nevertheless, reparation and compensation for the
victims remains a challenge. In response, on 3 April
I went before the Parliament, accompanied by 130
Congolese NGOs, including those in non-conflict
zones, to submit a draft bill to improve the compensation
for victims.

Moreover, with respect to medical issues, we mourn
the death ofDr. Byamungu, a colleague ofDr. Mukwege
of Panzi Hospital. There are ongoing investigations.
We continue, by way of public institutions and the
Government's available resources, to support both
public and private hospitals in providing better care
to victims. That is what we are doing with Japan to
enlarge the hospital in Kintambo. That is also what
we did in 2016 with regard to the Karibuni Wamama
Medical Centre and the non-governmental organization
Solidarite feminine pour la paix et le developpement
integral in Bunia.
All of those initiatives, we hope, will facilitate the
gradual decline in cases of sexual violence even if we
have not yet completely eliminated cases of rape.

Lastly, after its three years of work, I would like
to acknowledge and commend the contribution of the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and its group of
experts for the excellent cooperation that allowed us to
implement the joint communique with the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo on the fight
against sexual violence in conflict.

We must also thank all of those who, since 2014,
have made the realization of that progress possible,
showed no scepticism with regard to the good will of
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and have remained by our side down that long
road: the regional non-governmental organizations that
joined us in the struggle; the Congolese Government,
which, despite security-related constraints, has
allocated a specific budget for our office's work since
2014; and the Government of Japan, either directly or
through the intermediary of the Office of the Special
Representative, in collaboration with UN-Women and
the United Nations Fund for Population Activities.

It is perhaps that collaborative work that has led
to the decline of reported cases of sexual violence in
the successive reports of the Secretary-General. We
went from 15,352 cases reported in 2013 to 1,734 in
2016 - an 85 per cent decrease in three years. That
is not a victory but the beginning of something that
is attributable to the will of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the active
synergy of our helpful partners standing alongside us.
It is no accident. It is the result of hard, daily work and
an example of collective will manifested at the highest
levels of the State.

In the light of that report, we reiterate the
commitment of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to continue the struggle to provide additional rights
and an increased sense of peace and well-being to the
women of that country who were once humiliated by
unpunished rapes.

In that regard, my country will welcome with
interest, during 2017-2108, technical discussions
more focused on a precise road map pertaining to
consolidating the progress made with a view towards
delisting scenarios.

