Mr. Schaper (Netherlands): My delegation
welcomes this debate and would like to make a few
remarks in addition to the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union, with which
my delegation aligns itself, and to others that have
underlined the importance of the topic of women and
peace and security.

The recent cases of sexual and gender-based
violence in countries in conflict such as Syria and
Mali continue to illustrate that fighting such violence
remains a priority. It is evident that sexual violence
exacerbates conflict and perpetuates insecurity. It
holds entire communities hostage and has an economic,
social, cultural and inter-generational impact. Women
are excluded from communities and cannot engage in
economic activity or access markets; girls cannot go to
school safely.

Sexual and gender-based violence can be seen from
two perspectives. On the one hand, we see women
as victims of such Violence, from the perspective of
violence against women. On the other hand, however,
we often tend to underestimate the role that women can
play in finding solutions through conflict prevention,
resolution and transformation - in fact, by using the
reverse perspective, of women against Violence. That
capacity is underutilized, decreasing the effectiveness
and likelihood ofsuccess ofany peace and reconstruction
process. The Netherlands recognizes that women play
active roles as peacebuilders, politicians, activists
and quite often also as combatants. We should listen,
therefore, to the priorities that women define, and we
should understand the barriers that women perceive.
Their participation in finding solutions to conflicts and
in reconstruction processes is indispensable.

The Netherlands considers sexual violence in
conflict as a sign of a failure to implement all the
elements of the agenda for women and peace and
security. In today's debate, therefore, we would like
to stress four points. First is the importance of taking
urgent action in key areas, especially those of women's
participation and equality and of prevention, response
and accountability. Another important area is national
and regional efforts to end impunity, including through
referrals to the International Criminal Court, and by
emphasizing the importance of reparations.

Secondly, we should give specific attention to
the importance of providing effective support and
protection to women-led organizations and defenders
of women's human rights, particularly given the threats
such defenders face and their lack of resources. Thirdly,
there is a need for a comprehensive multisectoral
response for survivors, including medical care, in
accordance with international humanitarian law, and
access to emergency contraception, safe abortion
and HIV treatment, as well as access to justice and
psychosocial health care services for women and
girls. Lastly, and equally important, is strengthening
the gender components of security sector reform
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes, not least through ratification and full
compliance with the Arms Trade Treaty, which gives
substantive attention to gender dimensions.

Through policies such as its human rights and
gender strategies, the Netherlands pays particular
attention to issues such as gender equality, women's
political role and leadership, economic empowerment
and ending trafficking of and violence against women
in post-conflict countries and unstable areas. In that
regard, we are actively implementing resolution 1325
(2000) through a second national action plan for 2012-
2015, signed by three Dutch ministries and 41 civil
organizations. The plan focuses on six countries:
Afghanistan, South Sudan, the Sudan, Burundi,
Colombia and the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
as well as on the Middle East and North Africa region.
I will cite three examples.

In Afghanistan, a group of Dutch signatories to the
plan are working with a local telephone and Internet
provider to start a programme connecting poor rural
women and men with more modern young people in
large towns via an SMS platform. The objective is keep
the rural poor better informed about national women's
issues and to foster dialogue between them and urban
young people on issues such as Violence against women
and the role women can play in fighting it.

My second example is that together with the
Funding Leadership and Opportunities for Women's
Fund and the Human Rights Fund, the Netherlands
supports many women's organizations in their struggle
to combat Violence against women. When women's
political and economic empowerment is supported,
their vulnerability to sexual violence is reduced. For
example, the Netherlands has funded the Bell Bajao
campaign, which combats violence against women
with a very successful media effort. Started in India,
it consists of small clips that are nested in various
popular television talk shows and programmes such as
Who Wants to Be a Millionaire. The clips have become
very popular and have spread to other countries in the
region.

My third example is that in the Middle East and
North Africa region we have started, with a Dutch
non-governmental organization and an accounting
firm, a new fund with a budget of about €5.8 million,
designed to strengthen the financial and organizational
management of women's organizations in the region.

In conclusion, women can be powerful actors for
peace, security, and prosperity. When they participate
in peace processes and other formal decision-making
processes, they can play an important role in initiating
and inspiring progress on human rights, justice, national
reconciliation and economic revitalization. They can
also build coalitions across ethnic and sectarian lines
and speak up for marginalized and minority groups.
Investing in women's leadership is therefore smart
security as well as smart development.

