Ms. Holmlund (Finland): Ten years ago, the
Council recognized that conflicts have a differing
impact on the lives of women and men, and that
women and men alike have a valuable contribution to
offer in advancing peace. In short, the Council
recognized gender equality and the promotion and
protection of women's rights as central issues of its
mandate of maintaining international peace and
security. We congratulate the Council, the United
Nations, regional organizations and all Member States
for the work done over the past decade, and we thank
you, Mr. President, for having convened this
anniversary meeting.

Despite substantial efforts, there is no place for
complacency. We hope that the next decade will be one
of more strategic and systematic action, improved
accountability and measurable progress. The
recommendations and the comprehensive set of
indicators in the Secretary-General's report on women
and peace and security (S/2010/498) provide a tool for
accountability. The seven-point action plan presented
in the Secretary-General's report on women's
participation in peacebuilding (S/2010/466) is a very
good framework for systematic action. We encourage
the Council and the United Nations as a whole to put
them to full use, and we stand ready to do our part.

Finland aligns itself with the statement of the
European Union to be delivered later today.

In addition, I wish to offer some insights into
what Finland has done and learned during the past
decade, and to commit ourselves to future action with
regard to the participation of women at all stages and
all levels of peace processes, peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and post-conflict recovery; national
action plans; and working to combat impunity,
including paying due attention to victims.

Finland believes that conflict prevention,
mediation, and the peaceful settlement of disputes
should occupy a more central place in the peace and
security agenda of the United Nations. Equal and
effective participation of women at all stages and at all
levels of peace processes is an integral part of our
policies. For example, Finland supports the African
Union in strengthening its mediation capacities. We
recently carried out a very successful training exercise
on the participation of women in preventive diplomacy
and mediation.

As we mentioned in this Chamber a few weeks
ago when speaking on peacebuilding, even if outside
actors cannot dictate the composition of the negotiating
delegations, there is a lot that can be done (see S/PV.6396). Peace mediators and their supporting
teams can always ensure that sufficient gender-
expertise is provided to the parties and can organize
parallel consultations with women's groups if they do
not have a seat at the table. Those measures should
help us change the currently dismal record of women's
participation in peace processes.

The participation of both women and men in
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and post-conflict
reconstruction is crucial for the sustainability of their
ultimate objective: peace. Let me be clear. Full and
equal participation is important for the delivery of the
mandates that this Council has provided. A recent study
from Afghanistan showed that women's participation in
provincial reconstruction teams was beneficial to the
operational effectiveness of those teams. That is why
one of the goals of Finland's National Action Plan has
been to increase the numbers of women in both
military and civilian positions in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding operations. It can be done.

Before we initiated our Plan in September 2007,
women represented 19 per cent of our seconded experts
deployed in civilian positions in peace operations.
Through consistent efforts, we have increased that
proportion to a high of 34 per cent last August. We also
believe that understanding gender aspects is important
for all members of peace operations, and we have
therefore supported the work of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations in developing gender training
for all United Nations peacekeepers.

Increasing the number of women in the highest
positions can wait no longer. The United Nations and
regional organizations have a responsibility to set
examples and to promote gender equality, while
Member States have a responsibility to provide and
support female candidates. Accordingly, Finland
commits itself to nominating an increasing number of
female candidates.

National action plans on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) have proved to be the primary
tool in strategic and systematic implementation.
Finland's National Action Plan was jointly drafted by
five ministries and civil society partners, which are
also actively engaged in its implementation and follow-
up. As we look forward to the Council supporting the
comprehensive set of indicators today, we commit to
including the indicators in our own National Action
Plan when it is revised next year.

Including civil society in the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) is vital. For its part, Finland
actively seeks advice from and forms partnerships with
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in
implementing its National Action Plan. For example, in
our national Anniversary Seminar, held in Helsinki last
Friday, our President, our Foreign Minister and I were
honoured to hear from Special Representative Margot
Wallstrom and representatives of civil society. Many
ideas for improved concrete action and new best
practices emerged from that exchange, including a
proposal to include medical professionals in our crisis-
management teams in order to better respond to victims
of sexual and gender-based violence.

Finland also gives financial support to several
NGOs working in the area of women, peace and
security. One example is Femmes Africa Solidarite.
Among other invaluable activities, it supports drafting
of national action plans and a regional action plan for
the Great Lakes region in Africa.

We are willing to share our lessons learned and
experiences with other countries engaged in the
preparation and implementation of their own national
action plans. At the moment, Finland is cooperating
with Kenya in drafting its national action plan through
a twinning project. Should the experiences from that
programme be successful, we remain open to
considering twinning with another partner country in
the future.

Finally, I shall say a few words on the centrality
of the work against impunity and due attention to the
victims of human rights violations and serious crimes.

Justice for victims is essential in restoring the
confidence of people in their Government and in
promoting sustainable peace. There should never be
amnesties for the most serious crimes, including sexual
and gender-based violence, which can constitute war
crimes and crimes against humanity. Finland fully
supports the efforts of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) and the ad hoc tribunals in that regard.

As an additional tool, I wish to highlight the
potential of the Justice Rapid Response mechanism, a
multilateral stand-by facility to rapidly deploy criminal
justice and related professionals, trained for
international investigations and at the service of States
and international institutions. While still in its first
year of operations, the Justice Rapid Response
mechanism has already successfully completed three
deployments and trained over 80 experts, thus proving
its value. We are convinced that participation in the
Justice Rapid Response mechanism is yet another
example of concrete action for realizing the women,
peace and security agenda.
Justice is not only prosecutions. It includes the
reform and strengthening of the security sector and the
rule of law structures and, very importantly, addressing
the needs of victims and their right to reparations.
Among other things, Finland continues to provide
financial contributions to the ICC Trust Fund for
Victims and to United Nations Action against Sexual
Violence in Conflict.

In closing, let me repeat our hope that the next
decade will be one of strategic and systematic action,
accountability and measurable progress. We look to the
Council for continued leadership and to the newly
established UN Women and the whole of the United
Nations system for enhanced action. You have our full
support.

