Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I thank you, Madam
President, for holding today's open debate on the highly
important issue of displaced women and girls. We
would also like to thank the Under-Secretary-General
and Executive Director of UN-Women and the other
invitees for their substantive briefings.

Ukraine welcomes the adoption of the presidential
statement S/PRST/2014/21 earlier today.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
made earlier by the observer of the European Union.
However, we wish share some observations in our
national capacity.

The year of 2014 marks 14 years since the adoption of
the landmark resolution 1325 (2000), which established
the basis for the women and peace and security agenda
and called for special protection for and the full and
equal participation of women in all conflict prevention,
resolution and post-conflict peacebuilding efforts.
Ukraine remains fully committed to the implementation
of the the resolution, as well as to the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women, the outcome documents of the Beijing
Conference and of the twenty-third special session of
the General Assembly.

A national action plan in accordance with
resolution 1325 (2000) to promote women's equal and
full participation as active agents in the prevention and
resolution ofconflicts, peacebuilding and peacekeeping,
as well as to incorporate the gender perspective in
all areas of peacebuilding, is being developed by the
Government of Ukraine, in close consultation with
United Nations agencies and civil society. The plan
will provide for a number of practical steps aimed at
promoting women's greater participation in political,
economic and social life, as well as addressing the
current challenges faced by women and girls, first
and foremost those caused by the ongoing foreign
aggression against our country.

Despite certain setbacks affecting women in
Ukraine, including the budget cuts caused by more than
six months of foreign aggression, Ukraine, in close
cooperation with its international partners, is making
efforts to address imbalances based on gender and to
review its gender policies with the view to promoting
the effective participation of women in public and
political life and to empower them.

Ukrainian society is united. Our country is fully
committed to build on the momentum inspired by
our European choice and to ensure access to crucial
services for those women and girls who are currently
internally displaced and, ultimately, to make women in
Ukraine equal and active members of society who are
able to lead and coordinate in promoting their rights.

In its recent report, the United Nations human
rights monitoring mission in Ukraine finds that in the
Donetsk region women comprise 15 per cent of those
killed and 15 per cent of those wounded as a result of
the conflict. Women who have remained in the area are
forced to clean, cook and wash clothes for the members
of illegal armed groups supported by Russia. Groups
of volunteers helping to evacuate people received first-
hand reports of rape or detention of women at check-
points. There have also been incidents of abductions
of women by illegal armed groups whose whereabouts
remain unknown.

We are particularly alarmed by reports of the
abduction of people in the territory of Ukraine and their
subsequent illegal transfer to the Russian Federation
for interrogation. Ukrainian servicewoman Nadiya
Savchenko, captured in the Luhansk region in July
without any legal grounds, remains in a detention
facility in the Russian Federation, where she is
subjected to inhuman practices that constitute a flagrant
violation of international law and obligations under
bilateral treaties. We demand the immediate release
of Ms. Savchenko and will do everything possible to
ensure that those involved in her abduction and illegal
detention are brought to justice.

This morning Russian delegation stated that
currently there are 830,000 Ukrainian refugees on
Russian territory. That number cannot be trusted, as it
has not been independently verified and comes from
a single source, Russian Federation itself.Yet, what
Russian delegation failed to mention in the first place
is that the situation of internally displaced persons
(IDPs) in Ukraine is of Russia's own making. It is a
direct consequence of its aggression against Ukraine,
which started with invasion and occupation of the
Autonomous Republic of Crimea, an integral part of
Ukraine, and continued with the creating and now
fuelling of conflict in the east of my country.

The Russian delegation also did not mention
that, according to the Secretary-General, his Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and other
authoritative sources, at this stage the humanitarian
situation is being managed properly by the Government
of Ukraine, in coordination with our international
partners. It is exactly in that context that we provided
every assistance to one of today's briefers, Mr. Chaloka
Beyani, Special Rapporteur on the human rights of
IDPs, during his visit to Ukraine.

According to the latest official statistics, the number
of IDPs in Ukraine stands 275,489 people. Two thirds of
adult IDPs are women. The Government fully realizes
their specific needs, as most IDP families include
elderly and unaccompanied women with children. A
national law on IDPs was adopted on 20 October this
year. It aims at ensuring the rights and freedoms of
IDPs, including women, and at addressing key issues
in this area, including by facilitating humanitarian
assistance. Measures to strengthen the capacity of
our communities to absorb IDPs are being undertaken
by the Government. The issue of IDP women will be
of particular concern in the course of elaborating,
adopting and implementing the national action plan in
accordance with resolution 1325 (2000).

The Russian delegation also forgot to mention its
so-called humanitarian convoys sent to Ukraine in
clear violation of the international and national law, in
a unilateral and shadowy manner without involvement
by the International Committee of the Red Cross, let
alone Ukrainian Government consent. Should Moscow
proceed with the fourth such convoy as it has announced
today, it will be yet another violation of the Charter of
the United Nations.

Time and again we have stressed that the only
way that Russia can contribute to the alleviation of
the humanitarian situation it has created in the east
of Ukraine is to stop waging a hybrid war against
my country, to halt sponsoring and arming terrorists,
to fully withdraw its troops and mercenaries and to
establish effective and verifiable border contributionrol.

