Ms. Hutchinson: I thank you, Sir, for the
opportunity to address the Security Council as the
NATO Secretary General's Special Representative for
Women, Peace and Security. I would also like to thank
this morning's briefers for their incredibly moving and
powerful statements. I especially thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and her team for all the work that
they do.

This year NATO is celebrating its seventieth
anniversary, which provides an opportunity not only to
reflect on its achievements, but also to look to the future.
NATO's core mission over the past 70 years has been to
closely safeguard the fundamental rights of democracy,
individual liberty and the rule of law - themes that
resonate so clearly with the women and peace and
security agenda and underscore our work on the
protection of civilians. The adoption of the women
and peace and security resolutions and the work of the
Council have established a new course in understanding
and responding to the grievous, systematic sexual
abuse of women and girls in and around conflict.
Awareness that conflict-related sexual violence affects
not only women and girls, but entire communities, is
now entrenched in our collective thinking.

Last year, NATO Heads of State and Governments
endorsed a new policy and action plan on women, peace
and security, introducing our guiding principles of
integration, inclusiveness and integrity. Those collective

principles provide a connective tissue linking security,
stability and protective environments, and frame our
approach to protection through the kaleidoscope of
women and peace and security. For NATO, that means
that there can be no protection without participation
because, at its root, sexual Violence is a gendered issue.

Sexual violence arises from fundamental gender
inequalities. Therefore, focusing on solely protective
and preventative solutions is limited and insufficient.
In order to effectively combat sexual violence, we
must address and dismantle all obstacles that impede
women's full participation in peace and security,
including in peace processes. Eradicating sexual
violence in conflict and focusing on operationally
effective responses to that appalling abuse of women
and girls is critical, but it should not take place at the
expense of the empowerment of women.

The long-term destructive nature of conflict-
related sexual violence, as well as its effect on entire
communities, continues to pose significant threats to
global peace and security. For NATO, that has become
central to its efforts to protect civilians in its missions
and operations.

In Afghanistan, we are working closely with the
Ministries of the Interior and Defence to improve their
efforts to tackle sexual violence. Our work is helping
to increase the awareness of the Afghan authorities and
bolster their efforts to identify and investigate acts of
sexual violence.

In Kosovo, we are focusing on community
outreach and ensuring that the Kosovar population
understands NATO's role in combating conflict-related
sexual violence.

In Iraq, we are working with the military medical
school to increase awareness of conflict-related sexual
violence, with a particular focus on providing advice
to medical personnel on how to work with victims and
survivors and how to put effective prevention strategies
into action.

Finally, at NATO headquarters, we are developing
a new handbook for commanders and operational
planners as a reference tool for critical thinking and
decision-making in military crisis situations and to
guide them as they put in place the actions required to
prevent and respond to conflict-related sexual violence.
But there is so much more we can do, because,
despite our best efforts, the efforts of the international
community, the plethora of attention and the resolutions,
commitments, endorsements and financing, women
constantly remain at risk and subject to heinous
brutality around the world.

While the Alliance has long held the women and
peace and security principles as an innate element of
our core tasks, on this seventieth anniversary year
we pledge to do even more to address conflict-related
sexual violence within our operational mandates and we
will continue, wherever we are deployed, to create the
conditions for security that will allow women and girls
to live free from abuse and violence. Only in that way
will we fulfil our international obligations to prevent
the threat of violence and protect those most in need.
Ultimately, in tackling sexual violence against women
and girls, we do more than help individual victims;
we set a tone for respecting fundamental dignities and
human rights, and by doing that we can lay a foundation
for lasting stability.

