Mr. Sefue (United Republic of Tanzania): Let me
begin by expressing our sincere appreciation to the
delegation of Uganda for organizing this open debate.
The tenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000)
provides us with an opportunity to further reaffirm the
indispensable role of women in conflict prevention and
resolution and peacebuilding.

My delegation associates itself with the
statements made by the representative of Namibia on
behalf of States members of the Southern African
Development Community and by the representative of
Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women,
Peace and Security.

We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2010/498). The set of indicators annexed to the
report provides a good and objective basis for
monitoring the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). It is our hope that the Council will endorse
those indicators.

As an equal component of any society, women
should have equal and active participation in
formulating political, economic and social policies.
Equally, as victims of exclusion, as vulnerable targets
in conflicts and as mothers and breadwinners, women
have high stakes in conflict prevention and resolution,
and in all issues related to peace and security. Yet, in
the name of tradition, in the name of culture and
sometimes even in the name of security, women have
continued to be excluded, and too often they have been
set aside while men brokered peace agreements. We are
encouraged, therefore, that more and more women are
challenging this viewpoint and are increasingly
demanding involvement as stakeholders in their
communities. Their potential as peacebuilders must
now be harnessed.

We have to make concerted efforts to support and
strengthen the capacities of women and their networks
to actively participate in all processes of conflict
prevention and management, as well as in
peacebuilding and peace consolidation. In this regard,
we commend the efforts that have been undertaken by
various stakeholders, in particular the United Nations
system, civil society and various national political
leaders, in promoting the participation of women in
peacebuilding and peace consolidation processes.

The adoption of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000) was an important milestone in empowering
women in the critical areas of peace and security,
where women have often been deliberate targets and
silent Victims of violent conflicts. The effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) is therefore a
necessity. In this regard we wish to emphasize the
following points.

First, there is a need to create more awareness
and to provide technical support for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
subsequent resolutions, such as 1820 (2008), 1888
(2009) and 1889 (2009), specifically in national gender
machineries, foreign affairs ministries, the judiciary
and the army.

Secondly, women's participation in peace
processes and post-conflict planning should be routine,
predictable and mandatory. Such participation must
now be the norm, not tokenism.

Thirdly, women's political and economic
empowerment and the promotion and protection of
women's and girls' rights are critical for promoting
women's participation in conflict prevention,
post-conflict activities and gender mainstreaming in
post-conflict strategies. More funds should now be
provided in this regard, including to ensure that women
have access to quality education, to capacity-building
through entrepreneurship and to economic opportunity.

Fourthly, support for post-conflict countries
should include reform of their justice systems and
security sectors to ensure that there is a credible and
supportive environment for the participation and
protection of women.

Fifthly, impunity for all those who abuse women
and girls and violate their human rights, as well as for
those who commission such acts, must cease forthwith.
These persons must be speedily brought to justice.

Sixthly, we must support UN Women, which is
well placed to coordinate the various actors within the
United Nations system and bring coherence to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
Allow me to conclude by encouraging the
Security Council to continue to be seized of this matter.

