Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing today's debate and
for the priority that the United Kingdom is devoting to
combating sexual violence in conflict. 1 also appreciate
the remarks and presence of Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon this morning. I wish to thank Special
Representative Bangura, Special Envoy Jolie and
Ms. Adong Anywar for their briefings and leadership
on this critical issue affecting international peace and
security.

The United States welcomes this opportunity to
reaffirm the indispensable role of women in bringing
peace and security to countries embroiled in conflict
or emerging from it. Women's active, indeed integral,
involvement in peace processes and transitional justice
mechanisms, including to address sexual violence, is
critical to laying the foundation for lasting peace. The
resolution that we have adopted today reinforces our
collective efforts to prevent conflict-related sexual
Violence, hold perpetrators accountable for their crimes
and provide support and justice to survivors. It also
recognizes that national Governments have the primary
responsibility for addressing the issue.

We see signs of progress as some national
Governments are making justice systems more
responsive and accessible to survivors of sexual
violence. For example, Sierra Leon's new sexual offence
law gives stiff minimum sentences to perpetrators. Sri
Lanka's women's protection units provide female staff
at police stations, and privacy for women to report
crimes. In May, Somalia committed to ensuring the
the protection of victims, witnesses, journalists and
others who report on sexual violence - a necessity for
strengthening legal cases and bringing those issues into
the public sphere.

Special Representative Bangura deserves special
thanks for her significant work with authorities to
reduce sexual violence in Somalia, the Central African
Republic and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

We applaud and appreciate the critical role
that civil society, especially local women's groups,
plays in assisting survivors by providing them with
medical care, counselling and a political voice, and by
facilitating their access to justice. The United States is
proud to support Congolese organizations that provide
free legal aid for survivors, as well as training for
provincial lawyers and mobile courts - courts that
heard almost 3,000 cases in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo last year. The efforts of local civil society
remain vital and deserve even greater support from
national authorities and the international community.

We also commend international initiatives that
bolster national capacity on the issue. The United
Kingdom, and Foreign Secretary Hague in particular,
deserves praise for leading the development by the
Group of Eight of an international protocol on the
investigation and documentation of rape and other forms
of sexual violence in conflict. Through efforts such as
Justice Rapid Response, UN-Women and other entities
have provided valuable technical support for promoting
accountability by helping to document evidence for
judicial processes. And the Security Council has
adopted targeted sanctions against those who commit,
command or condone sexual violence in places such
as the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We strongly
encourage United Nations Sanctions Committees to
expand their use of that tool to fight impunity.

We have indeed made strides in addressing sexual
violence in conflict, but there is still a long way to go.
More countries should criminalize conflict-related
sexual violence. Provisions that prohibit amnesty for
perpetrators must be put into ceasefire and mediation
agreements. And it is imperative that the international
community and senior United Nations officials, at
Headquarters and in the field, support the mandate of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict.

The Security Council must continue to treat this
threat to international peace and security with the
utmost gravity. Sexual violence in conflict cannot
and must not be viewed narrowly as just a women's
issue, since it remains a horrific weapon of war that
destroys individuals, devastates communities and even
destabilizes countries. Above all, let us remember that
sexual violence is not cultural, it is criminal.

