Archbishop Auza (Holy See): The Holy See
extends to the presidency of the Plurinational State
of Bolivia its appreciation for convening this open
debate on the important theme of women and peace and
security. Women, as Pope Francis has said, "have the
great gift of being able to give life, being able to give
tenderness, being able to give peace and joy". When
women have the opportunity to pass on their gifts to
the entire community, society is inevitably transformed
to better reflect the human family. Women are at the
forefront of what Pope Francis called the "revolution of
tenderness", which the world urgently needs.-

Women offer an important contribution to dialogue
with their capacity to listen, to welcome and to open
themselves generously to others. Women are often the
first ones to assist others, especially the weakest in the
family and in society, yet they also pay the very high
cost of enduring the consequences of conflicts.

Resolution 1325 (2000) remains a significant
instrument that stresses the equal participation and
full involvement of women in all efforts for the
promotion of peace and security. Dialogue and political
engagement are in fact a journey that men and women
must undertake together. The Holy See, which often
participates in mediation efforts among the parties
involved in various violent conflicts throughout the
world, has been pleased to see the leadership of women
during those processes.

Women and girls in conflict situations suffer the
trauma of war. They can be all-too-easy targets to
humiliate and inflict pain on the enemy. The Holy
See strongly condemns in particular the use of sexual
violence as a weapon ofwar and calls on Member States
and non-State actors always to defend women and girls,
and all innocent civilians caught in the crossfire.

The Catholic Church, especially through the
activities of its many courageous religious sisters and
volunteers, has always defended the dignity and human
rights of those enduring conflicts and humanitarian
emergencies by providing physical protection as well
as moral and spiritual support; working with police and
border-control agents; facilitating access to justice and
humanitarian aid; helping to fight arbitrary detention;
assisting with access to housing, emergency health care
and education in many cases when there is no one else
to provide such basic services; and mediating tensions
with host communities.

The Holy See supports the efforts being made
to ensure that each woman benefits from assistance
when it is needed. However, while acknowledging the
particular risks that women and children face in the
context of humanitarian emergencies and their specific
and integral needs regarding access to basic health
care, essential obstetric services, sanitary services
and food security, the Holy See cannot accept as a
fitting solution those services that promote and provide
abortion, such as those included in the minimum initial
service package for reproductive health.

Humanitarian law and related programmes are
established as measures to support life and to save the
lives ofthose who find themselves in critical situations.
Thus humanitarian aid should never be envisaged as
operating, or actually operate, against the right to life;
abortion is never a safe solution. The youngest members
of the human family cannot be discriminated against
based on emergency situations of migration, conflict or
disaster. As Pope Francis has emphasized,

"Human beings are ends in themselves and never

a means of resolving other problems. Once this

conviction disappears, so do solid and lasting

foundations for the defence of human rights".

