Mr. Puente (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Let me
begin, Mr. President, by welcoming you to this meeting
of the Security Council. It is an honour to have you
among us. We also recognize your delegation's
leadership in forging this initiative in follow-up to
resolution 1325 (2000).
Our thanks go to the Secretary-General for his
report on women and peace and security (S/2009/465),
as well as to Deputy Secretary-General Migiro for her
statement. My thanks go also to Ms. Rachel N. Mayanja,
Ms. Ines Alberdi and Ms. Asha Hagi Elmi Amin.

We congratulate the delegation of the United States
for its successful presidency of the Security Council in
September, and we wish the Vietnamese delegation every
success during its presidency this month.

Almost 10 years have passed since the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), and, while some progress
has been made, the realities faced by women in conflict
and post-conflict situations continue to be a matter of
concern. Armed conflict continues to have a
disproportionate impact on women and girls, and
sexual violence continues to destroy the lives of
thousands of them. We reiterate our appeal that in any
conflict situation the parties recognize that it is essential
under all circumstances to respect and ensure respect for
the provisions of international humanitarian law.

Mexico is of the View that resolutions 1882
(2009) and 1888 (2009), which address sexual violence
in armed conflict, constitute a positive step in
strengthening applicable international law with respect
to the protection of civilian populations in armed conflict,
in particular the most vulnerable groups affected by
sexual violence, including women and children.

The challenge now is to ensure full
implementation on the ground, and resolution 1889
(2009), which we adopted this morning, is a very
valuable contribution in that regard. We hope that the
special representative of the Secretary-General on
sexual violence in armed conflict and the team of
experts - both called for in last week's resolution
1888 (2009) - will contribute to progress in this area.

We recognize the efforts being made by the
United Nations Development Programme, the
International Research and Training Institute for the
Advancement of Women, the World Food Programme, the
United Nations Development Fund for Women and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations in promoting
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We hope
that the outcome of negotiations on the new gender
entity will expedite progress, which has been slow thus
far, on the implementation of that resolution.

Mexico reaffirms how important it is that the
mandates of peacekeeping missions include measures
to support Governments in formulating national action
plans for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

We can wait no longer for the international
community to give due priority to the role of women as
active protagonists, not solely as victims, in order to
remedy their marginal participation in peace processes
and mediation. We fully support the Secretary-General
appeal for a strategy to increase the number of women
in senior United Nations positions, in particular as
special representatives, special envoys, high-level
mediators and officials in peacekeeping and political
missions.

We also view it as especially important to request
of the Secretary-General a series of indicators in order
to better and more effectively assess the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We consider
that this would be a valuable tool that will enable us to
make progress next year, when we mark the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).

The lack of follow-up mechanisms for resolution
1325 (2000) has hampered the gathering of information
about implementation on the ground. Mexico considers
of particular importance the Secretary-General's call
for assessment indicators to measure progress and
shortcomings in the implementation of that resolution,
and on that basis to take action to fill the gaps that
have been identified. We also consider it appropriate to
request the Secretary-General to include in all reports
on conflict situations information on the impact on
women and girls and their particular needs, as well as
to identify the obstacles that stand in the way of
meeting these needs.

Lastly, we would like to reiterate that our
delegation truly believes that resolution 1889 (2009),
adopted this morning, represents a significant step
towards ensuring full implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). We have now ensured that, by 2010, we
will have the necessary tools to allow us to better
understand the challenges and obstacles to be
overcome and, above all, the measures we must take to
guarantee the full participation of women in conflict
prevention and in the building of lasting peace.

