Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I am very grateful
to the Secretary-General for his urgency in bringing this
issue to the Security Council and for his briefing today.

For nearly 70 years, the pale blue helmets of United
Nations peacekeepers have been synonymous with
the work of the United Nations. In the 16 missions
ongoing today, and in the 54 that came before, each
and every peacekeeper presents the human face of
the Organization and the principles we stand for. In
upholding those principles, many have paid the ultimate
price. At the outset, I would like to pay tribute to the
3,444 peacekeepers who lost their lives since 1948,
including 104 from my own country. We all know why
their sacrifice was needed. Peacekeeping, by definition,
can be dangerous. It is the preservation of international
security - not in word, but in deed. In the midst of
conflict and chaos, peacekeepers bring safety and hope
to those most in need, to those in the darkest moments
of their lives.

To fulfil that crucial role, peacekeepers need the
trust of those they seek to protect. When a girl looks
up to a Blue Helmet, she should do so not in fear, but
in hope. Every time that a peacekeeper fails to live up
to our principles or fails to uphold the integrity and
decency that is expected of the United Nations, that
trust is undermined.
Today we have heard about the worst abuse of trust
imaginable - the sickening actions of a small number
of individuals now threaten the reputation of the entire
United Nations. Such actions are a horrific betrayal
of the faith placed in the United Nations by the very
people in need of protection, people who have already
suffered the trauma of conflicts. Those crimes truly are
a cancer in our system.

The stories that have emerged from the Central
African Republic are harrowing. We cannot shy away
from them. We cannot hide behind an acronym. This
is not "SEA". It is abuse. It is exploitation. It is women
and girls being raped and manipulated for sex. For too
long that has existed in the shadows, in rumours and
speculation, concealed by incompetence and, yes, by
conspiracy. Today we have brought overdue light to
this darkness, we now need to prove that we will never
let it happen again. We all have a role to play in that.
We cannot pretend that this is a matter just for other
countries. When our collective reputation is threatened,
collective action is needed.

Ahead of their deployments to South Sudan and
Somalia, all troops from the United Kingdom will be
vetted rigorously and receive robust predeployment
training covering sexual exploitation and abuse. I hope
all troop contributing countries will do the same.

The United Nations system must also bear its share
of responsibility. We welcome the Secretary-General's
decisiveness in withdrawing units facing credible
allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse. We
support his prerogative to name and shame countries
that contribute those units, and we fully support the
appointment of Jane Holl Lute as Special Coordinator
on the United Nations response to this terrible scourge.

But this is just the start. The coming months will
need to see bold United Nations reforms. Those must
include designing a system for reporting allegations
that is trusted by host communities. When allegations
are proven, the United Nations must act quickly and
decisively, and well within the Secretary-General's
suggested six-month deadline.

The United Kingdom has committed funds to assist
the United Nations and the Special Coordinator in these
efforts this year. Some of that money will be spent
rebuilding much-needed trust in communities hosting
peacekeepers. I hope that other Member States willjoin
us in committing financial support too.

The world is watching us today. Let us be clear:
this cannot continue; this must not continue. The report
(A/70/729) of the Secretary-General is a wake-up call
that simply cannot be ignored. It is a call for all of us
to do everything in our power to protect those in our
collective care. The reputation of peacekeepers, of
the Security Council and of the United Nations is at
stake. The Council has a clear responsibility to ensure
accountability and to take action. I hope we can adopt
the Security Council draft resolution under negotiation
in the coming days. That will be a valuable step forward,
but it cannot be our last.

