Mr. Kim Sam-hoon (Republic of Korea): The
report of the Secretary-General makes it clear that,
while significant progress has been made in several
key areas in the past two years, there still remain vast
gaps between the goals of resolution 1325 (2000) and
its implementation.

My delegation appreciates the advances made in
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in the
area of peacekeeping. We are pleased to note that there
are now full-time gender specialists in 10 of the 17
United Nations peacekeeping operations, supported
and guided by the Gender Adviser at Headquarters in
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.

We also commend the efforts that have been
made by United Nations entities, Member States and
civil society in training military, civilian police and
civilian peacekeeping personnel on the protection of
the rights and needs of women. But we underscore the
Secretary-General's call for a more coherent strategy
for strengthening understanding among all actors of the
relevance of gender issues to peacekeeping. We also
strongly support the development and implementation
of recruitment strategies to increase women's
participation in military, civilian police and
peacekeeping operations.

My delegation fully subscribes to the View that
post-conflict processes can offer societies emerging
from conflict a new chance to recast social relations for
the better. We therefore welcome the Secretary-
General's finding that women's participation in post-
conflict reconstruction has increased in recent years.
We are particularly pleased to note the significant
progress has been made in Afghanistan, where women
were very much involved in the formulation of a new
national constitution. Furthermore, we are heartened by
the fact that 20 per cent of the seats in that country's
new constitutional body are held by women. That
dynamic is also in evidence in Rwanda, where
constitutional set-asides and new elections have
brought 49 per cent of the seats to women in the lower
Parliament, which represents the highest proportion of
women in parliaments worldwide.

However, we remain concerned that the majority
of reconstruction efforts do not systematically include
gender perspectives. Accordingly, we support the
Secretary-General's call for systematic incorporation of
gender perspectives in the planning, implementation
and monitoring of all reconstruction programmes and
budgets.

One of the terrible truths of modern warfare is
that women and girls suffer at a level wholly
disproportionate to their involvement in a given
conflict. In particular, gender-based violence -
including rape, sexual slavery and other forms of
abuse - has been a shameful aspect of warfare in
many conflicts around the world. The consequences
have been tragic for millions of women and girls, as
well as for the families, communities and societies they
sustain.

We are troubled that the international community
has not yet been able to prevent acts of violence
against women during armed conflict. As the
Secretary-General's report notes, sexual and gender-
based violence have recently been reported in the
Darfur region of the Sudan and in other countries in
conflict or post-conflict situations. Clearly, we have a
long way to go in eliminating that scourge upon
humanity.

Nevertheless, we have hope in the positive
developments in our uphill battle against gender-based
violence. The special rapporteurs of the Commission
on Human Rights, in particular the Special Rapporteur
on violence against women, have played an important
role in drawing attention to the vulnerability of women
in recent conflicts. The International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda have broken new ground
in the area of jurisprudence on sexual violence under
international law. Most significantly, the establishment
of the International Criminal Court, with jurisdiction
over crimes against humanity - including rape, sexual
slavery and other forms of sexual violence - promises
to eliminate impunity for gender-based crimes against
women in armed conflict.

That hope, however, will not automatically
become reality. Member States must send strong
signals to parties to armed conflicts that violations of
women's human rights and gender-based violence will
be met with severe punishment and sanctions. We must
vigorously pursue and prosecute those who commit
such criminal acts, and we must enhance the
effectiveness of tribunals and justice mechanisms. The
best way to prevent gender-based violence during
wartime is to send a clear signal to would-be
perpetrators that their crimes will not go unpunished.
Furthermore, for countries emerging from conflict, the
elaboration of a domestic legal system that provides
effective ways to bring the perpetrators of gender-
based crimes to justice would be important in the post-
conflict peace-building process.

It has been four years since resolution 1325
(2000) was adopted. However, lack of protection for
women and girls and violations of their human rights
during armed conflict still persist. The Republic of
Korea reaffirms its commitment to working bilaterally,
multilaterally and through United Nations agencies to
do our share for the full and effective implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000).

