Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): First,
allow me to thank Uruguay for organizing today's
debate and choosing the theme of sexual violence in
conflict as a tactic ofwar and terrorism, the importance
of which has become self-evident owing to its urgency,
acuteness and impact on societies. I also thank
Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed and
Acting Special Representative Adama Dieng for their
respective briefings this morning, as well as Ms. Mina
Jaf as a representative of civil society.

At all times and regardless of the victims, violence
is always reprehensible. However, sexual violence in
times of conflict is even more so. We strongly condemn
such practices, which date back to another era that
still persists today. Today's debate is a forceful and
eloquent illustration of the phenomenon. As evidence,
we need only cite the relevant resolutions adopted by
the Security Council that have followed resolution 1325
(2000), as well as resolution 2331 (2016).

There is no doubt about it: Da'esh, Boko Haram,
Al-Shabaab and many other terrorist groups mentioned
in the report (S/2017/249) of the Secretary-General use
sexual violence as a tactic of war, a weapon of terror
and a source of financial revenue used to augment
their resources and augment their power. They openly
advocate those practices, which figure prominently
among their strategic objectives and ideologies. No
woman, girl, man or boy is spared. Women and girls
suffer the most from the devastating consequences
of conflicts and pay a heavy price because of their
increased vulnerability. They are now offered up as the
spoils of war. For their part, men and boys are often
subjected to forced labour, domestic slavery, trafficking
in human organs and even sexual exploitation. Sexual
violence does not only affect the victims, it eats away
at and rots communities and societies to their very core.
Its goal is to hurt the body, tear down dignity, destroy
the social fabric and obliterate reconstruction efforts
from the onset. It destabilizes, destroys and terrorizes
societies affected by conflicts. Those who commit such
heinous crimes must be brought to justice and sentenced
with the maximum punishment.

My country, which is a member of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security, chaired by
Canada, and the Group of Friends for Gender Parity,
led by Colombia, which adopted the Declaration of
Commitment to End Sexual Violence in Conflict,
subscribes to its international commitments to
combat all forms of sexual violence, including in
times of conflict, and considers them barbaric, brutal
and inhuman methods and practices, having serious
consequences on the process of achieving lasting peace
and reconciliation.

Because of the systematic and premeditated nature
of acts of sexual violence, there is an urgent need
for innovations to counter that scourge. In its firm
devotion to international law, Morocco is committed to
encouraging an inclusive approach to combating sexual
violence that takes into account the complexity of the
causes ofthat scourge, as well as the interests and needs
of the persons concerned. It is an approach that calls
for strong measures concerning accountability for all
those who continue to act in defiance of international
humanitarian law, human rights law and the Geneva
Conventions. Moreover, it is essential that we alter the
stigmatization of victims of sexual violence and the
children born as the result of such violence.

In conclusion, protection, prevention and the fight
against impunity must be our watchwords. It is our
collective responsibility and duty. International law,
including international humanitarian law, must be
applied without exception. It is incumbent upon us to
protect and respond to the needs of victims, prevent
sexual violence and ensure that the perpetrators of those
violations are held fully accountable for their actions. It
is high time to invest in peace, give victims back their
dignity and make planning for the reconstruction of
societies and lasting peace a reality.

I would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute
to Secretary-General Antonio Guterres - the author
of the new United Nations approach for the prevention
of sexual exploitation and abuse, as outlined in his
report (A/7l/818), which prioritizes the rights and
dignity of victims and calls for the establishment of a
zero-tolerance policy. We are confident that that new
strategy will bring change.

