Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing today, for the
important report upon which it is based (A/70/729), and
for his determined leadership in tackling what he has
rightly called a cancer in our system. We know that he
has faced considerable push-back against his efforts to
bring to light these horrific abuses and to ensure that
those responsible are held accountable, and we thank
him for holding firm.

Let me begin by reading out a quote,

"The Security Council is deeply concerned
with the allegations of sexual misconduct by United
Nations peacekeeping personnel... The Security
Council... recognizes the shared responsibility of
the Secretary-General and all Member States to
take every measure within their purview to prevent
sexual exploitation and abuse by all categories of
personnel in United Nations peacekeeping missions
to enforce United Nations standards of conduct in
that regard.

The Security Council reiterates the importance
of ensuring that sexual exploitation and abuse are
properly investigated and appropriately punished."
(S/PV5191, p. 7)

Those words were spoken in this Chamber nearly
11 years ago, in May 2005, by the Security Council
President at the time. She was speaking on behalf of the
Council at its first-ever meeting on the issue of sexual
exploitation and abuse committed by United Nations
peacekeepers. Like today's, that meeting was convened
following the release of a report commissioned by the
Secretary-General at that time, Kofi Annan, in order
to lay out a strategy for eliminating the scourge of
such abuses in peacekeeping operations. The report
(see A/59/710), as many of us here know, followed a
series of disturbing allegations of sexual exploitation
and abuse in 2004, not unlike those that have surfaced
since last year.

Yet as we all know, despite the commitment made
by the Council over a decade ago to address this
problem, the scourge of sexual exploitation and abuse
by peacekeepers persists. According to the report
released by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon last week,
69 allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse were
levied against uniformed and civilian personnel serving
in peacekeeping missions last year. That represents
a 20 per cent increase in reported violations from
the previous year. More than half of the allegations
concerning peacekeeping operations involve the rape
or sexual abuse of children. And those are just the
cases we know about. As Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Central African Republic
Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, who took over as Head
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) last August, has said, the cases reported
are likely to be just the tip of the iceberg.

We have long known that one of the most effective
ways to prevent sexual exploitation and abuse is to
send a clear message that perpetrators will be held
accountable, so it is deeply alarming that, according
to the Secretary-General's report, out of 69 allegations
of sexual exploitation and abuse in 2015, in only 17
instances were investigations completed by January 31
2016 - 17 out of 69 - and in only one of those cases
did a country report to the United Nations that it had
punished a perpetrator in response to a substantiated
allegation. The perpetrator in that case was found to
have engaged in a sexually exploitative relationship. As
punishment, he was suspended for nine whole days.

Some have argued that this discussion has no place
in the Security Council, implying that they do not think
that sexual exploitation and abuse by peacekeepers have
an impact on international peace and security. They are
mistaken. In addition to being a heinous abuse, sexual
exploitation and abuse erode the discipline of military
and police units and undermine the confidence of
local communities in peacekeepers, both of which are
critical to fulfilling Security Council mandates. More
broadly, when those entrusted with being protectors
become perpetrators, it undermines the credibility
of peacekeeping missions everywhere, as well as
the legitimacy of the United Nations writ large. And
along with that, it undermines our ability to address
effectively the serious threats of our time.

I have listened really hard to those who think that
the Council has no role to play in overseeing discussions
about what we do next to curb sexual exploitation and
abuse by peacekeepers, but I have to say that I honestly
do not understand the argument. I do not. It is the
Council that sends peacekeepers into conflict areas
because we believe that their presence is essential to
promoting international peace and security. We deem
it our responsibility as a Council to oversee every part
of their missions - how many soldiers and police
officers to send, what their mandate is, when they can
use force - and we give them clear mandates to protect
civilians.
So let me pose my question to the skeptics this way.
When Governments attack civilians, it is our job; when
armed groups and non-State actors attack civilians,
it is our job; when terrorists attack civilians, it is our
job. So why in the world, when the United Nations own
peacekeepers are the ones attacking civilians - when
peacekeepers commit the sickening of crime of raping
children - is it someone else's job? Can anyone explain
that? Why is that the exception? The Security Council
cannot have responsibility for protecting civilians
against all threats from all forces except those whom
we directly oversee.

As we all know, a crucial part of accountability is
transparency. The United Nations, its Member States
and the Security Council need to know when soldiers
and police officers are accused of abusing the privilege
of wearing the blue helmet. We need to know whether
those allegations are being adequately investigated and,
where appropriate, punished. And victims and their
communities need to know thatjustice is being served.
Let us imagine if it was a member of our own family.
Yet the opaqueness of the existing system has made it
virtually impossible for any of us to know these things.
All to often, we do not know whether investigations
have been opened, and even when we know that
investigations are ongoing we do not know whether
they are being carried out promptly, thoroughly or
impartially.

Without basic facts, it is impossible to enforce a
zero-tolerance policy. It is no coincidence that we
have had a zero-tolerance policy for a long time, and
yet sexual exploitation and abuse allegations have
risen. That is not a coincidence. There is not sufficient
accountability to our own policy. Louis Brandeis, one
of the most eloquent justices who ever served on the
United States Supreme Court, once said that "[s]unlight
is said to be the best of disinfectants". Yet allegations of
sexual exploitation and abuse by peacekeepers are too
often allowed to remain in the darkness, where the rot
they cause continues to spread, to the detriment of the
entire enterprise of peacekeeping.

That is why it is so important that the Secretary-
General's report brings to light, for the first time,

the nationality of the personnel who face credible
allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse, and it is
why we commend the United Nations for starting to post
on its website new allegations of sexual exploitation
and abuse, including the date on which the report
was received, information about the nationality of the
accused, and whether the alleged victims are minors. It
is through such reporting that we know that, in the first
three months of this year, 26 additional allegations of
sexual exploitation and abuse have been reported. That
is a horrifying number.

We can and must do more to shine a bright light
on this enduring problem. A place to start would be
providing additional information on the status of
investigations. For example, while we know that the
majority of investigations into allegations of sexual
exploitation and abuse from 2015 are pending, we do
not know when those investigations were opened. This
data is crucial for gauging whether countries are acting
in a timely manner.

Some countries have adamantly opposed this push
for greater transparency, in particular the practice of
identifying the nationality of peacekeepers credibly
alleged to have committed such abuses. They claim that
it unfairly singles out troop- and police-contributing
countries that are putting their personnel at risk in
some of the most difficult environments around the
world. We commend the service of those troop- and
police-contributing countries. Let me be very clear.
The vast majority ofthe 91,000 troops and 13,000 police
officers in United Nations peacekeeping missions serve
honourably and with courage, putting their lives on
the line every day to protect people in countries very
far from their own. They neither commit sexual abuse
nor do they turn a blind eye to it. And most troop-
contributing countries are serious about holding to
account soldiers and police officers from their forces
who would perpetrate such abuses, recognizing that
impunity for sexual exploitation and abuse undermines
the effectiveness of their troop contingents as a whole,
whether they are serving in a United Nations mission or
any other mission.

Yet the fact that so many - the vast
majority - serve so honourably is all the more reason
why troop- and police-contributing countries should
want to bring these cases to light, investigate them, and
hold accountable those who have committed abuses.
Those serving honourably are the ones who have the
greatest incentive to prevent the sickening acts of a
few from tarnishing the noble service of so many.
When peacekeepers commit sexual exploitation and
abuse with impunity, the fault lies not only with the
peacekeepers who commit those deplorable acts, the
commanders who look the other way or the countries
that fail to conduct proper investigations. The blame
rests on all of us, including the countries that fail to
adequately train peacekeepers to prevent and root
out these problems, the Member States that fail to
press troop- and police-contributing countries to hold
perpetrators accountable, and the United Nations
institutions that fail to report on the magnitude of
the problem or repatriate units when countries prove
unable or unwilling to investigate credible allegations
of abuse. This is an all-systems failure.

Let me just give just one example. According
to the United Nations, there were seven separate
allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse committed
by peacekeepers from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in a single mission, MINUSCA. One allegation
was reported in January, one in February, four in August
and one more in September. The majority of the alleged
victims of the abuses were kids. As the allegations
continued to add up, members of the Council, including
the United States, pushed for the repatriation of the
unit. In the meantime, more and more victims continued
to come forward. In January of this year there were
three more credible allegations of sexual violence and
abuse against the same unit, followed by five more in
February. Think about that: eight credible allegations of
sexual exploitation and abuse reported against a single
group ofpeacekeepers injust two months - in seven of
those instances the alleged victims were children. How
could we let that happen? All of us. How could we let
that happen?

In late February, the entire contingent from the
Democratic Republic ofthe Congo was repatriated- the
first time the United Nations had ever repatriated an
entire contingent for sexual exploitation and abuse.
It was the right thing to do. It sends a clear message
to all countries that there will be consequences for
failing to address this serious problem. But it should
never have taken so long. The Security Council was
told the contingent would be repatriated, but the
repatriation was delayed for operational reasons. That
is unacceptable. The experience should force us all to
ask: What if those soldiers had been sent home sooner?
How many kids could have been spared suffering
unspeakable violations that no child should ever have
to endure, and that they will have to carry with them for
the rest of their lives?

We have to do better by these victims. That means
not only securing justice, but also ensuring that they
receive the care they need and deserve in the aftermath
of such crimes, both in the short term and in the long
term. The Secretary-General has proposed a trust fund
to support special services for victims that will withold
payments from repatriated individuals and direct the
funds to victims. We should move swiftly together to
create that fund.

In conclusion, let me share the story of one of
those alleged victims, a 14-year-old girl who lives in
Bambari, in the Central African Republic. She recently
told a human rights organization that, in December
2015, she was walking along a path near a peacekeeper
base when she was accosted by an armed soldier whose
uniform she recognized as one worn by peacekeepers
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. She said,

"He slapped me in the face and made me continue
to walk on the path. Then he ripped off my clothes
and used them to tie my hands behind my back.
He threw me on the ground, placed his gun to the
side and got on top of me to rape me. When he was
done, he just left. I had to put my clothes on, and I
went home."

In 2005, the author of the Secretary-General's
first report (see A/59/710) on this problem, Prince
Zeid, who of course is now the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, warned the Council
here in the Chamber that sexual exploitation and abuse

"would carry with it the most serious consequences
for the future of peacekeeping if we were to prove
ourselves incapable of solving [the] problem."
(S/PV5191, p. 4)

The same holds true to this day, and the profound
consequences of failing to solve this problem - for
peacekeeping missions, for the United Nations and
for so many individuals like that 14-year-old girl in
Bambari - continue to add up. We knew how to fix
the problem then, and we know how to fix the problem
now. We cannot wait any longer. The United Nations
has presented a Security Council draft resolution to
take our responsibility to address this grave issue as
an immediate step. We urge all Council members to
support it.

