Ms. McAskie: I am very pleased indeed to
participate in the Council's deliberations today on the
occasion of the sixth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000) on women, peace and security. As a recently
returned Special Representative of the Secretary-
General in a peacekeeping mission, and now in my
current role as head of the new Peacebuilding Support
Office, that landmark resolution has had direct
relevance for my work.

The focus of my presentation this morning will be
on the role of the newly established Peacebuilding
Commission and on its support office, but I would also
like to make reference to my experience as a

peacekeeper. There is no doubt that the existence of
resolution 1325 (2000) made an appreciable difference
to our peacekeeping operations on the ground.

The existence of a gender adviser in the United
Nations Operation in Burundi, along with strong
leadership from mission management and Headquarters
management, had a direct impact on our work, for
example, in disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR), in addressing the issues of
women associated with armed combat, in elections, in
addressing the need to support the commitments to
30 per cent targets for women in parliament and in
addressing human rights issues for women. The
absence of a dedicated gender adviser within the
United Nations country team, however, gave us the
example of how progress lags behind when special
efforts are not made to ensure that development
programmes are sufficiently gender sensitive. As this
debate demonstrates, we are not ready to assume that
women's issues will automatically be included. Special
measures continue to be required.

Gender mainstreaming in the area of
peacebuilding, and in particular in the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission, has been recognized by
Member States in various resolutions. The resolutions
establishing the Commission that were adopted by the
Security Council and the General Assembly called on
the Commission to integrate a gender perspective into
its work and encouraged the Commission to consult
with civil society, including women's organizations
engaged in peacebuilding. In the follow-up to Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000), the General Assembly
requested the Secretary-General to ensure that in
supporting the Peacebuilding Commission, the
Peacebuilding Support Office should integrate a gender
perspective in all aspects of its work, taking into
account resolution 1325 (2000).

Protecting and empowering women in countries
making the transition from violent conflict to lasting
peace will require a deep understanding of gender
discrimination. When we speak of the foundations for
sustainable peace and development, women - as
decision makers, as productive members of society, as
caretakers and as heads of households - must be
recognized as one of the pillars of that society. In
achieving lasting peace beyond the mere absence of
violence, we must understand the social and political
fabric that makes up societies and forms the basis of
communities. This requires recognition, not only of
women's key roles, but also of their work and potential
as agents of change.

Members will note that the Commission itself is
tasked with marshalling resources and proposing
integrated strategies for post-conflict peacebuilding. In
doing so, it will focus on the reconstruction and
institution-building efforts for countries under its
consideration. It is also tasked with improving
coordination, developing best practices to ensure
predictable financing and sustaining the attention of
the international community on countries emerging
from conflict.

The Commission is examining ways in which it
could benefit from civil society involvement in its
deliberations. Civil society representatives participated
in the country-specific meetings held on Burundi and
Sierra Leone on 12 and 13 October respectively. Many
Commission members favour more systematic
involvement of civil society, including women's
groups, in the work of the Commission. As such, we
are exploring ways by which we can engage civil
society in general, and women's organizations in
particular, in supporting the process of peacebuilding.

The Commission's advisory role places it in a
strong position to draw attention to critical
peacebuilding challenges on the ground, including the
special needs of women and girls, ensuring that space
is created for women's active participation in political,
economic and social life, and strengthening the
protection of the rights of women against
discrimination, violence and persecution. The
Peacebuilding Commission can act as a key conduit for
promoting practical actions in support of women's
needs and for promoting gender equality. The
Commission is a unique intergovernmental forum,
focusing on specific country situations, and it therefore
has a comparative advantage which will enable it to
provide strategic and practical support to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

The Commission can play an effective role in
empowering actors on the ground to facilitate and
strengthen the partnership between Governments and
civil society, including women's groups. The
Commission can help build confidence and pave the
way for transparent and accountable governance, by
helping newly formed Governments to understand the
extent to which modern concepts of democracy are
based on ongoing engagement with civil society.

To ensure that gender aspects and the provisions
of resolution 1325 (2000) are taken into account in the
work of the Commission, the Peacebuilding Support
Office will have to play a vital role and provide the
Commission with the analysis it needs to meet its
commitments to gender mainstreaming. In this, we will
be informed by the ongoing work of the United Nations
and its partners at the field level and at Headquarters,
including taking advantage of the available gender
specific policies and data that have been developed by
humanitarian and development organizations present at
the field level.

The process, whether through the Commission or
the Support Office, will work through existing field
presences of the United Nations and Member States.
Peacebuilding is not another layer of activity; it is all
about ensuring that what we, whether the country itself
or all its partners, are doing is geared to supporting the
country in staying the course with a view to sustainable
peace. This represents an unprecedented opportunity to
improve on past practices. What better objective than
for us to get it right this time on how we include
women and end gender discrimination and gender
victimization? The United Nations presence already on
the ground is the instrument of the new United Nations
commitments on peacebuilding. It must work in close
collaboration with national authorities, but also with all
internal and external parties to peacebuilding: donors,
institutions, regional and subregional political actors,
as well as local players. Resolution 1325 (2000) can
and should inform this work by being one of the
fundamental underpinnings of the strategic approach
mandated in General Assembly resolution 60/180,
creating the peacebuilding architecture.

Support to women emerging from conflict will
also require the Commission's action in its role of
resource mobilization for national peacebuilding plans.
The Peacebuilding Support Office will play a role in
developing effective resource-mobilization strategies
which address the need for gender equality in
peacebuilding.

The recently established Peacebuilding Fund will
also be able to contribute in furthering the practical
aims of resolution 1325 (2000). We must remember
that the Fund, while generous, will be limited in its
resources and should be seen as a catalyst to launch
peacebuilding activities that will require more
sustained resources. We will collaborate with partners
at the field level, including national authorities, to

ensure that funding for peacebuilding activities, such
as that provided to national institutions and that aimed
at strengthening national capacities to promote
peaceful resolution of conflict, is responsive to the
needs of women with a view to promoting gender
equality.

Six years after the adoption of this landmark
resolution, much has been done to recognize women's
important role in countries affected by conflict.
However, this debate recognizes that we still have a
road to travel. We have a better understanding now of
how conflicts have a disproportionate effect on women
and girls. What we do not yet demonstrate is that in
addressing the roots of conflict and in reversing its
effects we need a similarly disproportionate effort to
address those effects. This will require the
implementation of the recommendations before the
Council in the Secretary-General's report.

In closing, let me say that gender discrimination
needs to be seen on a par with other forms of
discrimination, and an international commitment and
effort must be made to understand its roots and reverse
its tragic effects. This will require leadership on the
part of all of us, and accountability on the part of the
United Nations system, both officials and Member
States. The creation of new instruments dedicated to
peacebuilding presents, as I said, an unprecedented
opportunity, which must not be wasted, to do things
differently. It provides a clean slate on which to
re-write how we approach the needs of societies
coming out of conflict. We cannot ignore the voices of
the women from the time we broker peace onwards.
Peacemaking is not just an exercise involving
combatants; it must involve all of society. And that
means women.

The Commission is taking an extremely practical
and substantive approach to its work. It is determined
to make a difference in real terms by working with
Burundi and Sierra Leone, and it will factor in
elements related to the needs of women and girls as
they pertain to resolution 1325 (2000) to ensure that
the sustained attention and resources of the
international community are effectively utilized.

For the Commission to succeed, it must play a
role in strengthening the understanding of the root
causes of conflict and help countries identify the path
to peace.

A key to successful peacebuilding is to work with
national Governments to ensure that consultations take
into account the elements contained in resolution 1325
(2000), including those dealing with conflict
resolution, protection and respect for human rights, and
to ensure that these are at the core of the Peacebuilding
Commission's work. The challenge will be to bring all
the resources and energies of society together to ensure
the broadest possible approach, the most inclusive
process and the most sustainable results.

Women have a key role to play in building
peace - in their own right, and not only because they
are disproportionately victimized or because they are
seen more naturally as agents of peace. Women's key
role must be recognized because societies where
women participate fully generally enjoy more peace,
more prosperity and more opportunity.

