Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I congratulate Viet Nam on
its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of October. I thank you, Sir, for
organizing this debate. The concept paper (S/2009/490, annex) that your delegation has prepared on the needs
of women and girls in post-conflict situations is quite
useful. I also commend the Council for having adopted
resolution 1889 (2009) earlier today.

Before proceeding, let me say how saddened I am
at the news of the terrorist attack in Islamabad today
against the facilities of the World Food Programme,
which claimed the lives of five aid workers. We offer
our deep condolences to the bereaved families.

As the Secretary-General pointed out in his report
on peacebuilding (S/2009/304), and as highlighted in
the concept paper, the period immediately following
conflict is critical. What is done or fails to be done has
2
enormous repercussions for the process of peace
consolidation. That is why we must spare no effort to
ensure that the needs and priorities of women and girls
are properly dealt with from the earliest possible
moment.

My delegation believes that, inasmuch as women
and girls are particularly vulnerable in the context of
armed conflict, post-conflict recovery strategies must
make them a priority. Special attention must be given
to those who were victims of sexual violence during
the armed conflict. Although wars affect all, the
personal humiliation brought about by sexual violence
and, in many cases, the social stigma that follows tend
to be particularly painful. National Governments, the
United Nations system and civil society groups must
redouble their efforts to help victims rehabilitate as
much and as soon as possible.

That is not enough, however. Women are not
merely victims to be protected. They must be
acknowledged and empowered as central actors in the
establishment of lasting peace. They must be involved
in formulating and implementing reconstruction
strategies on all fronts. In my capacity as Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission's country-specific
configuration on Guinea-Bissau, I have had the
privilege of witnessing the extraordinary determination
and vitality of the women of that country. There, as in
many other countries, women play a central role.
Without them recovery would be a much more difficult
task. We must strive to ensure that the important part
women play in the economy is also reflected in their
political participation.

The Peacebuilding Commission has a relevant
role to play in empowering women in post-conflict
situations. My delegation was pleased to note that
resolution 1888 (2009), adopted by the Council last
week, reaffirms the Commission's role in that matter.
In the case of Guinea-Bissau, I recall that women's
groups made an important contribution to the
preparation of the country's strategic framework for
peacebuilding.

The Secretary-General's report on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) (S/2009/465)
contains disturbing findings in several country-specific
situations. Perpetrators of acts of violence and abuse
must be promptly and effectively brought to justice if
we want to avoid a cycle of continued impunity
stimulating more violence.
09-54249

The report, however, also brings good news. In
particular, it is encouraging to see the manner in which
so many organs of the United Nations system have
committed themselves to implementing the provisions
of resolution 1325 (2000). The progress made in the
areas of training, capacity-building and awareness-
raising is particularly notable. In this context I would
like to mention what the report refers to as challenges
that relate to the breadth of resolution 1325 (2000).

The task that we set for ourselves in that
resolution is large and complex. To carry it out
successfully requires a broad and coordinated approach
among all of the relevant stakeholders within the
United Nations system. In the same way that the
Security Council is uniquely mandated to deal with the
widespread or systematic use of sexual violence in
armed conflicts, other bodies have mandates and
specialized expertise that allow them to better address
other aspects of the issue. We must continue to ensure
coordination among all efforts undertaken in this
regard and avoid duplication or overstepping of
competencies. In this context, we welcome the
adoption of General Assembly resolution 63/311.

Some of the recommendations contained in the
Secretary-General's report can also help in meeting the
challenges we all face in further implementing
resolution 1325 (2000). Among the suggestions, we see
particular relevance in better data collection. Without
credible information, we cannot act effectively or
fairly. As my delegation indicated in the open debate
held last August (see S/PV.6180), such data should be
shared with other relevant principal organs and with
the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination
against Women and the Commission on the Status of
Women as appropriate, so as to ensure that
international action is not merely punitive, but
transformative as well.

