Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): Ensuring
the security of women in armed conflict and promoting
their role in conflict prevention and resolution are
indeed noble objectives. The realization of those
goals requires a comprehensive approach as well as
realistic and pragmatic solutions. Principally, the most
effective way to ensure the security of women in armed
conflict is to prevent the occurrence of those conflicts
in the first place. That is of essential importance
to our region - the Middle East - where women
and girls continue to suffer from the vicious cycle of
armed conflict.

The most severe case is the situation in Palestine,
where women bear the brunt of foreign occupation. The
Council's inability to protect Palestinian women and
girls has resulted in their death, detention, torture and
displacement and the systematic violation of their basic
rights. No institution can end the suffering of women in
armed conflict if its resolutions and decisions remain
unimplemented. Terrorism and violent extremism
also have serious adverse effects on women's lives.
Genuine efforts are therefore needed to protect women
against such menacing issues. Similarly, women
are the main victims of sexual violence as a tactic
of war and terrorism. In order to end that brutal and
atrocious crime, accountability must be seriously and
strongly promoted.

In all cases, we must not ignore the importance of
women's empowerment as an essential factor in conflict
prevention and resolution, as well as in our broader
efforts to maintain international peace and security. In
that context, we must not lose sight of the devastating
effects of unilateral coercive measures, which make
no distinction between men and women, violating the
basic human rights of both and ultimately undermining
the constructive role that women can play in promoting
peace and security. As a victim of aggression, foreign
military invasion, terrorism and unilateral coercive
measures, we attach great importance to the role
that women can play in building a secure, stable and
prosperous society.

In conclusion, women are active partners in the
social, economic and political life of our societies
and have made great achievements so far. With that
in mind, my Government is determined to ensure the
empowerment of women and girls in all walks of life.

