Ms. Wallstriim: I thank you, Sir, and members of
the Security Council for this opportunity to brief the
Council on this matter of grave concern to the
international community and also to say something
about the role of my Office. A senior member of my
staff, Mr. Tonderai Chikuhwa, accompanied Mr. Khare
on his mission to the affected villages in Walikale
territory.

But I wish to begin, in complementing
Mr. Khare's account, with the survivors. In Luvingi
village, one of the women spoke of how they had been
forced to live through something like never before. She
recounted how armed men went from house to house
breaking down the doors, and how people were
prevented from escaping because the village had been
surrounded. She described how armed men inserted
their hands into women's genitals searching for gold.
Many women were gang-raped by up to five or six men
at a time.

The women of the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo deserve better. They are the backbone of
the country and the mainstay of its largely agricultural
economy. Yet in 2010, the sad reality for many women
in the eastern DRC is that they are tired. They are tired
of wondering when their time will come to be robbed,
tortured and raped. For them, there is no safe place.
They are raped when harvesting crops, when going to
market, when fetching water and firewood, when
carrying their babies, and when in their homes at night
among their loved ones. Rape does not end when the
violence is over. Many survivors are permanently
traumatized, unable to return to the fields to earn an
income, resulting in increased poverty, isolation and
despair. Women live in fear of men carrying guns,
often clad in uniform. They cannot distinguish
protector from tormentor.
7

If this is not an illustration of why sexual
violence is an impediment to peace, stability and
security, what is? Right now, as we meet here in this
Chamber, thousands of women, children and families
are trying to cope with the trauma of rape. A ripple of
devastation emanates from each crime, bringing with it
disease, depression and despair. There are Congolese
women whose tragic experiences have led them to
conclude that being gang-raped by many men is normal
for a woman.

When I was in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in April, I stressed that the reputation of the
country is being held hostage to the perception that it is
the rape capital of the world. The only way to combat
such a perception is through determined and visible
actions by the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to address impunity and strengthen the
rule of law.

With regard to what must happen now,
humanitarian actors are now struggling to provide
essential health services to survivors. A recent inter-
agency mission to Walikale confirmed that, of the 242
survivors who reached Lubongo Health Centre, most
had received some medical treatment and psychosocial
support. However, none had received post-exposure
prophylaxis to protect her from HIV, primarily because
they were unable to access care within 72 hours of the
incident. Many of the rape victims have still not come
forward to receive urgent medical treatment for fear
that they are still unsafe or due to the risk of being
ostracized by their communities because of the taint of
rape, as we have already heard Mr. Khare recall.
Indeed, rape is the only violation for which
communities tend to stigmatize the victim rather than
prosecute the perpetrator, and where victims feel
shame.

What is particularly disturbing is that the attacks
on Kibua were not an isolated incident but part of a
broader pattern of widespread and systematic rape and
pillage. I am deeply distressed by information that is
now beginning to surface about the large numbers of
rapes in other parts of North Kivu, as well as in South
Kivu, as outlined in stark detail by Mr. Khare.

It is evident that rape is increasingly selected as
the weapon of choice in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, with numbers reaching
endemic proportions. The sad reality is that incidents
of rape have become so commonplace that they do not
trigger our most urgent interventions.

We know that information on the rapes that
occurred along the Kibua-Mpofi axis was slow to
surface. Therefore, one of the critical lessons we must
take from this tragedy is that the actual reporting of
rape cases should not be viewed as a prerequisite for
robust protection responses. We must be more keenly
attuned to other indicators, including the movements of
armed groups, their proximity to civilian centres,
patterns of looting and pillage, their actions to block
off access to certain areas, and the concerns of local
women about the security situation. These should all
now be considered to be signals that the population is
at risk from exactions, attacks and, increasingly, sexual
violence.

In Walikale, our information suggests that the
rapes were part of a planned and organized attack.
Women were rounded up and prevented from fleeing,
indicating that sexual violence was explicitly used as a
tactic of war and terror. I have previously stressed and
continue to maintain that, where sexual violence is
planned, it must also be viewed as preventable.
Systematic responses to sexual violence have been
elusive because, until recently, it was dismissed as an
unavoidable consequence of war.

At this moment, we are all compelled to look in
the mirror and face our collective responsibility for our
inability to prevent the mass rapes in Kibua. The
United Nations, for its part, cannot afford to shy away
from confronting its shortcomings because such an
examination, carried out in a spirit of transparency and
accountability, must form the basis for improving our
response in the future. Therefore, I welcome and
support the concrete recommendations made by
Mr. Khare in areas where we can and must improve.
That includes our communication with local
communities - particularly women - and our
capacity to collect and analyse early warning
information to trigger timely action.

Through resolution 1888 (2009), the Council has
emphasized better monitoring and reporting on sexual
violence as a basis for a more effective protection
response. Drawing on lessons from the mechanism
established to track grave violations against children
affected by armed conflict, I will prioritize the
establishment of systems for obtaining real-time and
actionable information. It is, of course priority number
one to make sure that all the information, reporting and
monitoring work well.

However, as we focus on improving the flow of
information and data, we must confront squarely the
fact that we were too slow to respond to existing
information. We should examine the United Nations
response, including that of our peacekeepers on the
ground, not in a spirit of self-recrimination but with a
determination and resolve to do better to protect
civilians in what is undoubtedly one of the most
complex, vast and volatile conflict zones in the world.

We must also bear in mind that if we expect our
peacekeepers to perform more effectively, we have to
ensure that they receive the training, knowledge and
tools to do so. In that regard, I intend to work closely
with the United Nations Development Fund for
Women, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and troop-contributing countries to roll out a new tool
that my Office helped to launch in June this year,
entitled "Addressing conflict-related sexual violence -
An analytical inventory of peacekeeping practice". It
contains a range of promising practices employed by
peacekeepers to protect women and girls from conflict-
related sexual violence. These ad hoc efforts need to be
systematized and included in predeployment training as
model scenarios that can help peacekeepers recognize
and react to sexual violence by armed groups. This
document provides, for the first time, a knowledge
base to help peacekeepers translate their obligations to
preventing sexual violence into actions. It gives
examples of early warning systems, patrols tailored to
women's mobility patterns, community liaison
techniques and other tactics that illustrate a gradual
shift from best intentions to best practice.

Turning to another point, the mass rapes in Kibua
indicate a connection, as we have already heard,
between the illicit exploitation of natural mineral
resources, the continuing operations of illegal armed
groups and the high levels of violence against civilians
in general, and women in particular, in lucrative and
strategic areas. We must examine this nexus more
closely as one of the root causes of recent atrocities,
and more broadly of the protracted conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. I will continue my
calls for Governments to enact due diligence measures
to track the flow of conflict minerals.
I should also like to stress that the role of the
United Nations in the Democratic Republic of the

Congo is to support and not to supplant the
Government as the primary protection and service
provider. It is clear that deploying a well-trained,
vetted and permanent Forces armees de la Republique
democratique du Congo and National Police presence
that prioritizes the protection of civilians is critical in
high-risk zones. I also urge the Government to
reinforce its efforts to address impunity and strengthen
the rule of law, particularly in the context of sexual
violence. For our part, I reiterate the offer to deploy a
team of experts on the rule of law, as called for by
resolution 1888 (2009), to support the Government in
that regard. My Office is in the process of constituting
that team and I hope that we may soon agree on the
timing and modalities for its deployment.

I have also been concerned that the intense focus
on the response of the United Nations has deflected
attention from the most critical element of all -
pursuing and bringing to justice the perpetrators. As
the spotlight falls on the United Nations and what we
could have done differently, the perpetrators - those
who committed or commissioned rape and pillage -
seem to have escaped from the scene of the crime and
slipped into the shadows. This challenges our
collective credibility and undermines efforts to deter
such atrocities in future.

As the Council has heard, we already have some
names, such as Colonel Mayele, the Mai Mai Cheka
Chief of Staff, and Colonel Serafim of the Forces
democratiques de liberation du Rwanda (FDLR), who
was present on the scene. Cheka himself, as well as the
political and military leadership of the FDLR, may
ultimately bear command responsibility for crimes by
their subordinates that they failed to prevent or punish.
These names are a starting point and constitute leads
and leverage by which we may also identify some of
the other participants in and architects of the mass
rapes in Kibua. I believe that we have a narrow
window of opportunity before the trail goes cold and
the attention of the international community and media
turns to other crises, dissipating the pressure on these
groups. My role is to ensure sustained international
attention through public advocacy and direct political
dialogue.

The Council has encouraged systematic United
Nations engagement with armed groups that commit
grave violations against children affected by conflict.
This approach has yielded tangible results. In line with
resolution 1820 (2008), I intend to pursue such

engagement with State and non-State actors alike to
ensure that perpetrators of conflict-related sexual
violence are held accountable and prevention measures
put in place. In that regard, the Security Council has
unique means at its disposal. This includes the black-
listing of individuals and entities and the imposition of
sanctions and other targeted measures, which add
leverage in our dialogue. I therefore urge the Council
to take such action, beginning with the commanders of
the armed groups responsible for the atrocities
committed in Kibua.

Furthermore, I believe that the Security Council
is primed to take such action through its sanctions
Committee for the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Resolutions 1857 (2008) and 1896 (2009), which
specify the mandate of the sanctions Committee,
establish a legal basis for the imposition of sanctions
on individuals operating in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo who commit sexual violence. I urge the
Council to follow up on this provision by mandating
the Democratic Republic of the Congo Sanctions
Committee to gather all necessary information from the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
and the Committee's Group of Experts, as well as from
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and other
humanitarian actors who may have relevant
information. My Office stands ready to facilitate such a
process. The FDLR has time and again been
responsible for grave human rights violations in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. I therefore urge
Member States that have FDLR leaders residing in
their countries to take legal action against them in line
with resolution 1925 (2010).

On the ground in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the United Nations, together with the
Government, last year launched a comprehensive
strategy on combating sexual violence in the country.
The strategy has five pillars: combating impunity,
prevention and protection, security sector reform,
multisectoral assistance for survivors, and data
collection and mapping. It is being supported and
financed by donors through the Government's
Stabilization and Reconstruction Plan for the eastern
part of the country, and has created a platform for a
coordinated, comprehensive response by all actors. We
need to support and strengthen this coordination
platform, reaching out particularly to NGOs that
provide frontline services. Their critical role has once

again been exemplified by the work of such
organizations as the International Medical Corps and
Heal Africa in response to the mass rapes in Kibua.

MONUSCO's sexual violence unit is charged
with coordinating the implementation of the Strategy.
We must ensure that it has adequate capacity to
effectively perform this function. My role is to help
mobilize resources for the full implementation of the
Strategy, as well as to ensure strategic support from the
United Nations Action Network that I chair.

Finally, we cannot turn back time for the victims
of Kibua or for the countless other survivors of brutal
acts of organized sexual violence. As we strive to help
these survivors, we must do our utmost to ensure there
are no more victims. These unconscionable acts must
spur every one of us as protection duty-bearers to
immediate and concerted action. This is our collective
responsibility to the survivors and our collective signal
to the perpetrators, who are watching and waiting to
see how the world will react. Our policies of zero
tolerance cannot be backed by a reality of zero
consequences.

I intend to return to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo by the end of September to engage with all
stakeholders and, above all, to listen to the survivors.

