Mr. Kolga (Estonia): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this open debate.

Estonia fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union.

The Security Council, through its resolutions, has
developed a robust framework to prevent and address
sexual violence in armed conflict. However, gender
crimes remain an enduring part ofmost armed conflicts.
The leading role the United Kingdom is playing
in international efforts to combat sexual violence
is therefore much needed and appreciated. I would
also like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
Ms. Bangura, Ms. Jolie and Ms. Anwar for their
statements, and passionate and inspiring commitment
and dedication.

Special Representative Bangura has repeatedly
underlined that there is no way to end sexual violence
unless one ends impunity. Two weeks ago in the Human
Rights Council in Geneva, the Special Rapporteur
on Violence against Women, Ms. Rashida Manjoo,
underlined that States need to be held accountable not
only for investigating all acts of violence against women,
but also for failing to prevent such violence. In recent
years, sexual violence and its threat have continued to
be employed as a weapon of war. Armed conflicts have
made evident the need to protect civilians, especially
the most vulnerable groups of women and children.

Estonia calls on States to take further political steps
to fulfil the promise of Security Council resolutions on
ending sexual violence as a tactic of war, and also calls
on everyone to adhere to those tenets of international
humanitarian law that prohibit rape and other forms
of sexual violence. As to the United Nations, the next
important step would be the further implementation of
monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements on
conflict-related sexual violence. We would also urge
the further deployment of women's protection advisers
to the Security Council-mandated missions.

Despite the increasing international focus on sexual
violence in conflict, perpetrators of sexual Violence are
rarely held accountable. The vigorous investigation and
prosecution of perpetrators are, however, necessary to
deter and halt such violence. We share the assessment
of Special Representative Bangura that national
ownership, leadership and responsibility in addressing
sexual violence are some of the most important aspects
of the fight against sexual violence.

In a similar vein, in his report of March 2013 on
sexual violence in conflict (S/2013/149), the Secretary-
General notes that national courts remain the principal
venue for holding individuals accountable for crimes of
sexual violence and that the national authorities should
be supported in that regard. This is crucial, as the lack of
adequate national capacity and expertise to investigate
and prosecute acts of sexual violence remains one of the
main impediments to ensuring accountability for gender
crimes. To date, sexual violence in armed conflict has
been prosecuted primarily at the international level
through hybrid courts and international tribunals. These
tribunals do indeed play an important complimentary
role to national efforts.

The International Criminal Tribunals for the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda developed groundbreaking
international jurisprudence outlawing rape and sexual
violence during war. Investigating and prosecuting
gender crimes has also been an integral part of the
investigative and prosecutorial strategy of the Special
Court for Sierra Leone. The Rome Statute, the founding
treaty of the International Criminal Court (ICC), built
upon the recognition of sexual violence as a serious
international crime by the ad hoc tribunals and
expanded the scope of sexual violence-based crimes in
international law. The Rome Statute specifies a greater
number of sexual violence crimes than the statutes
of the ad hoc tribunals, and acknowledges that these
crimes can be committed against men and women. It
is important that the Rome Statute's gender sensitivity
be translated into national prosecutions to make sure
that national proceedings take into account the gender
dimension of atrocity crimes to the same extent as the
Rome Statute does.

The ICC has also proven itself to be sensitive to
gender crimes in practice. The Prosecutor gives priority
to sexual and gender-based crimes from the outset of its
preliminary investigations. Charges for gender-based
crimes have so far been brought in cases arising from
six of the eight situations. Estonia joins the Secretary-
General in his call on the Council to employ all means
at its disposal to address sexual violence in conflict,
including through referrals to the ICC.

The ICC is, however, not only about punishing
perpetrators, but also about empowering victims of
atrocity crimes. The Court is committed to ensuring
victims a participatory role in its proceedings, and the
Rome Statute contains a relatively broad reparations
provision. The Trust Fund for Victims established
under the Rome Statute has been doing important
work in countries where the court is conducting
investigations to alleviate the suffering of victims.
Among other activities, it is providing assistance to
the victims of rape and to children born as a result of
rape. In replenishing the Fund, Estonia has paid special
attention to the needs of victims of sexual violence, who
are very often stigmatized by their own communities.
The trust fund is dependent on voluntary donations
in order to effectively fulfil its mandate, and Estonia
welcomes voluntary donations to the Fund.

