Mr. Braun (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Ithank
the presidency of Spain for having taken the initiative
of organizing this important open debate. I welcome
the adoption of resolution 2331 (2016), which was the
culmination of broad consultations outstandingly led
by the Spanish delegation. The resolution ensures that
this meeting will not be without consequences and that
human trafficking in the context of conflict situations
will remain a priority for the Council and every State
Member of the United Nations.

Luxembourg aligns itself with the statement made
on behalf of the European Union by Ms. Vassiliadou,
the Anti-Trafficking Coordinator of the European
Union. I would like to make four points.

First, at the United Nations level, we must strengthen
the link between combating human trafficking and
the implementation of efforts to end sexual violence
and grave violations of children's rights in conflict
situations. Resolution 2331 (2016) recognizes that
link, and we encourage the Security Council and its
sanctions committees to implement the provisions
of that resolution, in particular by strengthening
information-sharing with the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, so as to be able to
more effectively punish individuals involved in human
trafficking in conflict areas.
At the European Union level, my country is
committed to combating human trafficking, which
affects vulnerable groups, such as migrants and
refugees. Since 16 July 2015, we have provided a naval
surveillance plane to Operation Sophia, the European
naval force authorized by the Security Council,
which contributes to the European Union's efforts
to dismantle the economic machinery of trafficking
networks and human traffickers in the southern part of
the Mediterranean Sea.

At the regional level, in the framework of our
chairmanship of the Economic Union of Belgium,
the Netherlands and Luxembourg (Benelux), we
have endeavoured to bring together relevant actors,
including non-governmental organizations, with a view
to better caring for the victims of human trafficking.
In particular, we signed a declaration confirming
the resolve of the Benelux countries to strengthen
cooperation among accommodation and assistance
centres for victims of human trafficking, judicial
authorities and police agencies, among others.

Finally, at the national level, we are in the process
of completing our legislative arsenal. A bill is currently
before Parliament that proposes in particular to punish
any client soliciting the services of a sexually exploited
victim of human trafficking. In the humanitarian area,
we ensure that the protection of vulnerable people,
including victims ofhuman trafficking, will be included
in the programmes that we support in conflict areas.

The poignant account of the victims of human
trafficking must motivate all of us to do more at all
levels to end that scourge, which is fuelled by war and,
in turn, fuels organized crime and terrorist networks.
Last Thursday, our Minister for Foreign and European
Affairs, Mr. Jean Asselborn, had the honour of
welcoming Nadia Mourad and Lamiya Aji Bachar to
Luxembourg. Those two Yezidi persons, who had been
relegated to the status of slaves by Da'esh, managed to
escape from that hell. Today they bear witness to the fate
of too many civilians - men, women and children - in
Syria and Iraq, but also in Nigeria, Somalia and Central
Africa. Let us hear their call.

