Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): I too thank our
briefers and the Secretary-General for his personal
commitment to advancing the Women and Peace and
Security agenda.

I have four key points to make today, but frankly
it is disappointing that I have to make any of them
in 2016. It is my personal hope that by the time New
Zealand presides over the Security Council again, there
will no longer be a need for a separate women and
peace and security agenda. It is also my hope that, by
then, my colleagues will not feel the need to point out
how special it is to thank "Madam President" because
women presiding over the Council will no longer be
considered a novelty. In any case, let me go back to the
points that I am here to make in my national capacity.

First, the meaningful participation of women at all
stages of conflict is essential to achieving sustainable
peace. We know that gender equality is critical to
maintaining international peace and security. We know
that women and girls have a significant role to play
as leaders and decision-makers in the prevention and
durable resolution of conflict. As the Secretary-General
mentioned, we have the data. Women's participation
increases the probability of a peace agreement lasting
at least two years by 20 per cent. That percentage rises
to 35 per cent after 15 years. But all too often, that is not
reflected in our peacebuilding activities.

On a positive note, the peace process in Colombia
has provided a best-practice example of women's
participation. As we have heard, Colombian women
have successfully advocated for the inclusion of women
and ensured that the peace process adequately addresses
crucial issues, including violence against women and
community displacement. That must be maintained in
the ongoing dialogue towards a final peace agreement
and encourage contributors to the United Nations
Mission to respond to the call to deploy women.

We also commend the initiative of the Secretary-
General's Special Envoy for Syria, Staffan de Mistura,
to establish a women's advisory board to ensure
that the voices of Syrian women are reflected in the
peace process. Unfortunately, however, such positive
outcomes remain rare, and we have yet to achieve the
meaningful participation of women as a natural and
necessary element for all peace processes.
My second point is that the Security Council should
match rhetoric with action. That includes doing better
in the mandates we set for peace operations, ensuring
that United Nations missions have the right specialized
personnel and skills sets, and being more open-minded
about who briefs the Council.

Thirdly, the United Nations system must ensure
that gender perspectives are integrated across activities.
Appointments across the United Nations, including
at senior levels, must reflect the world around us. If
not the United Nations, who will take responsibility
for improved representation of women at all levels?
That is especially important for those operating in
conflict, fragile and post-conflict environments.
We should monitor and review such issues in the
Fifth Committee when we approve and fund posts.
That also means deploying more women in United
Nations missions. And it means ensuring that those
deployed - male and female - have the knowledge
and training required to respond to challenges related
to a lack of gender equality or women's empowerment.
That requires making greater effort within our national
military and police forces. New Zealand is actively
increasing the recruitment, promotion and retention of
senior women within the police and the defence force.
We are determined to deploy women at all levels of
decision-making in conflict-resolution processes.

My final point is the need to combat conflict-related
sexual violence. Like others, New Zealand condemns
the use of sexual violence, including as a method of
warfare, and supports measures to tackle this challenge.
Ongoing United Nations leadership to prevent and
address conflict-related sexual violence will be
essential. New Zealand has also consistently supported
the Secretary-General's zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse by United Nations peacekeepers.
It is time for an honest conversation among the
Secretariat, contributing countries and Member States
about why this continues to be a problem, how to stop it
and, when it occurs, how to respond.

New Zealand has full confidence that the
Secretary-General-designate will take forward this
important agenda. We appreciate the strong signals
he has sent about his commitment to gender equality
within the Secretariat, and his acknowledgement that
full participation of women is essential to peace and
prosperity.

We all benefit when the women and peace and
security agenda is fully realized: the operational
effectiveness of our peacekeeping missions improves,
our peacekeeping efforts are more likely to take hold
and we improve the chances of sustainable peace being
achieved. Those are goals to which we all should aspire.

