Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): Four
years ago the Security Council adopted resolution 1325
(2000), thereby setting the goal of establishing a
benchmark for the international community that would
guide the actions of States, international institutions
and civil society in addressing gender-related problems
in the context of efforts to promote peace and security.

The Secretary-General's assessment of the
implementation of the resolution clearly reflects the
progress that has been made, but also points to the gaps
that still have to be bridged. Overall, we were pleased
to see that there has been a mindset change as concerns
the particular situation of women and also concerted
action at all levels to give women their rightful place in
our societies.

We welcome the joint efforts of States, the United
Nations system and civil society organizations,
particularly women's groups, which have helped
increase awareness of the particular needs of women in
conflict situations.

The report, however, also notes the regrettable
persistence of gender-based violence and of trafficking
in human beings, with women and girl children as the
primary victims, particularly in countries in conflict
and post-conflict situations. Mr. President, we welcome
your country's decision to convene a public debate on
the strengthening of the response of the United Nations
to violence against women in conflict situations. We
take this opportunity to express our full and strong
condemnation of that phenomenon.

At an Arria-style meeting on 21 October, the
Security Council heard heart-rending accounts that
truly brought home these harsh realities and the extent
to which such criminal practices harm humanity as a
whole, as they represent a serious affront to human
dignity, particularly when they are used on a large
scale as a weapon of war in certain conflicts. That is
often the case in internal conflicts, which are real
tragedies that are played out behind closed doors, out
of the spotlight of the international media.

The increase in the number of such conflicts in
recent decades has created a fertile breeding ground for
gender-based exploitation and violence. The combat
against gender-based violence must fully be
internalized by the international community in its
efforts to settle internal armed conflicts. It is necessary
also to criminalize gender-based violence in order
combat impunity. That means that, at the national
judicial level, rules and norms must be introduced for
the prosecution of such cases.

The efforts of the United Nations must help to
ensure the documentation of cases of gender-based
violence and of other human rights violations, as well
as strengthen the capacity of civil society, particularly
women's organizations, to tackle that scourge. It must
help to provide protection to witnesses and ensure that
justice is done and redress made to victims, as well as
identify perpetrators of gender-based violence and
bring them to trial at the national level or at the level of
the International Criminal Court. Finally, it must bring
increased pressure to bear on parties to a conflict to put
an end to such human rights violations.

In the framework of conflict prevention, we must
devote particular attention to the provision of
information to women and girls about what recourse is
available to them in the area of gender-based violence.
The participation of women in the decision-making
process at various levels is necessary in order to ensure
that gender issues are dealt with comprehensively.
The United Nations must seeks ways and means
of better integrating the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) into its multifaceted activities aimed at the
protection of the human person. All United Nations
structures must therefore adopt coherent strategies to
combat the scourge of gender-based violence in their
activities in countries in conflict or post-conflict
situations. The question of leadership in the
coordination of such activities seems to us pressing and
vital. The Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
which is dealing with this issue, must therefore be
provided the necessary resources.

Finally, we believe that at the current stage,
peacekeeping operations, through their composition
and their mandates, can be a useful tool and a
determining factor in the implementation of such
measures.

