Mr. Kamara (Sierra Leone): My delegation
would like to thank you for organizing this debate in
connection with the tenth anniversary of the adoption
of what has become a landmark resolution in the
history of the United Nations - namely, resolution
1325 (2000) on women and peace and security. We
would also like to express our appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
contained in document S/2010/498.

From our own experience, sustainable peace
cannot be achieved without the full and effective
participation of women in conflict prevention, conflict
resolution, peace processes, and post-conflict
reconstruction and peacebuilding.

A few weeks ago, the Security Council itself
acknowledged the efforts that Sierra Leone is making
towards the prevention and resolution of conflict and in
peacebuilding. In resolution 1941 (2010), the Council
commended the Government of Sierra Leone for
recognizing the important role of women in
peacebuilding, with reference to resolutions 1325
(2000) and 1820 (2008), by establishing national
strategies relating to women, peace and security.

Today, we can boast of a national action plan
launched by President Koroma on 8 June, which was
developed through a process that has been acclaimed
by many as highly participatory and inclusive. This
comprehensive plan includes a monitoring and
evaluation framework to ensure that all actors are
accountable for its full implementation. Prior to the
launching of our national action plan, we also launched
an overarching national gender strategic plan, with
which the national action plan has been harmonized
with a view to mainstreaming its implementation into
the President's Agenda for Change.

Increasing the participation and representation of
our women in peace and security programmes within a
democratic governance structure for us is key. To
ensure that the role of women in the local Government
machinery is enhanced, the Local Government Act
stipulates gender parity at the municipal level. We have
also ensured a significant improvement in the
participation of women in the security and justice
sectors by appointing a number of women to senior
management positions. In 2008, for instance, there was
a landmark appointment. A woman was appointed as
Chief Justice of the judiciary of Sierra Leone. Nine of
the 21 judges are women, while four of the seven
Supreme Court justices are also women. The first
female brigadier in Sierra Leone - also the first in
West Africa - was recently appointed as a major step
towards the implementation of the equal opportunities
policy adopted in 2009 by the Republic of Sierra Leone
Armed Forces.

Access to justice for our women has been
reinforced through the enactment of the three gender-
responsive laws: the Registration of Customary
Marriage and Divorce Act, the Domestic Violence Act,
and the Devolution of Estates Act. These laws are
designed to promote women's human rights and protect
women against discrimination.

The illicit flow and use of small arms and light
weapons during the 11-year rebel war was devastating,
particularly for our women and girls. In this regard, the
enactment of the National Commission on Small Arms
Act of 2010 and the formal establishment of the
National Commission should, among other things,
enhance our capacity to address the issue of violence,
including gender-based and sexual Violence. We have
also established a National Committee on Gender-
based Violence to look into cases of abuse and violence
against women and girls. Moreover, pillar 3 of the
Sierra Leone national action plan specifically deals
with the prosecution and punishment of perpetrators as
a way of addressing the question of impunity for sexual
and gender-based Violence.

Among other impressive strides taken by the
Government of Sierra Leone to improve the welfare of
our women and girls are affirmative action for girl-
child education and the recent adoption of the free
health care delivery initiative for pregnant women,
lactating mothers and children under the age of five.

We are well aware that it is our national
responsibility to implement the provisions of this
groundbreaking resolution. We acknowledge the
support of the Unite Nations system and the
international community as a whole in what we have
been able to achieve since resolution 1325 (2000) was
adopted 10 years ago. We count on their continued and
sustained support, especially that of United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone, in this
noble venture.

