Mr. De Riviere (France) (Spoke in French): First
of all, Madam President, I would like to welcome your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and to thank South Africa for having carried out that
function effectively throughout the month of October
and for having led the Council on the Horn of Africa. I
thank the Deputy Secretary-General for her statement.
Thanks also to the Permanent Observer of the African
Union for her briefing.

The Deputy Secretary-General's visit to the Horn of
Africa is very timely, given the encouraging momentum
in the region today. Women are stakeholders in that
process, and the momentum must benefit them over
time. The resolution we adopted last week (resolution 2493 (2019)) reminded us that the time has come to
implement all dimensions of the women and peace and
security agenda, everywhere in the world. The United
Nations must mobilize fully in support of States.

We welcome the efforts of the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Horn of Africa,
Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, in the area of women's
political participation in that region. We also commend
the efforts of the Prime Minister of Ethiopia to
strengthen peace in the region, including his signing
of an agreement with Eritrea and the actions he has
undertaken in the Sudan with the African Union. We
are delighted that he has been awarded the Nobel Peace
Prize. Ethiopia, which has a woman President and 10
women ministers, is a leading example in terms of
women's political participation.

The situation in the Sudan is also encouraging,
and France supports Prime Minister Hamdok's efforts
to achieve lasting peace and to revive the economy.
Sudanese women played a decisive role in their country's
revolution. They have earned their rightful place in the
transition. In that connection, we call for compliance
with regard to the quota for women's representation that
was set out in the Constitutional Declaration. The fact
that there are four women ministers in the Government
is positive, but that should only be the beginning.

Despite that positive momentum, significant
challenges remain. We hope that South Sudan will
be able to form a Government of National Unity by
12 November. In that regard, we call on all South
Sudanese parties to respect the 35-per cent quota for
women in transitional bodies, in accordance with
the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan.

We also call for a rapprochement between Djibouti
and Eritrea in order to enable those two countries to
resolve the persistent problems between them. In
that regard, we consider it necessary for the Security
Council to continue closely monitoring the relations
between those two countries.

Finally, in Somalia, while the recent progress
achieved by the Somali National Army is encouraging,
we remain concerned about the frequency and intensity
of attacks by Al-Shabaab and the sexual violence
that is being perpetrated in the country. We call
for the resumption of dialogue between the Federal
Government of Somalia and the federal member states,
and believe that Somali women have a key role to play
in that process.

I will conclude by reiterating that it is important
to France that these transitions enable significant
progress to be achieved on the ground with regard to
the resolutions of the Council on women and peace
and security.

