Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for holding this debate. We are also
grateful to the Secretary-General and to Mr. Peter
Wittig, Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, for
their briefings today.

The progress report of the Secretary-General on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2010/386) is encouraging for two main reasons.
First, it puts the right emphasis on the multifaceted
nature of sustainable peace, and therefore that of
peacebuilding. Gone are the days when peace could be
seen as the mere absence of armed conflict. The report
is also encouraging because it makes clear that the
senior management of the Organization is engaged in a
serious effort to adjust institutional practices and
mechanisms to that concept of peace. We thank the
Secretary-General for leading that process within the
system.

Among the initiatives now under way, I wish to
single out two of particular importance, namely,
integrated planning, which is critical to ensure that a
truly holistic approach to peacebuilding prevails, and
the establishment of unified teams of civilian experts to
assist the heads of missions. Such units must
themselves be comprehensive in scope. They must
include experts not only in the rule of law, human
rights and security sector reform, but also in public
administration and socio-economic development.
Without staff in those latter areas, our support for
United Nations action in them will tend to be merely
rhetorical.
My delegation could not agree more with the
Secretary-General when he emphasizes national
capacity development as the cornerstone of
peacebuilding efforts. Several of the protracted crises
that the United Nations faces today are, to a large
extent, fuelled, if not caused, precisely by weak
governance and the lack of institutional capacity. We
also concur with the view that support for capacity
development must be a system-wide priority. The
ultimate goal of several parts of the United Nations
system should be to work themselves out of business.
Member States are also a key piece of that puzzle. We
must once and for all move away from supply-driven
cooperation and focus on finding the right way to
support partners without stifling ownership. In so
doing, we will be serving our own long-term interests.

In that regard, we reiterate our support for
ongoing efforts aimed at establishing pools of civilian
capacity to be expeditiously deployed in the field.
Needless to say, such pools should not replace existing
local capacity. They ought to resort to experts from
developing countries as much as possible, especially
from the region of the country concerned, and must
help to develop national capacity in post-conflict
countries, even in the immediate aftermath of conflict.
The current review of civilian capacities should also be
consistent with the holistic approach to peacebuilding
and put forth recommendations on all the areas set out
in the report of Secretary-General of last year
(S/2009/304), including the provision of basic services
and economic revitalization.

Another key issue is the interaction of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. The emerging
consensus that they are not sequential forms of
engagement must now be made operational. In those
cases where peacekeepers can be early peacebuilders, it
is illogical not to use some of their existing capacities
to start laying the groundwork for peacebuilding. That
is especially true for civil affairs components of
peacekeeping operations, in particular with respect to
the consolidation of State authority.

The area of job creation, which is key to stability,
is also potentially relevant for the interaction between
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. As indicated by the
Secretary-General, greater synergies between
peacekeeping operations and the activities financed by
the PBF may contribute to broadening the reach of
projects.
As we near the anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000), the importance of involving and empowering
women in all stages of the conflict is very much on our
minds. In that area, as in others, our main concern is
sustainability. Our ultimate goal must be to help
permanently improve women's place in society.

It is with that in mind that we are studying the
Secretary-General's report on women's participation in
peacebuilding (S/2010/466), for which we are grateful.
Today, I wish to make a few preliminary comments on
one of the plan's key commitments, namely, women's
participation in economic recovery.

Although Brazil is not a post-conflict country, our
experience suggests there are significant long-term
social and economic benefits in steering social
programmes towards women. A similar approach may
be fruitful in peacebuilding. It is not merely a question
of distributive justice, but of inducing meaningful
change. Ensuring women's economic inclusion has the
potential to permanently transform their role in society,
regardless of cultural and historical particularities. That
should be our collective ultimate goal.

Finally, I wish to say a few words on the report of
the co-facilitators of the Peacebuilding Commission
review process (S/2010/393, annex). We thank them
for their work. The document is quite comprehensive,
although more could have been said about the work of
the country-specific configurations. The report also
sets out recommendations that deserve careful
consideration in the General Assembly, the Security
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission.

Among such recommendations, I would single
out those concerning support to national capacity-
building, the developmental aspects of peacebuilding,
the emphasis on youth employment, coordination and
coherence, and the strengthening of the relationship
with the General Assembly, the Security Council and
the Economic and Social Council.

Our peacebuilding efforts are a key element of
our strategy, both as an Organization and as individual
Governments, to move from a simplistic and
fragmented approach to peace to a more complex and
integrated way of consolidating peace - one that fully
understands that peace, security, development and
human rights are closely linked and that peace will not
be sustainable without simultaneous and coordinated
action in all four aspects. The challenge is to translate
that concept into practice and above all in a new
mentality - in capitals, in New York and in the field.

