Mr. Gertze (Namibia): Namibia welcomes the
Security Council's decision to once again discuss the
issue of women and peace and security as a standing
agenda item. We are encouraged by the overwhelming
support shown by Member States as evidenced in the
large number of participants.

My delegation also aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Canada on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Women and Peace and Security.
We would like to reiterate that Namibia, as the
initiator of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace
and security, remains committed to its implementation.
We look forward to a time when women's contributions
to peace processes are valued and respected equally.

In Namibia, the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) falls within the national gender policy
framework, which includes a cluster on gender,
peacebuilding, conflict resolution and natural disaster
management. Its overarching objective is to increase and
strengthen women's participation in conflict resolution,
promote women's contribution to peacebuilding and
involve women in natural disaster management, an
emerging issue that resolution 1325 (2000) overlooked.
The reviewed gender policy is complemented by other
national policies aimed at mainstreaming gender and
holding discussions on placing women on par with men,
including in the Affirmative Action Act, the Inheritance
Act and the Communal Land Act, among others.

Those policies have ensured that Namibia has
been deploying women to all peacekeeping missions
and has had to date one of the largest female police
contingents at the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the Sudan. We also had a
women police contingent in Liberia. When one of the
Southern African Development Community (SADC)
countries, Lesotho, faced a political impasse last year,
the SADC police contingent to that country was led
by a Namibian woman who had previously served in
Darfur. In addition, Namibia has seconded a woman
to the Office of the African Union Special Envoy on
Women, Peace and Security.

It is our belief that the significant presence of
women peacekeepers in conflict and post-conflict
areas has an added advantage of creating safer spaces
for girls and women who have suffered sexual violence.
Studies conducted by the United Nations on support for
resolution 1325 (2000) have demonstrated that female
soldiers often face different cultural restrictions than
their male counterparts and are able to gain information
from women and children. That ability to gain the
trust of local populations should be considered a vital
component of any peacekeeping operation.

The challenges to the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) are many, and include a lack of awareness
of the agenda, a lack of political will, compounded by
entrenched biases not to promote women to positions
of power, and a lack of capacity-building and financing
for the agenda. Another challenge is simply cultural
and traditional norms that serve to promote men to
positions of power, while questioning the ability of
women to lead, particularly in traditionally male fields
such as the police, defence services and peacekeeping.
Since those traditional norms are pushed by both
women and men, we must encourage a culture in which
both men and women believe it is vital to support the
rise of women to positions of leadership.

The inclusion of women in early-warning,
mediation and conflict resolution efforts are key to
ensuring a successful peace and security agenda.
Gender-specific provisions also need to be included in
peace agreements. Much progress is still to be made in
that, as in 2016 only half of peace agreements adopted
contained gender-specific provisions.

We must also do more to prevent and condemn sexual
exploitation and abuse in peacekeeping operations. The
role of peacekeepers is to protect civilians, not cause
more harm or distress. In that regard, Namibia signed
the voluntary compact against sexual exploitation and
abuse, during the General Assembly high-level week
in September, and we encourage others to do the same.

Namibia urges Member States to commit
to nominating women for top-level positions in
international and regional peace and security
organizations. At the African Union, the Special Envoy
on Women, Peace and Security, Ms. Bineta Diop, has
been raising this matter in many forums. We encourage
other regional and subregional organizations to
nominate women, peace and security envoys. We urge
troop- and police-contributing countries to identify
and deploy female military experts in peacekeeping
missions. Finally, we demand greater consideration
of the women and peace and security agenda in the
working procedures of the Security Council, both
country-specific and thematic.

