Ms. Beham: I thank you, Sir, for allowing me to
participate on behalf of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in this important
debate. I would also like to thank the briefers and other
speakers for their thought-provoking presentations.

As the representative of the world's largest regional
security organization, I would like at the outset to devote
a few remarks to the role that regional organizations
can and should play with respect to the implementation
of the commitments resulting from the women, peace
and security agenda. We have already heard a number
of remarks in that regard.

While it is obvious that States have the primary
responsibility to ensure that the resolutions on
women, peace and security are translated into action,
regional organizations working on the maintenance of
international peace and security, such as the OSCE,
also have a recognized role. Both the recent presidential
statement on cooperation with regional organizations
(S/PRST/2013/12), adopted in August, and several
of the women, peace and security resolutions refer
to the crucial contribution of regional organizations
to affirming the participation of women in conflict
prevention, conflict resolution mechanisms and
peacebuilding.

There is now a good window of opportunity to
give women, peace and security issues a boost on
the regional level as the United Nations is currently
leading a process of strengthening the role of regional
organizations under Chapter VIII of the Charter,
dealing with conflict prevention, in particular early
warning and early action. The OSCE Secretary General,
in his recent round of consultations with senior United
Nations interlocutors, including Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon and Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson,
found strong support for the OSCE to play a central role
in this process. The OSCE welcomes the adoption of
resolution 2122 (2013) today, which clearly recognizes
the efforts of regional organizations in implementing
women, peace and security commitments, including
the development of action plans and implementation
frameworks.

The OSCE participating States have acknowledged
the importance of the women, peace and security
agenda by adopting a number of Ministerial Council
decisions, including one explicitly dedicated to
increasing women's participation in conflict prevention,
crisis management and post-conflict rehabilitation and
another dealing with the elements of the conflict cycle
to include commitments under resolution 1325 (2000).
As a result, the OSCE has taken a number ofinitiatives,
both at the secretariat level and in its field operations,
to implement these Ministerial Council decisions, in
particular in conflict-affected contexts in the OSCE
region.
Let me begin with our activities related to the
theme of today's debate - women, the rule of law and
transitional justice in conflict-affected contexts. The
OSCE field operations, institutions and secretariat
are implementing a variety of activities related to war
crimesjustice, trial monitoring, criminaljustice reform,
judicial independence and administrative justice. We
undertake every effort to mainstream the participation
of women into these activities and to integrate gender
into our substantive approaches.

To takejust one example, the OSCE promotes gender
balance in its work with judicial personnel because we
believe that diversity has a positive impact on women's
access to justice and the perceived legitimacy of the
judiciary. From a substantive perspective, our mission
to Bosnia and Herzegovina supports the integration of
a gender perspective into war crimes-trial monitoring
by providing specific training for civil society on how
to monitor conflict-related sexual violence cases and
understand the specific challenges that witnesses and
Victims face in such processes. Trial monitors are
then better prepared to gather data on how such cases
progress through the judicial system and to advocate for
policy improvements based on the data. This is one step
in ensuring that justice and accountability are pursued
equally for all violations and crimes, regardless of their
nature or the sex of the victim.

Also, through a number of women's resource centre
networks supported by the OSCE in Central Asia
and the Caucasus, our organization helps to enhance
women's access to legal aid. But the judiciary is, of
course, not the only actor involved in the rule of law,
and the OSCE also works with participating States to
increase the number ofwomen in the police and to make
law enforcement activities gender-sensitive as a part of
comprehensive security sector reforms facilitated by
our Organization in many countries.

Within the politico-military dimension, the OSCE
Forum for Security Cooperation promotes the inclusion
of women in the military, including in combat positions,
making sure that civilian oversight and human rights in
the armed forces are guaranteed for men and women
alike.

As I said, the OSCE is the world's largest regional
security organization. It also plays an important
role throughout the region in mediation, dialogue
facilitation, good offices and quiet diplomacy. The
organization has increased its efforts to ensure that those
processes are inclusive. We are pleased to announce
that on 24 October, in Istanbul, the OSCE will launch
a guidance note on gender-responsive mediation. The
purpose of the guidance note is not only to increase
women's participation in mediation, dialogue and
quiet diplomacy initiatives, but also to strengthen the
capacity of mediators to understand how the substantive
concerns of both men and women can be included in
those processes and how that inclusion benefits the
sustainability of conflict resolution and reconciliation.
We are grateful to the Secretariat's Department of
Political Affairs and the Mediation Support Unit for
their inspiring cooperation in preparing this guidance
note.

Allow me at this point to refer to one more issue
that we believe is important, also in the framework of
today's debate. The OSCE is a leader in a key peace
and security issue that is not discussed enough from a
perspective of women, peace and security: integrating
a gender perspective in combating violent extremism
and radicalization that leads to terrorism. This is an
issue of serious concern to OSCE participating States.
Both national authorities and international and regional
organizations increasingly recognize that a better
understanding of the dynamics of this issue is central
to formulating and implementing effective strategies
that will increase stability and security. In 2014, the
OSCE will undertake a new initiative, in partnership
with the Global Counterterrorism Forum, to promote
gender-sensitive strategies, policies and measures
to counter violent extremism and radicalization that
leads to terrorism, with an emphasis on empowering
women to contribute to those efforts in different roles
and capacitiesl would like to conclude by drawing
attention to the good cooperation between OSCE field
operations and UN Women offices on women, peace
and security issues. For example, next month we will
be co-hosting a conference in Almaty, Kazakhstan
for OSCE participating States to discuss with expert
representatives and civil society organizations progress
in drafting and implementing national action plans
or other strategies on Security Council resolution
1325 (2000). The results of this conference will be
merged with the outcome of an OSCE study on good
practices and lessons learned by OSCE participating
States, which was undertaken with the Peace Research
Institute in Oslo. We hope that events and research such
as those will provide us with further insight on how
to put into practice important goals in the resolutions
on women, peace and security and, that Member States
of the United Nations can benefit from the knowledge
generated by the OSCE.

