Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
First of all, I would like to welcome the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of Sweden
and the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Kingdom of the Netherlands. I would like to thank
your delegation, Mr. President, for convening this
open debate and discussing this important topic.
I also thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2018/900) and for his valuable briefing. I would
like further to thank Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka,
Under Secretary-General and Executive Director of
UN-Women, and Ms. Randa Siniora Atallah for their
informative briefings.

The Security Council has without a doubt
succeeded in highlighting the centrality of the role of
women in achieving international peace and security
in its various stages, from conflict prevention to the
settlement of conflicts. The United Nations and all
its organs have sought to empower women politically,
socially and economically, and to ensure gender parity.
That is best exemplified in the Secretary-General's
successful strategy on gender parity among higher
administration staff and resident coordinators.

Through consecutive Security Council resolutions,
beginning with resolution 1325 (2000), a solid
framework of standards has been established to
strengthen the role of women in maintaining peace and
security. Now we have to bridge the resolutions gap to
make them a reality and ensure that the participation
of women is neither secondary nor symbolic for the
purpose of filling quotas.

According to the latest statistics for the period
from 1990 to 2017, women represented 2 per cent of
mediators and 8 per cent of negotiators. If we are to
achieve positive peace, as the Secretary-General has
called it, which is a more comprehensive concept of
peace that is not limited to stopping violence, but also
includes accountability and full enjoyment of human
rights, we must intensify our efforts aimed at the useful
participation of women in mediation and negotiation
processes so that our resolutions will not be useless.
That begins with ensuring the political, social and
economic rights of women, empowering them to secure
an education and basic services, as well as empowering
them economically. Communities where there is gender
parity are more stable and resilient against disorders
and disputes.

In addition, we must address obstacles that hinder
the participation of women in the achievement of lasting
peace, particularly violence against women in political
life; high poverty rates and food insecurity; low political
participation of women in the stages of peace; and the
denial of their rights in general. When conflicts break
out, women should participate in the political processes
that take place prior to peace consultations, as well
as in the consultations themselves. Women should
be empowered to participate in the implementation
of peace agreements through specific and tangible
procedures and mechanisms. Experience has proven
that the participation of women in peace processes
is directly linked to achieving improvement in the
outcome of those processes and to the implementation
of peace agreements. The participation of women
would also lead to longer-term agreements, whereby
communities become more stable and less liable to fall
back into conflict.
The best example of the effective participation of
women in the peace processes is Colombia. Colombian
women have attained high positions in transitional
justice in their country. We encourage Colombian
women to continue participating in the implementation
of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and
Building a Stable and Lasting Peace.

At the regional level, we commend the effective
participation of Yemeni women in the inclusive
national dialogue, which is still the key factor for the
realization of the desired peace in brotherly Yemen.
Yemeni women also participated in the Yemen peace
talks hosted by the State of Kuwait.

In that regard, we support the Secretary-General's
efforts to improve gender parity in United Nations
peace operations. It is important to provide training
and capacity-building to all participants, military and
civilian, in issues pertaining to women, including
sexual violence in conflicts.

We understand that troop-contributing countries
and police-contributing countries, as well as host
countries, are mainly involved in realizing the effective
participation of women in peace processes. We
encourage the strengthening of cooperation with those
States, as well as building their national capacities
to ensure that the participation of women is of real
measurable value.

In conclusion, we reaffirm that women have the
inherent right to participate in issues of peace and
security. We support the United Nations efforts to
empower women, in cooperation with Member States,
to effectively participate for achieving lasting peace.

