Mr. Seger (Switzerland): I am pleased to speak
today on behalf of the members of the Group of
Friends of the Protection of Civilians in Armed
Conflict - Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada,
France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein, Norway,
Portugal, the United Kingdom, Uruguay and my own
country, Switzerland. The Group of Friends is grateful
to the Chilean presidency of the Security Council for
organizing today's open debate so as to ensure that the
issues of the protection of civilians and women and
peace and security remain high on the agenda.

I run the risk of echoing much of what has already
been said by previous speakers, but certain messages
cannot be repeated enough. The Group of Friends
strongly condemns all violations of international
humanitarian law, international human-rights law and
refugee law committed against civilians, including
women and girls. Those responsible for atrocities such
as crimes involving rape and other forms of sexual
and gender-based Violence; killing and maiming;
wilfully impeding relief supplies, in contravention
of international humanitarian law; and mass forced
displacement too often go unpunished. In that regard,
we would like to draw the Council's attention to the
policy paper on sexual and gender-based crimes
issued in 2014 by the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court. Recent trends point to an increase in
the deliberate targeting of women and girls in conflict,
in blatant disregard of international human-rights law.
The abduction of girls, which has been mentioned, and
the specific targeting of women by violent extremists
are two striking examples. Attacks on schools and
on health-care facilities and their personnel are
particularly despicable. As has been said, we cannot
tolerate impunity, and we must ensure that all the
perpetrators of such atrocities are held accountable
for their actions. In that respect, we underline the
importance of strengthening inter-State cooperation
and States' cooperation with international jurisdictions
in fighting impunity.

Women and girls face a wide range of threats and
human-rights violations and abuses in armed-conflict
and post-conflict situations. More must be done to
ensure that our response takes into account the full
range of violations and the differences in the impact
that they can have on women and girls. Certain groups
of women and girls who are particularly vulnerable
or disadvantaged, such as displaced persons, may be
specifically targeted or find themselves at an increased
risk of violence. Women and girls face a greater risk
of forced displacement, enforced disappearance and
disproportionate impacts as a result of the destruction
of civilian infrastructure, particularly education
and health-care facilities. The forced displacement
of women and girls is often the result of inequality
in citizenship rights and in their involvement in
decision-making processes, of discriminatory land and
property rights, of the gender-biased application of
asylum laws, of obstacles to registering and accessing
identity documents and of the breakdown of protection
systems in conflict situations. In that connection, the
Group notes the importance of ensuring that the United
Nations reports sex-disaggregated data and casualty
records, and of recognizing the different needs of
women, men, girls and boys.

Women's participation in the formulation and
implementation of responses to protection challenges
is essential, and humanitarian assistance must take
into account gender-specific needs and reduce the
risks faced by women and girls, including in the early
phases of response. However, improving the protection
of women and girls should also be done through their
empowerment in society, not merely during conflicts
and their aftermath. Indeed, the disproportionate
impact of conflict on women and girls is often related
to underlying inequalities, which must be addressed in
any effort to end impunity with regard to sexual violence
and other serious crimes, in order to provide victim-
centred support and create mechanisms to ensure that
women are empowered and supported through social,
economic and political inclusion and opportunities. In
that regard, we would like to recall here the importance
of implementing resolution 1325 (2000) and other
related resolutions.

The Group of Friends also stresses the importance
of prevention and the need to prioritize the use of
peaceful and diplomatic tools, including good offices
and mediation, in the protection of women and girls in
conflict and post-conflict environments. In that regard,
we have taken note of recent initiatives that emphasize
the role of the United Nations in prevention, such as the
recently released Framework of Analysis for Atrocity
Crimes and, of course, the Rights Up Front Action Plan.

In conclusion, we encourage the Security Council
to strengthen the protection of civilians across its
agenda, including in the mandates of peacekeeping
operations and special political missions. Looking
ahead, the parallel reviews in 2015 of the peacebuilding
architecture of the United Nations, the women and
peace and security agenda and peace operations will
be an important opportunity to examine how we can
reinforce the effectiveness and consistency of our
common action in protecting civilians and ensure that
it is gender sensitive and reflective of women's voices
on the ground.

