Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): We thank you,
Mr. President, and your delegation for choosing this
important topic for an open debate today. We also thank
the two Ministers for joining us. I found their briefings
very powerful and it is excellent that they have given
up time to be with us today. Minister Wallstrom is a
very frequent visitor to the Security Council, which
is extremely welcome, and I think that all I can say is
that I wholly endorse what both of those Ministers have
said in the Council today. We thank them very much for
that. This is a very important opportunity. We thank
the Secretary-General, the Executive Director of UN-
Women and Ms. Randa Siniora Atallah.

I would like to digress briefly, ifI may, to repeat
what I said on 17 October about the content of briefings
to the Council (see S/PV.8373), but we do believe that
civil society's contribution is essential. I want to add
our voice to those congratulating the Nobel Peace Prize
winners. I think that in this year it is a very important
signal of the criticality of their work, not just for the
communities that benefit from it and are protected
by it, but what it says overall about the international
community's priorities when it comes to putting the
issue of women and girls, and women and peace and
security, at the centre of policymaking.

Two years ahead of the twentieth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000), we are very pleased to have this
important moment to reflect on progress and consider
what more can be done. It is not just a moral issue, the
issue of women's political and economic empowerment.
Fundamentally, it is an economic issue. Countries that
enable equal opportunities for all of their people, equal
access to the law and services and equal participation
in the economic life of the country are much more
likely to thrive and prosper than countries that do not.
Fundamentally, enabling half of a country's population
to participate fully is much more likely to improve
inclusive growth and sustainability. I think that is a
very important economic point that we all need to bear
in mind.

Successive Council resolutions have, of course,
argued that the greater political and economic
empowerment of women is a key element of conflict
prevention. And I think that is all part of the Secretary-
General's core agenda. He spoke very powerfully today.
We welcome his leadership and that of the Secretariat
and we look forward to working more with them. When
women meaningfully participate in peace processes, the
resulting agreement is 35 per cent more likely to last at
least 15 years. It would be more inclusive and therefore
better serve the community that it represents. I would
like to echo what the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Sweden said about the importance of participation
being a right and not a bonus.

As conflicts around the world become more
complex and formal peace processes risk stalling,
women's efforts to tackle conflict have never been more
needed or more vital. In that regard, we as the United
Kingdom were pleased to bring members of the Women
Mediators across the Commonwealth network to New
York this week to exchange experiences with other
regional networks of women mediators and to explore
ways to collectively drive the agenda forward. I think
such mediation networks, whatever their affiliation
and wherever they originate, are an important resource
for us all. The Executive Director was able to describe
some of the very important work on the ground. I am
sure that they would be delighted to work even more
closely with the United Nations.

Sustainable Development Goal 5 makes clear that
empowering women is not only about community-
based actions. It also requires addressing systemic
challenges and structural issues and getting to the core
of the barriers to women's full and equal participation
and exercise ofbasic rights. In line with that, the United
Kingdom has a cross-Government national action plan
committed to increasing women's participation in
decision-making and to scaling up initiatives to prevent
and to respond to gender-based violence. I commend
such plans to all those countries that do not have them.
We also commend signing up to the United Nations
voluntary compact on preventing and addressing sexual
exploitation and abuse, which the Secretary-General
also mentioned today.

We often hear about the importance of
mainstreaming gender equality in all policies. As an
example of that, the United Kingdom has opened all
military roles to women and we are close to meeting
our target of women making up 15 per cent of our
armed forces. That is not enough but we believe that it
is a good start.

Representatives may not know that today there is
a British aircraft carrier lying just off Staten Island. It
is on a friendly visit to New York. I want to stress the
word "friendly". However, what I also want to stress
is that 13 per cent of that ship's company are women.
Eighty-three of the 650 personnel on board are women.
It is the highest number within our Royal Navy fleet.
As I said, that is not enough but it is a good start, and
we hope very much to build on that.

I would like to talk a little about education, which
is key to achieving our ambition. That means educating
women, men, boys and girls if we want to change
attitudes and behaviours. We have a Leave No Girl
Behind campaign. It has the goal of empowering women
and girls through quality education, including education
in emergencies. I would like to stress the word "quality".
A great deal of excellent work has been done around the
world in getting girls into school. I previously had the
honour to be the British Ambassador to Afghanistan. I
saw the girls there going to school and the difference
that it made to their lives. The next challenge is to make
that a genuine quality education so that they obtain the
skills and the tools necessary to be able to play a full
role in the political and economic life of their country
as they grow up. Also, as part of that campaign, we
endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration. We believe that
that represents an important step forward.

We have also talked about sexual and gender-based
violence. By definition, that prevents women from
being active participants at school, in the workforce and
in other political and economic areas. I want to endorse
what the Minister of the Netherlands said in particular
about speaking out against violence against women
leaders because they are the people who at the moment
will drive that forward, and we support her in that.

Finally, as we collectively look towards 2020, the
ambition for all of us should only continue to grow.
I want to clearly echo what the Ministers and other
representatives said about the need to translate our
plans into concrete implementation. I think that that is
very important. I hope that we will be able to continue
to address such issues in the Security Council. I would
like to conclude by referring to Minister Wallstrom's
quote from the women whom she met about wanting
bigger boats, bigger nets and not to get raped. There is
a wealth of meaning and description in that very simple
sentence. If we do nothing else, we ought to be able to
provide them with better equipment, better safety and
the personal security that they require.

