Ms. Patten: I wish to begin by acknowledging the
leadership of Germany and the personal commitment
of His Excellency Mr. Heiko Maas, its Federal Minister
for Foreign Affairs, for convening this open debate.

I am proud to join two of the heroes of our common
cause, Ms. Nadia Murad and Dr. Denis Mukwege,
recipients ofthe 2018 Nobel Peace Prize, who give voice
to the survivors of this heinous crime. Their award
is a triumph of all survivors. Allow me also to thank
Ms. Inas Miloud for being here to amplify the voices
of indigenous women affected by sexual violence in
conflict, as well as Ms. Amal Clooney for her presence
among us today.

In the 10 years since the establishment of this
mandate by the Security Council, a crime that has
often been called "history's greatest silence" has seized
the consciousness of the international community and
global action has escalated in an unprecedented way.
The Council has played a critical role by recognizing
that the use of sexual violence as a tactic of war
and terrorism constitutes a fundamental threat to
international peace and security and that it requires a
focused and strategic security and justice response to
prevent such crimes, as well as comprehensive services
for survivors.

Although stigma and other social barriers contribute
to chronic underreporting of sexual violence, we now
understand much more about its many forms, drivers
and impacts, and about the devastating physical,
psychological and social burdens survivors face. In
the past decade, the prevention of sexual violence has
been incorporated into peace agreements and ceasefire
verification frameworks, and Governments and
regional organizations have signed joint communiques
and frameworks of cooperation with the United Nations
as a basis for joint action. Technical assistance has
been provided to national security and justice sector
actors to strengthen accountability. United Nations
peacekeepers are receiving more consistent training
to improve operational readiness to prevent sexual
violence in conflict.

Still, after a decade ofconcerted attention and action,
the reality that we must face is that the implementation
of resolutions, policies, agreements and commitments
remains slow and that criminal accountability for these
crimes remains elusive. We have not yet improved the
situation on the ground in a sustained or meaningful
way. Wars are still being fought on and over the bodies
of women and girls. Sexual violence, in its destruction
of the individual and the pervasive way it undermines
the prospects for peace and development, casts a long
shadow over humankind. It is used precisely because
it is such an effective means of targeting individuals
and devastating entire communities. Sexual violence
fuels conflict and severely impacts the prospects for
lasting peace. Victims are often targeted on the basis
of their actual or perceived ethnic, religious, political
or clan affiliation.

When I Visited South Sudan last year, I was
horrified by the sheer brutality of the sexual violence,
perpetrated along ethnic lines against women and
girls, even children as young as 4 years old. I met
with communities that had arrived only days before
in the protection of civilians site in Juba, having fled
attacks in Western Equatoria. They were utterly shell-
shocked as they described the reign of terror and the
scale and brutal methods used, including gang rape and
abductions for sexual slavery.

Sexual Violence persists as part of the broader
strategy to displace communities, expel an undesirable
group or seize contested land or resources. It continues
to function as both a driver and a result of forced
displacement. In Cox's Bazar, in Bangladesh, I met with
Rohingya women and girls who described a pattern of
widespread atrocities, including gang rape, committed
as part of military clearance operations in northern
Rakhine state, in Myanmar. In Libya, we have seen that
new or exacerbated vulnerabilities can develop in the
course of migration, giving rise to rape, trafficking and
sexual exploitation and abuse among those who, once
displaced, find themselves without access to resources
or legal status.

The despair wrought by conflict often gives rise
to further abuse in the name of protection. Imagine
a desperation so raw that parents would marry their
daughter off to one stranger to spare her rape by many.
In Iraq, I met women abducted by Da'esh - including
Yazidi, Turkmen Shia and Christian women - who
faced the heart-wrenching choice of leaving their
children born of conflict-related sexual violence
behind in order to gain acceptance back into their
communities, or else not returning home at all because
they could not bear to abandon their children. Such
children may number in the thousands after protracted
conflicts in Bosnia, Colombia, Syria, Iraq, the Horn
of Africa, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
West Africa. Their marginalization and lack of legal
status represent a global peace and security concern,
as they are especially vulnerable to radicalization and
recruitment by armed groups.

In Maiduguri, Nigeria, I met with women and girls
who had escaped from Boko Haram. Sitting in a room
with dozens of them, I counted so many babies in their
arms. I was shocked when they told me that they were
better off with their Boko Haram captors because they
had gone from being abducted and raped by one man to
being subjected daily to sexual violence in the camps
and having to sell their bodies to feed their children.

It is essential that victims of sexual violence
by terrorist groups such as Boko Haram, Da'esh or
Al-Shabaab be able to return in dignity and that
services be provided for them, rather than being treated
as affiliates or intelligence assets. This is all the more
critical when we consider how such groups are using
sexual violence as a tactic of terrorism and a means of
advancing political, military and economic objectives.
They have used sexual slavery and forced marriage as
part of the system of punishment and reward through
which they consolidate power and build a world order
cast in their own image and beliefs.

Everywhere I have travelled, I have seen that
survivors are not a homogeneous group - they require
tailor-made services and interventions. That includes
women who are disproportionately affected in every
conflict zone; children who are increasingly targeted
as a way to destroy the future of communities; men and
boys who often endure sexual violence in the context
of detention and interrogation; women's human rights
defenders and journalists who report sexual violence;
and members of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and
intersex communities that have been targeted on the
basis of their sexual orientation or gender identity.

The urgency of ensuring comprehensive health
services for all survivors, including sexual and
reproductive health, as well as psychosocial and legal
support, could not be more acute. That is at the heart
of the survivor-centred approach that the Secretary-
General articulates in his recommendations and is
the central pillar of the strategic priorities that I have
established since taking Office.

Yet, if we are ever to prevent those crimes from
occurring in the first place, we must confront the
unacceptable reality that it is still largely "cost-free" to
rape a woman, child or man in armed conflicts around
the world. To turn the tide, we must increase the cost
and consequences for those who commit, command or
condone sexual Violence in conflict. We must convert
a centuries-old culture of impunity into a culture of
accountability. Therefore, we must prioritize deterrence
and prevention through justice and accountability.

One of the critical challenges going forward will
be how to ensure compliance with international law
and the resolutions of the Security Council on the part
of parties to conflict who are listed year after year by
the Secretary-General. Of the 49 parties listed this
year, 36 non-State actors have made no commitment
to preventing sexual violence and most of them have
now been listed for six years or more. If those parties
perceive that their actions are subject to neither scrutiny
nor consequences, they will have no incentive to cease
violations. I urge the Security Council to consider
additional targeted measures that may be undertaken to
apply pressure on those parties.

At the same time, an approach that places survivors
at the centre of all our actions requires a holistic
concept of justice and accountability, ensuring that
survivors receive the livelihood support that they
require to rebuild their lives and the reparations that
are the obligations of States under international law.
Therefore, I wish to emphasize the recommendation of
the Secretary-General for Member States to give due
consideration to the establishment of a survivor's fund.

Finally, we must recognize that civil society
organizations in situations of conflict all around the
world continue to be the most important protection
actors on the frontlines. It is imperative that we support
a broad range of such civil society actors as central to
our overall prevention strategies.

I wish to express my appreciation to the members
of the Security Council for their serious deliberation
of the platform of recommendations of the Secretary-
General. The draft resolution put forward by Germany
on that basis would represent a significant step forward
in terms of strengthening justice and accountability
and adopting a survivor-centred approach in all
our interventions.

The acute vulnerability of so many women, children
and men to sexual violence in conflict situations
around the world must now crystalize our resolve into
clear action to prevent such crimes. It is essential that
we translate promises into practice and resolutions
into solutions. It is time to bring such crimes and those
who commit them into the spotlight of international
scrutiny and to send a clear message that the world will
not tolerate the use of sexual violence as a tactic of war
and terrorism.

