Mrs. Theofili (Greece): Greece aligns itself with
the statement delivered on behalf of the European
Union and the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and
Security, and wishes to add the following.

Greece acknowledges that there is an urgent need
to consolidate a gender perspective in shaping and
implementing the international peace and security
agenda, which treats women and girls not only as victims
of armed conflict but, first and foremost, as empowered
agents of peaceful and democratic change. In this vein,
my country reiterates its commitment to enhancing
international efforts for the effective implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda at all levels
and in a coherent and results-oriented way. Greece is
currently drafting its national action plan on women
and peace and security. The development of the action
plan entails a participatory process and is expected to
focus mainly on the following priority sectors.

First, due to the unprecedented migratory and
refugee crisis by which my country is still affected, it
is expected to build on the national policy on refugee
and asylum-seeking women and girls who have fled
their homes due to armed conflicts raging in their
countries of origin. Secondly, it is aimed at enhancing
the equal participation of women in decision-making
and leadership. Thirdly, being the first national policy
instrument of its kind, it endeavours to spread the
word on the women and peace and security agenda by
educating, training, building capacity and raising the
awareness of policymakers and public administration
officials, as well as the general public, on the holistic
nature and various aspects thereof.

Furthermore, with a view to enhancing policy
coherence, Greece continues to focus on the protection
of media freedom from violations and abuses, placing
particular emphasis on the safety of women media
professionals working in conflict environments. This
aspect is reflected in the Third Committee resolution
on the safety of journalists and the issue of impunity
(A/C.3/74/L.45), to be submitted once again this year by
my country, along with Argentina, Austria, Costa Rica,
France and Tunisia. In addition, as a strong supporter
of multilateralism, Greece continues to address issues
related to gender equality, women's empowerment and
the women and peace and security agenda at the United
Nations and other regional forums.

In conclusion, allow me to underline the fact
that conflict prevention, sustainable peace and the
consolidation of inclusive, resilient, just and gender-
equal democratic societies are the ultimate goal.
Therefore, it is only by giving women and girls a
voice and enhancing their meaningful participation in
decision-making that we can make sure they are not
left behind.

