The Deputy Secretary-General: Let me begin
by commanding Peru and His Excellency Ambassador
Gustavo Meza-Cuadra for convening this important
open debate on sexual violence and conflict. I also
very warmly welcome Ms. Razia Sultana here today
to amplify the voices of the Rohingya community and
to offer an account to the plight of women and girls
systematically targeted due to their religion or ethnicity.

This year in Myanmar, and in many other conflict
situations, the widespread threat and use the sexual
violence is once again being used as a tactic to advance
military, economic and ideological objectives. Once
again it has been a driver of massive forced displacement.
Let me be clear: both genders endure the horrific
brutality of sexual violence in conflict. Sexual violence
is also a very common method of torture of detainees,
and in many conflicts most detainees are men and boys.
But overall women and girls are disproportionately
affected. Gender-based discrimination is the invisible
driver of most crimes of sexual violence. The lower
one's status in terms of wealth, health and education,
the greater her vulnerability and exposure to harm.

Last year, I travelled with Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Pramila Patten to Nigeria
and to the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In
both nations, the consequences of sexual violence are
profound and enduring for survivors, their families and
their communities. Survivors are forced to live with the
untreated physical and psychological trauma, the social
stigma and unwanted pregnancies. The children born of
rape are often ostracized and relegated to the margins
of society. That serves yet again to highlight the fact
that, in the end, sexual violence has consequences
for all affected women, girls, men and boys. It is a
deliberate tactic to humiliate and disempower and
undermine social cohesion. Our responsibility must
be to bring justice, recognition and reparations to
the survivors of those horrendous crimes - not only
justice in the courtroom but also social justice and
economic empowerment.

We should recognize and support the resilience
of the many survivors who are working as agents of
change. Ifwe are to prevent these crimes being repeated,
we must ensure accountability and deterrence. In that
context, I welcome the continued engagement by those
parties listed by the Secretary-General in his reports
on conflict-related sexual violence. For example, the
signing of a unilateral communique by a coalition of
armed groups in Mali in July 2017 and the development
of a joint communique implementation plan by the Iraq
Government last month are both very encouraging.

Let me also highlight the increased vigilance being
shown by peacekeepers in protecting women, girls,
men and boys from sexual violence as part of their
protection-of-civilians mandate. Last month in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of Congo, a
female engagement team of 16 soldiers from the United
Kingdom, South Africa and Nepal supported a civilian
mission to one of the country's most remote areas in
response to reports of abductions and sexual violence
inflicted on hundreds of civilians. This shows the
value of alert networks and the importance of women
in peacekeeping to better address conflict-related
sexual violence.

Women's protection advisers deployed to United
Nations peace operations also have a leading role
to play in supporting Government counterparts in
implementing their commitments. Those commitments
include engaging all parties to the conflict to prevent
sexual violence and ensuring that survivors and civil
society organizations can voice their concerns about
security, protection and limitations in service provision
and that they can help shape inclusive new policies
and laws.

Resolution 2106 (2013) calls on all actors - the
Security Council, parties to armed conflict, Member
States and United Nations entities - to do much more
to combat impunity for those crimes. Let us intensify
our efforts to end the horrific litany of sexual violence
in conflict so that our women, girls, men and boys have
no less burden to bear as they work to rebuild their
shattered lives.

