The President: I thank Ms. Merekaje for
her briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Federal Minister of Defence of Germany.

My thanks go once again to Secretary-General
Guterres, Major General Kristin Lund and Ms. Merekaj e
for their briefings.

The women and peace and security agenda is one
of Germany's priorities during its membership of the
Security Council and during our presidency this month.
In this open debate, I should like to focus on women
serving in United Nations peacekeeping missions.

In my five years as Defence Minister, I have met
many female peacekeepers, in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, for example, and many other missions. I have
always been impressed with their dedication and
diligence. More importantly, it has been obvious that
they are always broadening their mission's skill set.
Women are not better peacekeepers than men, but
they are different. And this diversity is a strength. Yet,
almost 20 years after the adoption of the landmark
resolution 1325 (2000), we are still far from the full,
effective and meaningful participation of women in
peace operations. I would like to present five ideas on
how to change that.

First, in empowering women in all walks of
life, visibility is key. We need role models to stir the
imagination - successful female mentors who tell their
stories to younger women and share their experience.
Therefore, Germany will take the initiative to establish
a global female peacekeepers network. We pledge
substantial support to get it up and running and invite
Member States to contribute ideas of their own.

Secondly, the network will support the Elsie
initiative, which is central to increasing the percentage
of women peacekeepers. We applaud Canada for this
great initiative and intend to provide up to €2 million to
the Elsie trust fund.

Thirdly, we must send more women into
international peacekeeping missions. We need more
women in our national forces. Germany is striving to
increase the share of female soldiers in our armed forces
more rapidly than before, but also, and that is crucial,
the share of female soldiers in leading positions. As
Minister, I understand that this effort requires a constant
pull from the top, a fight against unconscious bias and
real barriers, and constant evaluation. Transparency is
key. That is why my Ministry created a staff element on
equal opportunity, diversity management and inclusion.
This has led, for example, to a benchmarking of the
evaluation of male and female soldiers, to a mentoring
programme for junior female officers and to a regular
exchange on best practices. Once again, transparency
is crucial.

Fourthly, Germany has already been looking at what
keeps women fromjoining our forces and advancing in
them to top positions. We are seeking to intensify our
analysis by initiating a national barrier assessment. We
will determine what keeps more women from joining
peace operations. We invite the United Nations and
interested Member States to share their experience with
similar assessments.

Fifthly, and finally, Germany has enhanced its
military observer training course to focus specifically
on the role of women in peacekeeping. We have opened
the course to international participants; 22 women from
20 countries were part of the pilot course last year. This
success has encouraged us to offer this course again,

on a permanent basis. I invite all present to help us
promote this opportunity.

Let me conclude by expressing my gratitude to all
present for their contributions today. The peacekeepers'
Blue Helmet symbolizes protection and security. Let us
ensure that this helmet is worn by more women, for the
sake of peace.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

