Mr. Koroma (Sierra Leone): At the outset, I would
like to commend you, Mr. President, and your country,
Uruguay, for convening today's open debate on women
and peace and security in relation to sexual violence in
conflict. I would also like to commend Justice Rapid
Response and UN-Women for their initiatives.

Sierra Leone is pleased to once more join other
Member States in deliberating on this all-important
subject. We wish to take this opportunity to recognize
and thank the outgoing Under-Secretary-General,
Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, and her team for their
excellent work in raising global awareness on the
subject of sexual violence in conflict and giving voice
to the voiceless. We also want to register our support
to her successor, Ms. Patten. My delegation looks
forward to working with her in the years to come to
fulfil her mandate.

Sierra Leone joins all peace-loving nations of the
world in strongly condemning all forms of violence
perpetrated against women in conflict situations.
This menace is a threat to international peace and
security and must be taken seriously. We also strongly
maintain that perpetrators must be held to account
for any kind of violence committed against women in
conflict situations, for the days of impunity are over.
They must not find any hiding place in any part of the
world. The use of sexual violence by terrorist groups,
violent extremists and other non-State actors must be
condemned in the strongest possible terms. Perpetrators
of sexual violence can be defeated only by global action
and collaboration. No State can do it alone.
As Council members may be aware, Sierra Leone
suffered 11 years of an intensely violent civil conflict,
and a lot of atrocities were committed against women.
Since the guns fell silent in January 2002, the country
has been making steady socioeconomic progress,
consolidating peace and good governance. The lessons
learnt from that war have strengthened our resolve
to embrace the values of a peaceful society in which
respect for the rule of law and women's rights is
given priority.

The setting up ofthe Special Court for Sierra Leone,
which has been succeeded by the Residual Special Court
for Sierra Leone - which currently has in custody
those who bore the greatest responsibility - remains a
vivid demonstration of the resolve of the international
community and the Government of Sierra Leone to
ensure accountability for horrendous crimes, including
sexual violence in conflict.

No effort should be spared by the United Nations
to invest resources in identifying early-warning
signs of conflict and conflict prevention, because
women, girls and children are usually the targets in
conflicts situations. It is very important to note that
in the discussions of sexual violence in conflict here
at the United Nations, women should be given more
opportunitytoparticipateinthehighestdecision-making
bodies. Also, the capacities of countries emerging
from conflict must be enhanced, particularly in the
area of conflict prevention and institutional capacity-
building. The need to invest in women's development
towards our present-day aspiration for global, regional
and national development cannot be overemphasized.
Sierra Leone strongly upholds the relevant protocols
relating to women's empowerment, including the
Solemn Declaration on Gender Equality in Africa and
the Secretary-General's Campaign to End Violence
against Women.

The Government of Sierra Leone continues to enact
several post-conflict policy and legislative frameworks
aimed at addressing gender inequalities, lack of respect
for women's rights and other negative traditional
norms affecting women. Key among these include
the Gender Justice Laws or the Three Gender Acts.
These exemplify our resolve to attain gender equality
and empower women. Sierra Leone continues to make
modest contributions to international peacekeeping
missions. Our contingents of troops are given the
requisite training in the prevention of sexual violence
in conflict and have performed admirably. We look
forward to more opportunities to be given to our troops
to serve humankind.

Allow me to reaffirm Sierra Leone's commitment
to all international instruments aimed at ending
violence against women and girls, and to reaffirm the
importance of education, economic empowerment,
and the modification of social and cultural patterns of
behaviour of men and boys towards women and girls as
integral parts of overcoming violence against women
and girls, both in conflict and in post-conflict situations.

In conclusion, the fight to end sexual violence
against women and girls in conflict cannot be achieved
unless there is an effective, efficient and credible
international legal institution that is able to bring
to book those who have perpetrated and continue to
perpetrate horrendous crimes against the vulnerable
and defenceless, including women, girls and children
in conflict situations. In that regard, my delegation
continues to support the International Criminal Court,
which remains at the moment the most effective
international legal institution that is supposed to
address impunity.

We take this opportunity to acknowledge the good
work of Justice Rapid Response and UN-Women and
to pledge our unflinching support and solidarity with
them in the fight against impunity for sexual violence
in conflict.

