Mr. Cravinho (Portugal): Post-conflict
peacebuilding is at the core of our efforts to improve
United Nations efficiency and capacity. We now have
to take stock of the work that has been done since the
establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), five years ago, and to identify - as clearly as
possible - what we want to achieve in the near future.

At the outset, I would like to welcome the
progress report of the Secretary-General on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2010/386), as well as the report of the Secretary-
General on women's participation in peacebuilding
(S/2010/466). The substantive contribution of the
co-facilitators of the 2010 review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture (S/2010/393, annex)
deserves to be commended. In line with what the
European Union delegation will state, Portugal fully
endorses the co-facilitators' report.

We are now at a crossroads, and I want to assure
the Council of Portugal's commitment to contribute
towards a more effective and coherent international
response to post-conflict peacebuilding. We share the
perception that there is a risk of fragmentation of the
PBC process, on account of its complexity and on
account of the multiplicity of actors and institutions
involved. We must avoid artificial divisions and ensure
integration between different levels of engagement.

To that end, allow me to stress some elements
that in our opinion deserve careful and urgent attention.
First, the relationship between the Security Council
and the PBC needs to be improved. To date, even if
some progress has been achieved, the interaction is still
limited, and we should take advantage of the potential
that now exists to create a new dynamic that will allow
for better performance - in particular in the early
stages, when the setting up of peacekeeping mandates
takes place.

Secondly, we also believe that transparency and
inclusiveness should be increased, in order to build up
a firm involvement from the Member States, the United
Nations as a whole and other stakeholders and partners.
In particular, allow me to underline the importance of
regional and subregional bodies in that regard.

Thirdly, it is now broadly understood that
peacebuilding must not follow peacekeeping
operations, but rather that it should be simultaneously
present from the start and as soon as the situation on
the ground permits - that is, when the phase of open
conflict is over. We agree with the notion that the PBC
should also have a preventive role and should stand
ready to respond to any possible deterioration of the
situation on the ground.

Fourthly, concerning the chairmanship of the
country-specific configurations, we share the view that
there is still room for improvement, namely by the
nomination of vice-chairs as well as the establishment
of liaison committees in the field.

Portugal welcomes the recent creation of the
Liberia country-specific configuration, of which we are
a member. This is a great opportunity to ensure that
peacebuilding and peacekeeping efforts are
complementary and mutually supportive, as it is the
first time that a country-specific configuration has been
created during the effective lifetime of a peacekeeping
mission. Coming after the co-facilitators' report on the
2010 review of the PBC, it will provide an excellent
opportunity to start to implement some of the
recommendations in that report.

I also wish to make a reference to the importance
of women's contribution to this process, which was
clearly underlined in the Secretary-General's report on
women's participation in peacebuilding. The
instrumental role that women play in economic
recovery, social cohesion and political legitimacy -
thus expanding the scope of national ownership and
national capacity - makes it imperative to fully
integrate the gender perspective into our goals. To
relegate consideration of gender issues to later phases
of peacebuilding would be to ignore the centrality of
those issues in everything from institutional design to
funding allocations to programme execution. Portugal
is fully committed to a gender-responsive approach to
each of the five peacebuilding priorities that have been
outlined in the 2009 report of the Secretary-General on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2009/304).

Finally, it is always important to underline the
inherent connection between peace and development,
and, in this context, we consider that it is of paramount
importance to make more coherent and integrated
peacebuilding efforts, including by fostering stronger
partnerships with the World Bank and other
international financial institutions. Portugal is strongly
committed to an active contribution to United Nations
endeavours and to helping pave the way for a
revitalized peacebuilding process that will promote
peace and security in all parts of the world.

We are honoured to have been elected to serve on
the Security Council for the period 2011-2012, and we
wish to assure the Council that we shall accord the
highest importance to this issue.

