Mr. Kayinamura (Rwanda): Allow us to join other
Member States in congratulating you, Mr. President, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for this
month, as well as for convening this important debate.
I also thank all the briefers for their useful briefings.

From a Rwandan perspective, this open debate
comes at an important time in Rwandan history. This
month of April marks 25 years since the genocide
against the Tutsi, where rape was widely used in
carrying out the genocide. I will make my statement
today with that context in mind.

It was in 1998, at the trial of a genocide convict,
Jean-Paul Akayesu - a former commune mayor in
Rwanda - that the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda concluded and ruled, for the first time,
that rape was used as a means of perpetrating genocide
aimed at exterminating a targeted group and therefore
constituted an act of genocide, of which Akayesu
was convicted. Therefore, if we are going to address
the widespread use of sexual violence in conflict as a
weapon of war, terrorism, ethnic cleansing and even
for the extermination of targeted groups, then we need
to address the central issue of the culture of impunity,
which has become the default response to sexual
violence in conflict. Fighting impunity contributes to
the prevention of future crimes and the healing and
reintegration of survivors in their communities.

My second point concerns prevention, and I would
like to make the following recommendations. First,
the prevention of sexual violence begins with strong
institutions and comprehensive legal frameworks during
times of peace. National judicial institutions and legal
instruments should be robust enough to address cases of
sexual violence on an equal footing with other criminal
offences. Secondly, the Security Council should consider
expanding the designation criteria for individuals who
perpetrate sexual violence in the context of conflicts.
Relevant sanctions committees should work closely
with the Office of the Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict in order to regularly appraise
cases of sexual violence. Thirdly, we should invest in
survivor-centred approaches that prioritize the rights
and special needs ofvictims of sexual and gender-based
violence. That entails the provision of appropriate
medical, social and economic reintegration support
in order to reinstate the social fabric of the societies
in which we live. Fourthly, it is equally important to
involve women in conflict resolution, peace agreement
negotiations, peacekeeping operations, peacebuilding
and reconciliation at all levels.

My third point is on the survivor-centred approach,
which has already been mentioned. Survivors of sexual
violence face an uphill task in recovering and rebuilding
their lives. Their experience of sexual violence leaves
lasting marks of psychological and social trauma. They
have to deal with sexually transmitted diseases, which
create extensive health problems that are difficult to
address in post-conflict societies. We need a more
holistic and effective support system for survivors
that will enable them to move from being victims to
being resilient survivors and empowered members of
our communities.

The pain and trauma are also inherited by the
children who are conceived and born out of rape. As
they grow through adulthood, they try to come to
terms with an identity that no parent would wish for
their child. Those children also require extensive
psychosocial services to help guide them through their
unique experiences.

Inclosing, allowusto makethe following suggestions.

First, we need to improve our understanding of
the ideology behind sexual violence in conflicts. The
bodies of women, girls and children from targeted
groups have become the new battlefields where wars
are fought, with the intention of destroying the social
fabric of targeted communities. Secondly, we need to
scale up the accountability of leaders of armed groups
or politicians promoting or enabling the use of sexual
violence in armed conflict. Even if justice cannot
undo the atrocious crimes of sexual violence, without
justice there cannot be an end to the culture of impunity
and the cycle of Violence may continue. Lastly, in
the provision of justice and support for victims and
survivors, we need survivor-centred support in order
to shift the shame and stigma onto the perpetrators of
sexual Violence in conflict.

