Mr. Argiiello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Permit me to begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for
organizing this open debate, which clearly reflects the
Security Council's commitment to the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). That resolution represents a
milestone in the attainment of our shared objective of
ensuring that Council action is more effective and has
lasting results.

Because of the lateness of the hour, I shall deliver
a condensed version of my statement. The full version
will be circulated to delegations by the Secretariat.

With a perspective centred on human rights,
Argentina accords high priority to the situation of
women and children in conflict and to women's
participation as essential actors in peace processes,
particularly in the peacebuilding phase. For the past 15
years, Argentina has included women in its
peacekeeping deployments and is doing so today, in
accordance with resolution 1325 (2000). Under the
action plan adopted by the Argentine Ministry for
Defence, a total of 341 women have been deployed
thus far, almost 70 per cent of them in the past eight
years. Currently, 26 women from my country are
participating in peace missions in Haiti and Cyprus.
Thus, Argentina ranks second, after Uruguay, in terms
of the number of women participating in the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti.

We also wish to highlight the work that various
agencies of the United Nations system are doing to
protect and promote the rights of Haitian women and to
promote their participation in the political, economic
and social arenas. In that regard, we should recall the
declaration adopted in Banff, Canada, at the Seventh
Conference of Ministers of Defence of the Americas,
which reaffirms the commitment to continue
mainstreaming the gender perspective in peacekeeping
operations, pursuant to resolution 1325 (2000).

Argentina actively endorses the multiannual
system-wide campaign launched by the Secretary-
General to eliminate violence against women. In 2007,
within the framework of that campaign, an awareness-
raising campaign was promoted in the Common Market
of the South (MERCOSUR) through a poster contest at
Argentina's initiative. The goal of the contest was to
raise the awareness of our country's populations about
the situations of violence to which women and children
are exposed in the public and private spheres.

Argentina appreciates the consideration of the
role of regional institutions as indispensable actors in
the promotion of peace, together with the fulfilment of
United Nations mandates. In that regard, Argentina has
worked hard within the framework of MERCOSUR to
promote the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
It should be stressed that it was at Argentina's request
that that issue was included in the agenda of
MERCOSUR's twentieth special meeting on women, to
be held in Brasilia on 31 October.

Argentina has promoted mainstreaming the
gender perspective in security sector reform in order to
create a more favourable atmosphere for the
participation of women. In that connection, the
Ministry for Defence has an observatory for women in
the armed forces. It gives those responsible for
formulating public policies on gender an essential tool
for monitoring developments in the situation of women
in the armed forces.

With regard to resolution 1820 (2008) on sexual
violence, we wish to emphasize that the reform of
Argentina's military justice system defines sexual
abuse as a serious or very serious breach of discipline,
depending on the case.

In order to ensure the active participation of
women, it is essential to provide specific training with
regard to conflict prevention, mediation, negotiation,
peacekeeping, post-conflict reconstruction and
humanitarian assistance. In that regard, Argentina has
established the Argentine Joint Peacekeeping
Operations Training Centre. In operation since 1995, it
is a centre of excellence for sharing knowledge and
experiences related to peacekeeping operations. In
achieving those goals, the Training Centre has included
gender topics in its curricula for participants in its
courses as well as members of contingents to be
deployed.

In conclusion, Argentina agrees with the views of
the Secretary-General contained in his report
(S/2000/622) with regard to the need to develop
national action plans to identify priorities and
resources and assign responsibilities and set timelines
to guide the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
Putting those plans into practice will contribute to
bridging existing gaps between policies and their
effective implementation.

I should like to end by saying that Argentina
endorses the recommendations proposed by the
Secretary-General, especially as regards devoting
greater budgetary resources to the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).

