Ms. Saidane (spoke in French): Allow me to thank
the Bolivian presidency for organizing today's open
debate on the fundamental issue of implementing the
women and peace and security agenda and the goal of
sustaining peace through the political and economic
empowerment of women. I also thank the Ministers
of Sweden and the Kingdom of the Netherlands, the
Executive Director of UN-Women and Ms. Randa Siniora
Atallah for their insightful statements this morning.

This debate gives me an opportunity to present in
this forum -which remains the heart of the international
peace and security architecture - several aspects
relating to the recent steps taken by the International
Organization of 1a Francophonie (OIF) with regard to
the agenda item under discussion today. The Heads
of State and Government of States members of la
Francophonie met in Yerevan on 11 and 12 October for
their seventeenth summit and adopted a new strategy
for the promotion of equality between women and men,
and support for the rights and empowerment of women
and girls. The seventeenth summit of la Francophonie
also made it possible to reinforce the cooperation
developed with the United Nations, with the signing
of a framework agreement for cooperation between the
OIF and the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Pramila Patten.

That cooperation will favour political dialogue
between parties to conflict for the protection and
effective access of victims and survivors to justice,
as well as the fight against impunity for perpetrators
of violence. Such cooperation will also strengthen
national legal frameworks and the adoption of concrete,
multisectoral and coordinated measures to prevent such
violence by addressing the root causes, in particular
discrimination against women and girls.

In operational terms, la Francophonie supports
the strengthening of women's participation in
peacekeeping operations. In May, the OIF teamed
up with the Police Division of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations to train female senior
officers for the United Nations Police Command.
The objective of increasing the still-low number of
female uniformed military and police personnel in
peacekeeping operations is also on the agenda of the
seminar organized today by the OIF in collaboration
with the United Nations in a neighbouring room, with
the aim of contributing to the effective implementation
of the Declaration of Shared Commitments on United
Nations Peacekeeping Operations to which the OIF has
subscribed, as have the African Union, the European
Union and NATO, as part of the Secretary-General's
Action for Peacekeeping initiative.

Today we collectively reiterate consensus on two
essential points. The first is that the women and peace
and security agenda, while based on fundamental
rights, remains central to the prevention agenda, as well
as to the peacebuilding and sustaining peace agenda.
Secondly, we have the satisfaction of already having a
range of political, legal and even operational tools at
the national, regional and international levels that could
enable us to make progress on these issues. And yet it
is clear to all of us that despite the progress that has
been made, today we still have to say that we are a long
way from our goal, considering that in 2017 the number
of documented cases of conflict-related sexual violence
actually went up by 56 per cent.

The Secretary-General of the International
Organization of la Francophonie, Ms. Michaelle Jean,
who spoke here in October 2017, during the last debate
on this topic (see S/PV.8234), asked a question that I
would like to reiterate. "What are we afraid of?" Because
what is actually at stake here is our ability to make
profound changes to the foundations of our political and
economic systems and to deconstruct the stereotypes
that underlie the question that brings us together today.
As we know, on the ground women show unparalleled
resilience, strength and creativity in overcoming the
physical, socioeconomic and political constraints that
limit their lives. They are empowered and have proven
their intrinsic ability to use their power for the common
good every day. They undoubtedly contribute smiles
and gentleness, as some speakers have already said
this morning. As a woman, I take this reference to the
feminine nature, while perhaps somewhat stereotypical,
as a compliment. But if we are to make serious progress
today or, as some have said, ifwe want to finally hasten
the implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda, we must move resolutely beyond the perception
that women still have to be trained and empowered to
play a role. It is interesting, by the way, that no one,
in the Council or elsewhere, ever wonders whether the
men who participate in these peace processes have been
adequately trained, which, given the state of the world
and with all due respect to men, would seem not always
to be the case.

Some speakers have mentioned the inherent biases
in the economic and social system that still determine
women's ability not to be vulnerable but rather to be
in a position when they no longer fear attacks and can
control their own lives, like their male counterparts.
Initiating the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda must therefore be part of all sectoral
policies as a whole and at the heart of the decisions that
determine them. It is only by dismantling the social
norms that are the foundation of the devaluation of
the role of women - the devaluation that enables men
to legitimize the worst kinds of violence committed
against women and girls during conflicts - that we
can hasten the implementation of this agenda on every
front: protection, education, economic participation
and political power. That is also where we will make
progress in striking a better balance so that we can
perhaps begin to address the overrepresentation of
men rather than the underrepresentation of women
in some of these processes. There has been too little
funding until now to enable that change to happen and
it is time to speed that up both in terms of financing
and partnerships.

