Mr. Mmualefe (Botswana): My delegation is
grateful to you, Mr. President, for your timely
initiative, and to the Security Council not only for
recognizing the various factors that relate to women
and peace and security, but for emphasizing the
importance of women's increased participation in all
aspects of the process of conflict prevention and
resolution. Among the several documents before us,
Security Council document S/PRST/2000/25
particularly attests to this fact. Also, the Fourth World
Conference on Women, held in Beijing in 1995,
contributed in no small measure to focusing the world's
attention on the agenda of women, peace and security.
We also thank the various United Nations bodies that
continue to highlight the subject of women, peace and
security. In particular, we extend our thanks to the
Special Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of
Women, Ms. King, and the Executive Director of the
United Nations Development Fund for Women, Ms.
Heyzer, for their valuable interventions yesterday and
the work they continue to do in this area.

Unfortunately, violence against women is still the
norm in some parts of the world. There is definitely a
need to strengthen or enact legislation to censure or
punish domestic violence, including the sexual abuse
of women and girls.

In cases of peace operations, violations against
women must not be tolerated. They must be punished.
Peace support operations must include well-staffed and
integrated gender units and gender advisers. It should
not be forgotten that gender inequality, discrimination
and violence affect women more than men. Field
operations should therefore pay particular attention to
affected women, especially refugee women and girls.

In the case of Botswana, it is generally
understood and slowly being accepted that violence
against women, in particular domestic violence, is not a
family matter but a serious crime. Laws are therefore
expected to change to punish this crime. In 1997 there
was a review of all Botswana laws that discriminate
against women.

In war and conflict situations, the under-
representation of women in decision-making at all
levels is one of the major problems. In most cases, the
very men who make war or who take part in war make
decisions related to conflicts, and yet it is women who
have to take care of the war victims, both emotionally
and physically. For women to contribute effectively to
the maintenance of peace and security, their economic
and political empowerment is very crucial. This fact is
well illustrated in the Windhoek Declaration, which
was adopted during the commemoration of the tenth
anniversary of the United Nations Transition
Assistance Group in Namibia on 31 May 2000.

Botswana recognizes that the participation of
women in decision-making at all levels of private and
public life is an important human rights issue. In trying
to strengthen the link between politics and human
rights, Botswana has consistently expended efforts
towards gender-neutral education, including political
education, mobilization, lobbying and advocacy. Non-
governmental organizations have played a contributory
role here.

Whenever the issue of women, peace and security
is discussed, the painful topic of children in armed
conflict, children who are routinely subjected to gang
rape, ethnic cleansing and genocide, cannot be
overlooked. In this regard, we commend the 1996
Machel report, which clearly demonstrated that the full
impact of armed conflict on children can be fully
understood only when associated with or examined in
the context of the effects it has on women, families and
communities.

I cannot end my statement without touching on
the area of women and health. In Botswana, there are
some hurdles pertaining mainly to negative cultural
customs and traditions that need to be relegated to the
past. The Government, non-governmental organizations
and civil society have continued to make efforts to
address these problems. Currently, the main issue of
great concern is the HIV/AIDS pandemic, which, as in
most African countries, is devastating our country,
targeting mostly women. The United Nations, United
Nations bodies and the international community are
called upon to aggressively address the HIV/AIDS
problem in Africa and elsewhere, including in areas of
armed conflict.

In conclusion, it is the responsibility of each and
every one of us to increase public awareness of the
positive role played by gender mainstreaming in peace
and security matters.

