Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank the French presidency of the
Security Council for convening today's open debate,
which is highlighting the responsibility that States have
in ensuring the full and meaningful participation and
leadership of women in all efforts to maintain peace
and security, including those to prevent conflicts.

The Security Council has adopted eight resolutions
on the subject since 2000. Despite the progress and good
practices that have been developed in the past 17 years,
there are still barriers to the effective implementation
of this agenda. Peru is convinced that the participation
of women is essential for the resolution of conflicts
and the maintenance of peace and for peacebuilding,
since they offer different perspectives that enrich peace
negotiations. As the Secretary-General has pointed
out in his latest report on this subject (S/2017/861),
improving women's access to meaningful leadership
and their participation in peace efforts begins with
active collaboration with civil-society organizations,
especially organizations run by women.

Accordingly, we are pleased to see the trend of
systematically incorporating a gender perspective in
the mandates ofpeacekeeping operations, as well as the
incorporation of women as actors in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts, and the importance ofproviding
specialized training on the protection, special needs
and human rights of women and girls in situations
of conflict. That is why my country has been increasing
the participation of female personnel in each of the six
peace missions to which we contribute.

Peru has also carried out other measures to
implement the women and peace and security agenda,
such as the creation of a registry of displaced persons,
which has allowed for the adoption of measures to
protect the rights of women and girls in conflict and
post-conflict situations.

Similarly, in 2005, a comprehensive reparations
programme for victims of violence that occurred
between 1980 and 2000 was established. The Ministry
for Defence has also created an internal committee for
gender equality, with the objective of coordinating,
articulating and overseeing the incorporation of the
gender perspective into policies and institutional
management of the defence sector, including the
peacekeeping missions in which Peru participates.

Peru strongly believes that the women and peace
and security agenda should be a central element of
the process to reform United Nations peacekeeping
operations, and we will work hard to make that possible.
As a non-permanent member of the Security Council
as of 2018, we commit to making further progress in
gender equality in peacekeeping operations, and in all
areas related to that agenda, especially through our
participation in the Informal Expert Group on Women
and Peace and Security, which we will co-Chair with
Sweden as of 2018.

