Mrs. Gallardo Hernandez (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish): El Salvador welcomes the initiative to
hold an open Security Council debate on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security. That resolution is a cornerstone
of the call for full and equal participation of women in
all peace and security initiatives, together with
mainstreaming the gender perspective in the context of
armed conflict, peacekeeping and peacebuilding, and
also in post-conflict reconstruction and reconciliation.

The resolution emphasizes the need to increase
the role of women in the political participation process
and in decision-making with regard to conflict
prevention and resolution.

El Salvador's post-conflict situation enables us to
confirm that women and men experience peace and
conflict in different ways and that, therefore, they have
different vulnerabilities and needs and require different
mechanisms to address their security.

Thus, in the context of armed conflict and in
peacebuilding processes, we may wonder whether
gender roles and relations differ, since men and women
adapt to changes in situations according to
circumstances. Resolution 1325 (2000) is thus a
landmark which enables us to consider the increasing
complexity of conflict situations and the transition
from conflict to development in a broad and integral
manner and from a gender perspective.

El Salvador recognizes that since resolution 1325
(2000) was adopted, limited progress has been made in
implementing it. The results have been mixed, as
confirmed by studies carried out by the United Nations
International Research and Training Institute for the
Advancement of Women, particularly the study entitled
"Securing Equality, Engendering Peace: A guide to
policy and planning on women, peace and security". It
should be noted that this study helps facilitate the
development of national action plans that are realistic
and effective in implementing resolution 1325 (2000)
through good practices, specific recommendations and
a six-step process.
Additionally, as the debate on the gender
perspective in the context of armed conflict continues,
related problems come to light, such as a lack of
prevention and protection, in particular for women and
girls, from violence of all kinds, including sexual
violence, which unfortunately is, in some cases, used
as a weapon of war.

In this connection, my delegation joins other
delegations and civil society organizations in
requesting the Secretary-General to systematically
include full information on acts of sexual violence and
gender-based acts against women and girls in all
reports on conflict situations.

El Salvador recognizes the need to broaden the
framework of action derived from the promotion of a
holistic approach to the issue of the gender perspective
in the context of armed conflict and transitional and
peacebuilding situations. However, we are aware that
in progressing along this path, we are liable sometimes
to duplicate the functions of other principal organs of
the United Nations, including the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council, both of which
have specific mandates to deal with these matters
under the Charter.

In that light, further efforts should be made to
ensure coordination and cooperation among the
principal organs of the United Nations in order to
tackle these issues in an holistic manner while avoiding
overlaps in the mandates and functions of each organ.

Thus, in El Salvador's View, the special position
of the Peacebuilding Commission, deriving from its
organic link with the General Assembly, the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council, make it,
in a way, the proper forum for promoting and assessing
on the ground the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) in a broad-based and holistic manner.

In concluding, allow me to restate the political
will of the Government of El Salvador to continue
making progress in the promotion and implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) and in strengthening the
political participation of women in decision-making
processes which will ensure that women become active
players in their own development.

