Ms. Bangura: I join my colleagues in extending
my sympathy to the Russian Federation for the
assassination of the Russian Ambassador in Turkey.

I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity to add my
voice to this critical and timely debate on human
trafficking in situations of conflict. I would like to start
by extending my thanks and congratulations to Spain
for convening this meeting today, and for its leadership
every day as a tireless champion of the women, peace
and security agenda during its tenure on the Council
and beyond.

Over the past four years, during which I have served
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, we have witnessed a
deep and enduring shift in the treatment of this issue
as a peace and security imperative. This unprecedented
political momentum has translated into the adoption
of zero-tolerance policies for national armed and
security forces; frameworks of cooperation and joint
communiques signed by Governments, signalling
their commitment to act at the highest level - most
recently, by the Government of Iraq; and landmark
convictions for sexual violence as a war crime and
a crime against humanity, including at the level of
command responsibility.

Yet, as we take stock of this progress, we are also
forced to confront new and previously unforeseen
threats. These include the use of sexual violence as a
tactic of terrorism by groups that traffic their victims
internally and across borders in the pursuit of profit.
In the Chamber, we often hear accounts of survivors
of wartime atrocity. The stories of those brave enough
to bear witness - including the statements of the
trafficking survivors here today - are vital to our
work. But allow me to also take this opportunity to cast
a searchlight on the perpetrators - on those whose
deeds are often hidden by the so- called fog of war.

One such individual is Emir Abu Malek. He is
responsible for trafficking women and girls from Iraq
to Syria, dividing them up among his friends as the
spoils of war. According to information obtained by
my Office, this man issued instructions about where
they should be transferred, to whom they should be
given, and what his brothers in arms should do to these
girls. On one occasion, he ordered that a group of 15
girls, aged 9- and lO-years old, be transferred to Raqqa
and Mosul to be raped for half a day, and then sold
on further.

Another individual is Emir Abu Ali. He implemented
the so-called fatwa issued by Da'esh in April 2015,
ordering the separation of children from their mothers.
The aim was to enable children to be indoctrinated in
the Madrassa Jihadia and their mothers to be sold into
sexual slavery.

There is also the Sheikh in Raqqa who wrote his
name on the palm ofa Yazidi girl during the purchasing
process to brand her as his property. There is the militant
in Mosul responsible for buying and selling girls along
with guns and rocket-propelled grenades. There is
the head of a police station in Raqqa who used his
position to facilitate human trafficking. And there are
women like Umm Sayyaf, who helped to enforce sexual
slavery, and Doctor Nawal, who carried out virginity
tests and forced abortions at the behest of Da'esh, even
injecting young girls with hormones to accelerate their
maturation and readiness for sale into sexual slavery.

There are many more like them - too many
to name - operating with absolute impunity.
These ongoing atrocities are motivated as much by
commercial as by ideological concerns. They are not
isolated incidents. Simply stated, women and children
have become part of the currency by which Da'esh
consolidates its power. This blood money is then used
to bankroll its actions and cement its authority.

Though it is largely invisible and difficult to
quantify, the blood money of women and children has
become part of the lifeblood that sustains that group. It
is part ofthe financial calculus made by Da'esh fighters
that they will be able to supplement their salaries of a
few hundred dollars a month with potentially tens of
thousands of dollars raised through the sale and traffic
of women and children. Unlike oil and antiquities, to
which only top commanders have access, all militants
are able to exploit local women and children to boost
their personal economies.

In fact, a range of extremist groups are using
sexual violence to advance their military, political,
economic and ideological aims My Office has begun to
monitor this trend through the reports of the Secretary-
General on conflict-related sexual violence, which we
compile each year. These reports include an annexed
list of parties credibly suspected of committing or
being responsible for patterns of sexual violence in
situations on the Council's agenda. Of the 48 parties
listed, 37 are non-State actors. Seven are designated as
terrorist groups. These include Da'esh, Ansar Eddine,
the Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, Al-Shabaab, the
Al-Nusra Front, the Mouvement pour l'unicite et le
jihad en Afrique de l'Ouest, and Boko Haram. Such
groups invariably restrict women's rights, autonomy
and freedoms through their reign of terror. Indeed, the
same litany of horrors echoes across the accounts of
Nigerian girls who have fled the grip of Boko Haram,
Somali women liberated from Al-Shabaab, and women
in northern Mali who languish in the shadow of Ansar
Eddine

The use of sexual violence as a tactic to strike
fear into the heart of the civilian population is not a
new phenomenon; neither are the commodification,
trafficking and exploitation of women and girls. But the
combination of the evils that we are witnessing today
seems unprecedented in its scope and brazen brutality.
Crimes of sexual violence have historically been
dismissed as random, opportunistic acts. They have
been part of the larger silence surrounding women's
experience of war, linkedto gender-based discrimination
and exclusion from security institutions. It is therefore
unsurprising that the crime of terrorism has never been
viewed through the eyes of its female victims.

Recognizing sexual violence as a tactic of terrorism
demands that we rethink our response. For instance,
we cannot deplore the public face of terrorism - the
bombing, killing and property destruction - while
ignoring the violence terrorists inflict on women and
girls in private, behind closed doors. Our efforts to
disrupt terrorist financing cannot be limited to oil
smuggling and trafficking in antiquities, while ignoring
people smuggling and the trafficking of human beings.
As extremist groups evolve, their sources of financing
become increasingly sophisticated and diversified. The
result is a growing convergence between terrorism,
trafficking and transnational organized crime.

To meet these evolving threats, our policies must
also evolve. In this regard, applying a women, peace
and security perspective, or a gender lens, can be truly
transformative. Seen through this lens, sexual violence
represents the very front line in our battle against
violent extremism, because it is a battle being waged
on and over the bodies of women and girls. To disrupt
human trafficking is to help disrupt the business of
terrorism. This is critical, because when stripped of the
veneer of politics and the mystique of religion, we see
that the business of terrorism is business. It is profitable
crime under the cover of war. Although there is no
internationally agreed definition of terrorism, current
dynamics and realities on the ground have prompted
many to ask: "When is sexual violence a tactic of
terrorism?" To foster conceptual clarity, my Office has
identified six key dimensions.

The first is when it is committed by violent
extremists and terrorist groups in a systematic manner
that is integral to the operation.

The second is when it is deliberately used to spread
terror inculcate fear and create an atmosphere of
insecurity in order to intimidate and suppress opposition,
including as a form of collective punishment.

The third is when it is used to finance and sustain
the activities ofterrorist groups or as part ofthe systems
of punishment and rewards through which they control
behaviour, and includes the gifting of women and girls
as a form of in-kind compensation for fighters and the
leveraging of the threat of sexual violence to extort
ransoms from the families of those abducted.

The fourth is when it is used to target political,
ethnic or religious groups as a form of prosecution.
Attacking women as symbolic bearers of cultural
identity to shred the social fabric and unravel kinship
ties. That tactic may be linked with forced displacement
and population flight.

The fifth is when it advances a strategy to
radicalize, recruit, retain or reward fighters - often
disseminated by a technology and communication
platform, as part of online propaganda. That includes
the promise of access to wives and sex slaves and the
trading of women between brothers in exclusive online
forums that cement group ties and affiliation.
Finally, sexual violence is a tactic of terrorism when
it is committed pursuant to an ideology of controlling
women's bodies, sexuality and reproduction to produce
a generation that can be raised and groomed in the image
of the organization, according to their ideology. Da'esh
has established an official sex-trafficking institution,
dubbed Married Bureaus, to match young women to
fighters for that purpose.

Those six indicators of sexual violence as a tactic
of terror will continue to be tracked and monitored by
my mandate. Victims of sexual violence by terrorist
groups are victims of terrorism, in the same way that
victims of sexual violence by warring parties are
victims of war. Resolution 2331 (2016), adopted today,
is an important normative development in that regard.
The next step is to reflect that understanding in national
counter-terrorism legislation to render sexual violence
survivors eligible for relief and reparation programmes,
on a basis of equality with other victims. That must
be mirrored in national, regional and global counter-
terrorism strategies, which can no longer be decoupled
from efforts to protect and empower women and girls.

Greater coherence is needed between national
action plans on women, peace and security and plans
being developed to counter violent extremism. Indeed,
we have seen time and time again that if we ignore the
voices of grass-roots women, we do so at our peril.
Too often, women have identified the early signs of
radicalization but their warnings have gone unheard
and unheeded, due to a limited understanding of
terrorism and to narrow counter-terrorism strategies
which have traditionally been gender blind. Moving
forward, we must deepen the evidence base that informs
our advocacy and action. We must enhance information
sharing and judicial cooperation to combat crimes that
know no borders. It is a travesty and an outrage that not
one Da'esh fighter has yet been convicted for crimes of
sexual violence or even listed by our sanctions regime
on that basis. We must mobilize the moral authority of
progressive religious and community leaders who can
help to shift the blame, shame and stigma of sexual
violence from the victims to the perpetrators.

Socioeconomic reintegration support for survivors,
including medical, psychosocial, legal and livelihood
assistance must infuse all of our peacebuilding and
post-conflict reconstruction efforts. As evidenced
by their own families and communities, too many
survivors are seen as affiliates of extremist groups
rather than as victims. They are sometimes used as
intelligence assets by security forces. As we bring back
our girls, let us bring them back to an environment of
support and opportunity, not hostility and suspicion.

This is not just a fight against terrorism or a fight
against trafficking; it is ultimately a fight for the
values and ideas that shape our common future. Da'esh
and their affiliates may view abducted women as
commodities to be trafficked. They may itemize them
as price lists, ranging from $20 to $20,000, haggling
online over their victim's perceived market value.
They may try to negotiate the waters for human life or
barter away a captured child for as little as a pack of
cigarettes, but I am confident that the Council and its
sanctions committees will meet those depraved acts of
terror with unity and clarity of purpose. Together, we
will send a resounding signal that the rights, freedoms
and futures of women and children are non-negotiable.

