Mrs. Morgan (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the
way in which you are conducting the work of the
Security Council this month. We are grateful for the

convening of this important meeting and for the
briefing given by Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Margot Wallstrom. We commend the
committed way in which she has undertaken her
mandate. We would also like to thank Mr. Harve
Ladsous and Ms. Amina Megheirbi for their
statements.

One of the main challenges confronting the
international community with regard to sexual violence
in armed conflicts is to bring those responsible to
justice in order to put an end to the culture of impunity.
To that end, the Security Council must take robust
measures against all those who are involved in
committing those deplorable acts, in a manner
consistent with international law. Given the scope and
the impact of this type of crime, the Security Council
must use every measure available to it, such as the
adoption of sanctions targeting those who are
responsible.

Likewise, as mentioned by the Secretary-General
in his report (S/2012/33), the Security Council has the
capacity to refer cases to the International Criminal
Court and to mandate international investigation
commissions.

We support the recommendation of the Secretary-
General that sexual violence be included in the
definition of acts that are prohibited under ceasefire
agreements and peace and reconciliation processes. To
date, only a few such agreements address this issue. If
it is not addressed in an integrated way, there is a risk
that sexual violence will continue to be used as a
weapon of war.

At the national level, we must have effective
national legislative frameworks that prevent sexual
violence, eradicate impunity and provide for
educational and awareness-raising programmes to
prevent the stigmatization of victims. As we all know,
this is one of the root causes of impunity. My
delegation would like to reiterate the importance that
access be provided to health care, to psychosocial
support, to legal assistance and to socio-economic
reintegration services for victims.
My delegation would like to stress that although
peacekeeping operations can help avoid this scourge,
what is most important is that national institutional
capacities be developed, under the principle of national
ownership, in order to prevent this crime in the
medium and long term.
We are encouraged that the Group of Experts,
with a mandate designed to reinforce the rule of law
and the capacity of national systems, has already
undertaken some working visits. My delegation appeals
for the Group to continue to establish synergies
between existing United Nations agencies and
mechanisms that have experience in this matter.

It is important to recognize that other
mechanisms and mandates exist that also deal with the
question of sexual violence, something which
unfortunately arises in varied contexts. In order to
achieve tangible results, there must be no duplication.
The Security Council and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General must focus on those cases within
their mandates. That does not imply that they cannot
enhance cooperation with other human-rights
mechanisms that exist.

We are concerned that the report recognizes the
fact that the Security Council still has to appeal for the
deployment of advisers on the protection of women as
a part of peacekeeping operations and special political
missions. When resolution 1888 (2009), which was
adopted by consensus in 2009, already includes the
appointment of such advisers under mission mandates.

We welcome the development of training
modules for staff, and we reiterate the need to increase
the number of women on the ground. Such a measure
would foster greater confidence among women in the
host population and also provide more reliable
information.

Combating sexual violence in armed conflicts is a
long road, and it requires considerable stamina. The
international community now has an institutional
toolbox that can deal with the worst situations of
sexual violence that are under consideration on the
agenda of the Security Council.

We must ensure the continuous strengthening of
this framework, being careful that each one of its parts
is in accordance with its responsibilities and mandates.
That includes peacekeeping operations, special
political missions, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and other agencies of the United
Nations involved in the matter, according to their
respective competencies.

