Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): Before
making a formal statement, I want to assure participants
that, although I belong to the group that makes up one
third of those seated at this table, my colleagues and
I will do our best to promote gender equality and the
development of the cause of women.

The Chinese delegation wishes to thank Secretary-
General Antenio Guterres; UN-Women Executive
Director Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka; and the African
Union Special Envoy for Women, Peace and Security,
Ms. Bineta Diop, for their respective briefings. We also
listened attentively to the statements made by Ms. Lina
Ekomo and Ms. Alaa Salah.

China welcomes the adoption of resolution 2493
(2019) by the Council and appreciates the efforts made
by the Government and the Permanent Mission of
South Africa.

Next year marks the twentieth anniversary of
the Security Council agenda on women and peace
and security, which coincides with the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the founding of the United Nations
and the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of
the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action. The
international community should capitalize on this
opportunity to review and take stock of the achievements
and shortcomings with respect to the women and peace
and security agenda so as to identify the right direction
for future cooperation and strengthen consensus.
China stands ready to actively support and participate
in the comprehensive review of the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) and work with all parties to
promote the work of the United Nations in the field
of women and peace and security so that it can reach
new heights.

Over the years, thanks to the vigorous efforts of
the Council and all parties concerned, women have
played an increasingly prominent role in the field of
peace and security and become increasingly important
participants in and contributors to peace processes.
More and more women hold senior positions at
United Nations Headquarters and in field missions,
and the number of women peacekeepers and police is
gradually increasing.

In conflict-affected countries, women play an
indispensable role in preventing conflict, conducting
mediation and peacebuilding, and measures to protect
and assist them have been continually improved. The
international community should continue to strengthen
coordination and give full play to the important role
of women in the maintenance of international peace
and security.

First, we should commit to seekingpolitical solutions
to hotspot issues through dialogue and consultation
as well as create an international environment that is
conducive to the survival and development of women.
The Security Council should effectively implement
its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, not only by taking
effective measures to provide comprehensive security
and protection to women affected by conflict and
carrying out humanitarian relief work, but also, and
more importantly, by energetically moving forward the
political process and promoting the peaceful settlement
of disputes so as to shield women from the suffering
caused by war and conflict and the harm resulting from
terrorism and violent extremism.

It is imperative to secure women's full right
to participation and decision-making at all stages
of the peace process, while ensuring that women's
representatives involved in peace processes truly
reflect the voices of women on the ground.

Chinese women peacekeepers and medical teams,
in defiance of all odds and hardships, have been actively
safeguarding peace in conflict areas and helping and
taking care of women and children. They truly are
beautiful sights to behold.

Secondly, we need to address both the symptoms
and root causes of conflicts, effectively strengthen
women's capacity-building and ensure their effective
participation in the peace process. It is imperative
to help women achieve equal development, escape
poverty and access quality education, which constitute
important conditions for their effective participation
in the peace process. It is essential to actively help
the countries concerned to carry out post-conflict
reconstruction, focusing on capacity-building, and
ensure that development benefits all, not least women.

Support should be provided for gender equality and
women's empowerment in conflict-affected countries,
and special funds should be earmarked to support
capacity-building projects for women. Over the years,
China has provided substantial support to countries
in conflict in such areas as women's empowerment,
counter-terrorism and conflict prevention, through
platforms that include as the China-Africa Cooperation
Forum and the China-Arab Cooperation Forum.

China is actively fulfilling the commitments made
by Chinese President Xi Jinping at the 2015 summit,
the Global Leaders' Meeting on Gender Equality and
Women's Empowerment: A Commitment to Action, by
providing assistance to women and girls in developing
countries in health, education, vocational and technical
training, and other fields.

Capitalizing on the opportunity presented by the
twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration
and Platform for Action, we are deepening our
cooperation with all parties in an effort to advance
women's empowerment.

Thirdly, we need to fully respect the sovereignty
and will of the countries concerned and ensure
that the various United Nations agencies can create
synergies while leveraging their respective strengths.
The countries concerned must shoulder their primary
responsibility for the promotion of women's effective
participation in peace processes and take appropriate
measures in the light of their national conditions.

The relevant bodies, including the Security Council,
the Economic and Social Council, the Peacebuilding
Commission and UN-Women should, in accordance
with their respective mandates, bring their strengths
into full play and intensify their coordination in ajoint
effort to promote the important role of women in the
field of peace and security.

Regional and subregional organizations are best
informed and can therefore provide targeted solutions.
The autonomy and unique role of the relevant regional
and subregional organizations, such as the African
Union and the League of Arab States, should be fully
respected, and policy exchanges should be strengthened
and best practices shared. Non-governmental
organizations are expected to play a constructive role
by observing the laws of the countries concerned,
respecting the ownership of the host Government and
fully consulting with them. China therefore reserves
its position vis-a-vis paragraph 6 of resolution 2493
(2019), which we have just adopted.

China has taken note of the efforts of the Council's
Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and
Security, but notes that the Group is not an official body
of the Council and that the work it does in the name
of the Council must respect the views of all Council
members in a manner consistent with the Security
Council mandate and the rules of procedure, or its
decisions will not be authoritative or morally binding.

