Mr. Cato (Philippines): The Philippines would
like to begin by congratulating the United States and
commending it for having convened this debate on the
important issue of sexual violence in situations of
armed conflict. We thank you, Mr. President, for giving
the Philippines the opportunity to address the Council
on this issue.

The Philippines joins previous speakers in
condemning acts of sexual violence inflicted on women
and girls by parties involved in armed conflict. Sexual
violence in situations of armed conflict is something to
which the international community should not close its
eyes. As we speak, reports on how women and girls
have found themselves victims of sexual violence and
on how they remain vulnerable to increased risk of
violence from parties involved in armed conflicts
continue to stream in from various hotspots around the
world.

The sexual abuse committed against women and
girls is deeply rooted in a pervasive culture of
discrimination, highlighted by the unequal power
equation which denies females equal status. This
inequality is manifested in a number of ways during
conflict, particularly through the social, political and
cultural norms that identify women and girls not only
as the property of men, but also as sexual objects. This
inequality also finds form as a tool of war, with
violence directed at women being considered an attack
against the values and honour of a society.

While it is easy to see the vulnerabilities of
women, there is a tendency to regard them only as
victims of violence, most especially sexual violence.
Unfortunately, this obscures the many positive roles
that women play in conflict situations, especially as
agents of peace and reconciliation, as called for under
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security.

The Philippines continues to regard resolution
1325 (2000) as an important contribution by the
Security Council to addressing the complex issues
affecting women in countries torn by conflict.
Resolution 1325 (2000) is an instrument that brings a
United Nations gender perspective to conflict analysis,
monitoring and resolution. This has had a great impact
on the transformative responses that are needed to
address the gender dimension of conflict.

The fundamental strategy of the Philippines in
pursuing the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
lies in enabling more women to systematically
participate in conflict prevention, management and
resolution and in post-conflict peacebuilding, while at
the same time rehabilitating their communities and
ensuring basic services and livelihoods. Women are
empowered to take part in local peace processes by
building capacities and mobilizing peace
constituencies. Women in indigenous communities, for
instance, are even serving as intermediaries in local
peace dialogues and as mediators in the restoration of
broken peace pacts. The roles that women play in
addressing the issues surrounding them are critical;
therefore, the Philippines remains convinced that
women must be utilized as active agents in confronting
gender-based violence.
The response to sexual exploitation in conflict
situations necessitates a comprehensive approach. As
this entails a response which should address the
various dimensions of the problem, the United Nations
must mobilize the entities within its system and build
on their comparative advantages to address the root
causes, manifestations and consequences of conflict.

The Philippines recognizes the role of the
Security Council in addressing conflict in its various
dimensions, including the gender dimension, to the
extent that this is in accordance with the Council's
mandate. It should be emphasized that, since the issue
of sexual violence requires a more holistic response,
including political, economic, social and cultural
aspects, the Security Council's actions, which comprise
only part of the response, must be coherently
coordinated with the efforts of other bodies, such as the
development-oriented agencies.

The Philippines also wishes to underscore the
importance of the regional context in assessing and
addressing conflict, as well as in coming up with the
appropriate responses to the gender dimensions of
conflicts. In this connection, the Philippines urges the
Security Council to work closely with the relevant
regional intergovernmental and civil society
organizations in areas of conflict.

While the Philippines recognizes the need to
urgently confront sexual violence in conflict, it
believes that the Security Council must also exercise
caution to ensure that it does not confront the conflict
situation narrowly by focusing on palliatives to address
the issue of gender violence. As sexual violence is part
of the bigger context of conflict, the Security Council
must see to it that it also uses its mandate mainly to
assess and address this broader picture. Bearing in
mind the need to evaluate the effectiveness of targeted
measures and sanctions, the Security Council must be
cognizant that these, if contemplated, must not
exacerbate the conflict or give rise to negative
consequences for the civilian population.

The Security Council can concretely contribute to
gender-sensitive conflict prevention and resolution,
including post-conflict reconstruction and
peacebuilding, by taking the necessary steps to put an
end to impunity by going after all violators without
exception. This could also be accomplished by
integrating gender issues in the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process, incorporating

08-3908]
the necessary gender training in the security sector and
facilitating the establishment of necessary infrastructure
and capacity for women's access to justice, as well as
cooperative work with non-governmental organizations
and other community groups.

To further address the issue of sexual violence,
the Security Council could support systems for gender-
sensitive monitoring of conflicts, including the
collection of sex-disaggregated data and information
with the engagement of national and local authorities.
This is important to facilitate national ownership and
accountability. The Security Council could also
advocate for the inclusion of gender violence issues in
peace accords and peace processes between parties to
conflict.

The Philippines believes that the Security
Council can help address the issue of gender violence
in conflict areas by seeing to it that the design and
training of peacekeeping missions include the
deployment of more female police and military
personnel, the necessary gender-sensitivity training by
troop-contributing countries and the enforcement of a
zero-tolerance policy towards sexual exploitation and
abuse involving peacekeepers.

In the case of the Philippines, gender sensitivity
is incorporated in the predeployment training for
personnel of our armed forces and our national police
whom we send out to support United Nations
peacekeeping operations. As early as four years ago,
the Philippines had put in place a zero-tolerance policy
on misconduct, especially on sexual exploitation and
abuse that could be committed by our peacekeepers.
This policy of zero tolerance, which is firmly
embedded in the revised policy framework and
guidelines governing Philippine participation in United
Nations peacekeeping operations, serves as a guarantee
that no Filipino peacekeeper will go unpunished for
misdeeds committed in mission areas.

Finally, the Philippines, as one of the largest
contributors, if not the largest contributor, of individual
police officers to United Nations peacekeeping
operations, could also support calls for the deployment
of more female police officers, especially those
experienced in handling gender violence cases. We
hope that such a contribution would help to bring about
better monitoring, reporting and response to cases of
gender violence in conflict areas.
