Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Mr. President, at the outset, allow me to
welcome you as the President of the Security Council
and to extend my gratitude to the delegation of Viet
Nam for today's initiative of convening an open debate
of the Council to discuss the status of implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). We would like to thank the
Deputy Secretary-General for her presentation of the
thematic report on this topic (S/2009/465).

Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), we
have been able to accomplish a great deal to improve
the situation of women in armed conflicts. We note
with satisfaction that the range of issues discussed
today enjoys the growing attention not only of the
Security Council, but also of other competent United
Nations entities, including the General Assembly, the
Peacebuilding Commission, the Human Rights
Council, the Economic and Social Council and its
functional commissions, including the Commission on
the Status of Women. That having been said, the
successes achieved are insufficient to improve the
struggle on the ground against violations of women's
rights.

Resolution 1325 (2000) remains the effective
reference for enhancing women's roles in preventing
and settling armed conflicts, in post-conflict
reconstruction and in the protection of women's rights
in conflict situations. There is a need in practice to
exploit the resolution's provisions in the process of
creating equal opportunities for the participation of
women in all peacebuilding and security efforts, as
well as in bolstering their role in decision-making.

The basis for this approach is to ensure genuine
gender equality. Women can stand to make a more
substantial contribution to all aspects of preventing and
settling conflict. Moreover, there is a need to devote
greater attention to mainstreaming the gender
component into the poverty reduction and equality
work of the United Nations, poverty and inequality
being the main sources of conflict. In particular, we
can refer here to the expanded participation by women
in decision-making on socio-economic issues and the
elaboration of national frameworks to achieve the
Millennium Development Goals.

We welcome resolution 1888 (2009), adopted on
30 September, on sexual violence during armed conflicts.
However, sexual violence is far from being the only
problem with respect to violations of women's rights. We
must bear in mind that women and children continue to
fall victim to premeditated attacks, including terrorist
acts, indiscriminate or excessive use of force, as well
as other violations of international humanitarian law.

The varied nature of Violence should lead us to
devote due attention to all its categories. In that
connection, we view resolutions 1820 (2008) and 1888
(2009) as complementing resolution 1325 (2000),
which sets out the general parameters for the protection
of women in armed conflicts.

Next year, we will commemorate the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).
In that regard, the Russian Federation welcomes the
idea of organizing a set of events in 2009 and 2010 at
the national, regional and global levels in order to
spread awareness of that document. We cherish the
hope that such events will be used not only to report
successes achieved in implementing the provisions of
resolution 1325 (2000), but also to consider and gain
an understanding of outstanding problems and of
further steps to bolster the regime for the protection of
women in armed conflicts.

