Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in French):
I thank the French presidency for organizing this open
debate on the theme "Women and peace and security:
Responding to human trafficking in situations of
conflict-related sexual violence". Sir, you can rest
assured that the French presidency will have the full
cooperation of the Spanish delegation. We also thank
the Egyptian presidency for the work undertaken, and I
also thank today's panellists for their briefings.

(Spoke in Spanish)

Almost 10 years ago, in 2008, we adopted
resolution 1820 (2008). which has, in my View, the
great merit of being the first resolution in which the
Security Council examined exclusively the tragic
problem of sexual violence in armed conflict. In that
resolution, the Security Council concluded that sexual
violence could be avoided if we establish appropriate
prevention mechanisms, as well as mechanisms of
condemnation, suppression and sanctions. We are now
getting close to the tenth anniversary of resolution 1820
(2008) and, unfortunately, during the time since 2008,
sexual violence in armed conflict has increased. It has
increased in a very disturbing fashion.

What does that mean? It means that the Security
Council has to do quite a bit more, and we members are
those responsible for the actions ofthe Security Council.
I believe that we have the support of all members of the
Security Council in the commitment to strengthen the
fight against sexual violence. The best example of that
commitment can be seen in the Chamber today. I believe
that we have a very large number of non-members of
the Security Council that are following the debate. That
demonstrate's the larger membership's commitment to
the problem under discussion, which is one of the great
plagues of humanity.

As sexual violence has increased in recent years,
my statement will focus on proposing five specific
measures that I believe could strengthen the mechanisms
of the condemnation, prevention and sanctioning of
sexual violence in armed conflict. The first proposal
refers to the very valuable Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Bangura, with whom I have always been in very
close contact. She has explained to me on more than one
occasion that, with regard to the 48 parties to conflict
mentioned in the report of the Secretary-General on
conflict-related sexual violence (S/2016/361), there is a
very important piece of information about those entities,
namely, that of those 48 parties, only five are States.
All of the others are non-State actors, of which seven
are terrorist groups. That means that the nature of the
sexual violence in conflict has clearly changed, in that
we now have new actors - the non-State actors. That
is why Spain's first proposal would be to strengthen the
mandate of the Special Representative. Let us think, as
members of the Security Council, about how we can
ensure that the Special Representative could have more
effective instruments to fight against sexual violence in
conflict, with particular reference to non-State actors.

The second proposal is of a more cross-cutting
nature. Perhaps it affects the Special Rapporteur
on trafficking in persons, especially in women and
children, more. I believe that we have all read the
media reports about the $35 to $45 million that Da'esh
obtained for the release of 200 Yazidi women. I believe
that it is important for the international community to
establish cooperation mechanisms, so that the fight
against trafficking in situations of sexual violence
in armed conflict could be prevented better and be
sanctioned. I believe that we have to think about
integrating trafficking into all of ourjudicial and police
cooperation mechanisms, both internationally and
regionally. I accord a great deal of importance to the
regional level. In the context of judicial cooperation,
a key actor on which we have to count is INTERPOL,
which perhaps should strengthen its mechanisms for
combating trafficking.

The third proposal is directed primarily to the
members of the Security Council, and the Ambassador
of the United States made reference to this. The
Council has at its disposal a set of very important
tools, particularly the sanctions committees. The
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities could
have something important to say about certain very
specific situations. For example, in situations of human
trafficking involving women and girls, it is obvious that
qualified professionals are involved in administering
hormones to and sterilizing women who are then
trafficked. I propose that persons who commit this type
of crime be subject to sanctions by the corresponding
sanctions committee, in particular the 1267 Committee.

My fourth proposal refers to women protection
advisers in all United Nations missions. We all know
that not all peacekeeping missions have women
protection advisers. In some cases, which is even more
serious, when there are women protection advisers,
those positions are funded by voluntary contributions.
Here the Security Council and in particular all of the
penholders have a very special responsibility: to ensure
that when the mandates of peacekeeping operations
are extended, we specify the need for the inclusion of
women protection advisers in each and every one of
them; ideally, they would be financed by the regular
budget of the Organization.

Lastly, the fifth measure refers to impunity, but I
would say that it refers even more to the victims, to
the tragedy of the victims of sexual violence whose
chilling accounts we often have the privilege of hearing
in this Chamber.

I would note two very concrete measures. First,
although we have recognized that sexual violence is
used as a tactic of terrorism, why can we not recognize
as well the fact that the victims of sexual violence are
victims of terrorism and, as a result, should benefit
from the same level of protection and attention as
the victims of terrorism, at both the international and
national levels.

The second proposal is of a more cross-cutting
nature, involving awareness-raising in all areas,
in particular when it comes to religious leaders, to
incorporate the fight against sexual violence into
initiatives of interreligious dialogue, such as KAICIID
or the Alliance of Civilizations.

I believe that we have time; I hope that when the
tenth anniversary of resolution 1820 (2008) comes
along, we will be able to say that we responded in
time to reverse the trend of sexual violence in armed
conflict, and that the situation in 2018 will be better
than it is today, thanks to the initiative of the French
presidency of convening this debate, which could not
be more timely.

