Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow me
first to address my congratulations to the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan on its accession to the presidency
of the Security Council, and to congratulate you in
particular, Madam, on being the first Arab woman to
preside in this Chamber, of which we are very proud.

My delegation would like to thank you also for
organizing today's debate and for choosing the theme
of sexual violence in conflict, which is relevant not on
account of both its gravity and its timing.

At all times and regardless of the victims, violence
has always been condemned. But sexual violence in
conflict is even more so. Women and children are often
the first victims of conflict. They face destructive forms
of sexual violence and are exploited systematically to
achieve tactical, military or political objectives. They
suffer the most devastating consequences ofconflict and
pay a heavy price because of their great vulnerability.
Worse still, sexual violence has become a weapon of
war used by terrorist and extremist groups such as
Daesh, Boko Haram and Al-Shabaab in Somalia, which
we strongly condemn.

A year ago to day, 276 girls were abducted and taken
captive by the terrorist group Boko Haram in Nigeria
Despite the global outcry over their disappearance and
the launch of the international mobilization "Bring
back our girls" campaign, these kidnapped girls have
not been found and their fate remains unknown. We
express the hope today that they will not be forgotten
and that this meeting will help keep their memory and
sad and tragic fate at the forefront of the international
community's priorities.

The report published by UNICEF on Monday,
13 April, indicates that 800,000 children have been
displaced by the Violence caused by Boko Haram. The
March report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/203)
reveals that 2014 was marked by deeply distressing
reports of rape, sexual slavery and forced weddings
perpetrated by extremist groups, sometimes in the
framework of terror tactics. There has also been
an increased use of sexual violence as a form of
persecution, in particular against religious minorities,
or to displace populations.

Women and children fleeing violence and fighting
often find themselves once again exposed to the risk
of sexual exploitation, rape, prostitution, or forced
marriage, pregnancy or sterilization. Worse yet, they
may also be auctioned and sold in slave markets.
Rape is obviously the most common form of sexual
Violence in conflict, especially in camps for refugees
and displaced persons, which offer, unfortunately, no
security for women, especially single parents or heads
of households. The majority of cases of sexual violence
in conflict remain unreported for fear of threats,
serious intimidation or reprisals, to which not only the
Victims who speak are exposed, but also witnesses,
human rights defenders and anyone else who seeks to
denounce this guilty silence.

Sexual violence and threats of such acts or incitements
to commit them constitute a serious violation of
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law and a very grave breach of the
Geneva Conventions. Morocco strongly condemns all
forms of sexual Violence, including in times of conflict,
and considers them to be barbaric, brutal and inhumane
methods and practices, with serious consequences
for the process of establishing lasting peace and
reconciliation.

Prevention and the fight against sexual violence can
be effective only through an approach that takes into
account the complexity of the causes of the problem
and the interests and needs of the people concerned.
Firm measures must be taken urgently with regard to
the accountability of all those who continue to act in
defiance of standards of international law and civilian
protection, especially in relation to women, young
girls and children. It is also up to the parties to armed
conflict to take every possible measure to ensure the
protection of civilians and provide for their basic needs
by according special attention to the needs of civilians
who are particularly vulnerable, especially women and
children, in accordance with their obligations under
international humanitarian law and human rights and
refugee law.

Non-State armed groups undoubtedly constitute
a major challenge due to their responsibility for
most recent armed conflicts and their involvement
in atrocities and massacres of civilians, in particular
women. The international community must therefore
respond and take appropriate measures to end these
Violations.

Women play a key role in repairing the social
fabric of countries emerging from conflict. They
must therefore participate fully, effectively and on an
equal footing in all stages of peace processes. Their
marginalization may delay or hinder the establishment
of lasting peace, security and reconciliation.

Finally, national strategies to protect women and
girls remain dependent on measures to strengthen the
capacity of Governments and on the availability of
material, financial and human resources to ensure their
sustainability, empowerment and independence; hence
the importance of a prompt and generous response to
the Secretary-General's call in his report on donors to
meet the funding requirements for the implementation
of national action plans and national programmes,
and in support of the initiatives of the United Nations
Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict.

