Ms. Chan (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): Costa
Rica congratulates Spain on having organized this
debate and welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2242 (2015), which we co-sponsored. The
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) was a landmark in
the history of the Organization. It marks a normative
shift in the way we talk about women in the context
of international peace and security. Resolution 1325
(2000) called upon Member States to prioritize women
in peace and security processes and to stop talking about
women as victims and, instead, to begin simultaneous
conversations about the importance of promoting
women's agency and participation. Resolution 1325
(2000) established a bold agenda in which gender
equality forms the basis of peaceful and inclusive
societies.

Despite the increased visibility of women in these
processes, much work remains to be done in terms of
impact. While a greater number of women participate in
peace negotiations, nearly half of all peace agreements
make no mention of women, and those that do, are often
insubstantial. There may be an increase in the number
of women's groups in the field, but women still remain
especially vulnerable in conflict situations.

To remedy this disparity, the inclusion of women in
peace and security processes must go beyond checking
a box marked "women". Costa Rica believes that the
full and effective participation of women means much
more than inserting women in the existing security
structures and concepts. The original intention of
resolution 1325 (2000) was never to promote women
soldiers, but rather to reap the rewards obtained when
women are granted space to participate as equals in the
search for solutions.

Costa Rica recognizes that the path towards
complete implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) is
not an easy one. Just as there is not only one type of
woman in the world, there is also no single best practice
for operationalizing gender equality and women's
security amid the myriad of distinct conditions on the
ground. It is for this reason that we must work towards
creating a women-inclusive system of operations on the
basis of the normative agenda established by resolution
1325 (2000). An analysis of the disconnect between
how the Security Council talks about women and how
the wider United Nations community implements the
women and peace and security agenda should be at the
forefront of our debates as we move forward from this
fifteenth anniversary of the resolution.
Costa Rica stands firmly in support of holistic
approaches that enable women to participate in
addressing the root causes of conflict, but it is
impossible to move forward without also ensuring
justice for those who have been victims of the systemic
violence that accompanies conflict and war. In 1998,
during her tenure on the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, Costa Rican judge
Elizabeth Odio Benito worked successfully to have
rape and other forms of sexual assault be considered
forms of torture. Odio Benito's interpretation, based on
the case of two Serbian women who were raped in the
Celebici detention camp, is now an accepted principle
of international law.

Costa Rica is outraged by the pervasiveness of
sexual violence as a weapon of war and condemns the
sexual misconduct and abuse committed by United
Nations peacekeepers. Odio Benito's juridical legacy
continues to form part of our efforts to have sexual
violence as a weapon of war considered a crime against
humanity, and this belief is reflected in our zero-
tolerance position against impunity in cases of sexual
exploitation and abuse by United Nations personnel.

On this fifteenth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000), we do not wish the United Nations to be
accused of being another institution with "binders full
of women".

