Mr. Sajdik (Austria): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the members of the Human Security
Network, a cross-regional network composed of Chile,
Costa Rica, Greece, Ireland, Jordan, Mali, Norway,
Panama, Slovenia, Switzerland, Thailand, South
Africa as an observer and my own country, Austria.
The Human Security Network is an informal group
of States that advocates for greater use of the human-
security approach in policies and programmes at the
international, regional and national levels.

Let me first of all thank Assistant Secretary-
General Kyung-wha Kang, Director Durham and
Ms. Elman for their comprehensive statements. On
behalf of the members of the Network, I would also
like to thank the presidency of Chile for convening this
open debate, which focuses for the first time on the
protection of women and children and the challenges
and needs that they face.

The Network was created in the context of the
Ottawa Convention, which bans landmines, and the
protection of civilians in conflict has always been
central to our concerns. We cannot overemphasize
the importance of discussions such as today's on how
best to ensure the security, protection and dignity of
civilians affected by armed conflict.

This year, the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action will celebrate its twentieth anniversary,
and 15 years will have passed since the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security. Those documents recognized for the first
time the disproportionate impact of armed conflict on
women and girls, and in particular the important role
of women as active agents of change in the promotion
and maintenance of peace and security in all phases of
conflictresolution and peacebuilding. Moreover, in View
of this year's review of United Nations peacekeeping
and peacebuilding operations, it is particularly timely
to focus on the protection of civilians, especially the
challenges faced by women and girls.

Despite the unrelenting efforts of the international
community, civilians continue to account for the
majority of casualties in armed conflicts, which have
a huge impact on women and girls. Grave abuses and
violence against women and girls, including sexual
violence and rape, continue to be a common occurrence
in conflict and post-conflict settings all around the
world. We unequivocally condemn sexual and gender-
based violence, and we are determined to address and
fight those heinous crimes.

Likewise, the Network remains particularly
concerned by the difficulties in taking action to ensure
the protection of civilians, including women and girls.
Preventive measures and early warning and monitoring
mechanisms to counter violence against women and
girls must be strengthened. States themselves bear the
duty to protect civilians and to ensure and respect their
rights.

We stress the importance of fighting impunity and
ensuring accountability under national or international
jurisdictions. The perpetrators of such crimes must be
brought to justice. Commissions of inquiry and fact-
finding missions are useful tools for substantiating
alleged violations, thus opening the way for successful
prosecution and conviction. When States are unwilling
or unable to bring perpetrators to justice, a referral to
the International Criminal Court is a complementary
means for preventing impunity and restoring dignity
and hope to the survivors of atrocities, their families
and communities.

Moreover, parties to armed conflicts must allow
the rapid and unimpeded access of humanitarian
relief for civilians in need. The effective protection
of civilians requires that humanitarian assistance,
especially in terms of medical personnel and relief, is
respected, protected from attacks and enjoys freedom
of movement. That is essential to the exercise of
humanitarian personnel's functions.

The economic, political and social empowerment
of women and girls reduces their vulnerability and
enhances their ability to protect themselves and
exercise their rights. In that regard, we need to ensure
that women and girls' interests are fully respected and
systematically integrated into the framework of peace
processes. We need to increase the number of women
in peace talks, peacekeeping missions and in senior
positions at the United Nations, as well as in other
international, regional and subregional organizations.
In order to achieve this, further investments in female
skills development are necessary and measures to
promote women have to be taken. That includes
changing mindsets. Ultimately, the media should avoid
labelling women as victims of armed conflicts. Rather,
the perception of women and girls as positive agents
of change who play diverse roles in building, securing
and maintaining peace must be reinforced. In that
regard, the stories of women who have contributed to
the resolution of conflicts and peace agreements must
be told and heard in order to dispel such stereotypes.

Please allow me now to add some observations in
my national capacity.

Austria has been a strong supporter of the Council's
increased attention to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, based on the conviction that all parties
must comply with international human rights as well
as humanitarian and refugee law. Since the adoption of
resolution 1894 (2009) under Austria's presidency of
the Security Council in 2009, considerable progress has
been made. Austria has developed an interdisciplinary
training course on the protection ofcivilians that is open
to national and international participants. The course
recently received a certificate from the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and is now recognized as a
centre of excellence for training in the protection of
civilians.

Explosive weapons are a sphere of particular concern
to Austria. We commend the Secretariat's efforts,
including the expert seminars organized by the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs over the
last two years in London and Oslo to raise awareness
about the devastating humanitarian consequences of
explosive weapons for civilians, including for women,
and to restrict their use in populated areas, where they
cause indiscriminate harm. Austria will itself host an
expert meeting in Vienna in September.

We welcome the Secretary-General's recommendation
to avoid the use ofexplosive weapons in populated areas,
as well as the Secretariat's efforts to develop practical
measures and guidance to reduce their humanitarian
impact. Austria hosted an international symposium
on women and peace and security at the beginning of
November 2014 in Vienna. By focusing on neglected
aspects, such as the issue of gender-sensitive conflict
analysis or the role of the media, we intended to provide
useful input to the global study on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). We hope that the ongoing
reviews of the United Nations peacekeeping operations,
the peacebuilding architecture and the 2015 high-level
review and global study on women and peace and
security will provide evidence of what can be achieved
by effectively integrating a gender perspective in
conflict prevention and management.

