Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Today's meeting provides a good opportunity
for us to discuss the state of efforts to combat sexual
violence in armed conflict on the basis of the most
recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2016/361)
on thetopic. An important role in that undertaking is
played by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, in particular
with regard to cooperating with the Governments of
countries affected by armed conflicts.

We have carefully studied the report of the
Secretary-General on sexual violence in conflict for
2015. Many of the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the report dovetail with today's topic.
Without any doubt, oremost on our minds today is
the problem of the scope and unprecedented brutality
of sexual violence by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant and other terrorist armed groups and the
ensuing imperative to attach particular importance to
the matter of rehabilitating affected women and girls.
Dealing a final blow to international terrorism and its
crimes is impossible without consistently strengthening
international cooperation, with the central and
coordinating role to be played by the United Nations
and the Security Council.

Women and children in armed conflicts most often
become refugees and internally displaced persons.
Moreover, they face the threat of sexual violence both
in transit and in refugee centres. Of particular concern
are reports - which the report of the Secretary-General
also draws attention to - about the emergence of an
illegal infrastructure for exploiting refugees, including
through networks of illicit trafficking, commercial
sexual trafficking and sexual slavery.

Various aspects of combating sexual violence
in armed conflict, including issues related to human
trafficking, are the focus of a number of United
Nations agencies and international initiatives. As the
Secretary-General has rightly noted, those phenomena
are cross-border in nature. There is a need to strengthen
international efforts to combat human trafficking
in step with existing instruments. In that regard, the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime is making a
practical contribution by providing technical assistance
to States.

Our country, as a member of the Group of Friends
United against Human Trafficking, attaches great
importance to the system-level work to combat human
trafficking. Given the topical nature of the issue,
especially in the light of the mass influx of refugees
as a result of armed conflicts, the implementation
of the United Nations Global Plan of Action against
Trafficking in Human Beings has particular relevance.
The Security Council should focus its activities on
issues of sexual violence in situations of armed conflict,
especially in situations that are on its agenda, while
avoiding duplication of effort with other United Nations
bodies and other international mechanisms. At the same
time, the matter of combating sexual violence in armed
conflict should be regarded as an integral component of
a whole package of conflict-resolution measures.

Unfortunately, once again, we have to note
the ongoing practice of diverging in reports from
previously Council-approved terminology. Our
delegation drew attention to the issue earlier. We are
talking about replacing Security Council language on
the matter of sexual violence in conflict with the more
blurred concept of conflict-related sexual violence.
That approach has also been followed in the proposed
theme of this debate. That type of attempt to reopen
agreed-upon provisions is a matter of concern for us,
primarily because that could also bring with it broad
interpretation of existing mandates, blurring the lines
between the issue of the maintenance of international
peace and security and general matters of combating
organized crime or human rights violations.

We are convinced that the Security Council's
consideration of sexual violence in conflict, just like
the matter of women and peace and security as a whole,
should not be used to promote documents and debates
that are contentious and do not enjoy consensus among
States in their concepts and approaches and focus
on issues of sexual orientation and gender identity.
That risks distracting attention from tasks that are
directly planned for in the mandates formulated by the
Security Council.

Very soon, on 19 June, we will marking the second
International Day for the Elimination of Sexual Violence
in Conflict. We hope that the United Nations events,
including today's debates, will serve to eradicate sexual
and other types of violence with respect to civilians in
armed conflict and help to find more effective ways to
resolve conflicts and to maintain international peace
and security.

In conclusion, I will say a few words relating to the
statement ofthe Ukrainian delegation. In that statement,
yet another attempt was made to assign blame for the
disasters okarainian civilians on Russia. The suffering
of civilians in eastern Ukraine is the consequence of
full-scale military operations begun by Kyiv in 2014
against the region, as well as the social and economic
embargo against the region. Specifically, regarding the
topic of today's meeting, we might note, for example,
the matter of the situation of women in Ukraine and that
of internally displaced persons (IDPs). Those matters,
unlike the affirmations of the Ukrainian delegation,
are reflected in documents ofinternational bodies. The
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, for example, has many times called attention
to cases of sexual and gender-based violence against
such women. The Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission to
Ukraine also noted the particular vulnerability of IDPs
regarding human trafficking and exploitation. The list
of such examples goes on.

