Mr. Guehenno: Thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to address publicly the problem of sexual
exploitation and abuse in peacekeeping and the
progress achieved to date to tackle it.

As I begin, I must say a few words of admiration
for the efforts of His Royal Highness Prince Zeid
Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein, the Secretary-General's
Adviser on Sexual Exploitation and Abuse by United
Nations Peacekeeping Personnel. He has given us
unflinching diplomatic and practical support on this
issue. His involvement has been invaluable, and we are
grateful for it. I also must highlight the exceptional
leadership Assistant Secretary-General Jane Holl Lute
has demonstrated this past year in galvanizing the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and
the United Nations system as a whole to deal with this
problem more seriously than we ever have in the past.

Most of all, I express deep appreciation for the
amount of time, energy and political attention that
Member States have invested recently in seeking
solutions to the problem. The troop-contributing
countries especially deserve praise for engaging with
the Secretariat and the membership at large on issues
of extreme sensitivity and of great importance to their
national honour. I stress the word "honour", because it
has been earned at the cost of the lives of some of their
finest uniformed personnel.

Security Council members know well that just
some weeks ago three Jordanian soldiers died fighting
gang members while helping to strengthen a central
checkpoint on Haiti's most dangerous road. Not long
before that a Canadian Royal Mounted Police officer
was killed in an ambush while patrolling in Port-au-
Prince. In the jungles of the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, eight Guatemalan special
forces soldiers lost their lives in a firefight with a
hateful militia group. A year ago this week nine of their
06-25109
comrades from Bangladesh also fell in the line of duty
in clashes with armed thugs.

Unfortunately, they are not alone. This is a
dangerous business, claiming and threatening the lives
of men and women from Peru to Pakistan, Ireland to
India, Bolivia to Brazil. But despite the risks, day in
and day out, United Nations personnel - civilians,
military and police alike - from 120 countries get on
with doing their jobs in tough conditions and at great
personal sacrifice.

We dishonour those brave men and women when
we fail to prevent or punish those from within their
ranks who victimize the very people peacekeepers are
meant to protect and serve. I am not so sure that this
was fully understood a few years ago as clearly as it is
today. Two years ago, prior to the revelation that a
shockingly large number of United Nations
peacekeepers had committed sexual exploitation and
abuse in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
neither we in DPKO nor Member States openly
discussed or fully appreciated the magnitude of the
problem of sexual exploitation and abuse in
peacekeeping.

Today, not only is the severity of the problem
openly recognized, but the General Assembly has
adopted a comprehensive strategy to tackle it, building
on the collective efforts of Prince Zeid, DPKO and the
United Nations system at large. This strategy focuses
on prevention and enforcement, and it will - upon
approval by the General Assembly of a policy on
victim assistance - incorporate remediation as well.

We have already made concrete and meaningful
progress to implement that strategy. Before discussing
this, though, I want to be clear up front that we still
have a considerable way to go. It must be said that not
all troop contingents or staff on the ground fully
support - even after all the negative publicity and
attention - aspects of the zero-tolerance policy,
particularly as it pertains to prostitution. We will need
to work together to address that point. We also need to
strengthen markedly the capacity of peacekeeping
operations and of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services (OIOS) to investigate violations while
respecting due process. Once we have overcome those
hurdles, we expect to narrow significantly the
continuing gap between zero tolerance and full
compliance. Until then, as we even more aggressively
seek out non-compliance, measured against a higher
06-25109
standard than ever before, the progress being made will
not seem obvious, nor will it be enough.

Let me now refer to the progress that we have
achieved. We are making headway in laying the
foundations for the prevention of the problem in the
longer term. Two years ago, we did not even have a
uniform standard governing what is, and what is not,
considered to be sexual exploitation and abuse. One
can hardly prevent the problem if one cannot define it
clearly and consistently. Today, we can. Thanks to the
efforts of the General Assembly last year, all United
Nations civilian staff members, military personnel,
contingents, United Nations volunteers and contractors
are bound by the same very strict standards outlined in
the Secretary-General's prohibitions on sexual
exploitation and abuse.

In the past, we did not do enough to promulgate,
publicize and train personnel on whatever standards
were on the books. Today, we most certainly do.
Between 79 and 90 per cent of civilian police and
military personnel receive mandatory training on
sexual exploitation and abuse. Our aim is 100 per cent.

We have also developed tools to reinforce that
training and its underlying message of the duty of care
that every peacekeeper has to the people whom they
are meant to help. DPKO has worked with an outside
professional company to produce a film on the code of
conduct for peacekeepers. It has been widely
distributed in the field and translated into a dozen
languages. I am pleased to report that it has been well
received.

We have developed and are making use of other
innovative tools and training materials to educate and
inform personnel. They include an online e-learning
standards of conduct module, pocket cards, mission-
readiness booklets distributed to staff prior to
deployment, security briefings and posters and
brochures on sexual exploitation and abuse and
human trafficking - prepared, I might add, in six
languages - as well as other public information tools.

Our personnel are not the only people whom we
are targeting with this material. We are sharing it with
host populations as well. They have a right to know the
standards we expect of our people. They are also often
in a better position to know when our personnel are
violating those high standards. We are now actively
encouraging and making it easier for the local
3
population to bring breaches of conduct to our
attention.

But prevention cannot be achieved through
training, information and public outreach alone.
Welfare is another important part of the equation, as
armed forces throughout the world know all too well.
This is especially true when uniformed personnel, as
well as civilians, are deployed in quasi war-zones in
the remotest parts of the world. Missions are now
addressing that issue as a high priority. Most are now
creating constructive recreational outlets, and several
have even established, from existing resources,
multipurpose sporting, socializing and dining facilities.
Those are the types of initiatives included in our
welfare strategy and standard operating procedures on
welfare promulgated and sent to all heads of mission
last month. In our discussions in the General Assembly,
we will encourage troop-contributing countries to make
use, in the mission area, of the welfare stipend paid by
the Organization for every military peacekeeper. It is
important that the issue of welfare and recreation be a
priority, with a view to keeping soldiers busy when
they are not on duty.

With regard to enforcement, we have also made
some progress. During 2005, investigations have been
completed into allegations of sexual exploitation and
abuse involving 296 peacekeeping personnel, the
breakdown by category being 84 civilians, 21 police
and 191 military. So far, 17 civilians, 16 police and 137
military personnel have been dismissed or repatriated.
Those numbers include six commanders. For the past
year, we had been making managers and commanders
aware that they will be held accountable for those
under their chain of command, and we mean it. We are
in the process of making this accountability part of
their performance evaluation. We have also sought and
received the cooperation of two Member States in
repatriating entire units for misconduct, in part related
to sexual exploitation and abuse and in part related to
other misconduct.

One of the major reasons why we have made
significant headway in the areas of enforcement and
prevention is that Member States have recently given
us the means to ensure that professional experts are
dedicated to the task full time. As recommended by the
Zeid report and endorsed by the General Assembly, we
have designed, recruited for and staffed a multi-
disciplinary conduct and discipline team at DPKO
Headquarters, in addition to eight conduct and
discipline teams established in peacekeeping
operations in Burundi, Cote d'Ivoire, the Democratic
Republic of Congo, Haiti, Liberia, Sierra Leone, the
Sudan and Timor-Leste.

The conduct and discipline teams develop policy,
provide oversight of disciplinary issues and ensure the
coherent application of United Nations standards of
conduct. In missions, the teams provide policy advice
to heads of mission on discipline, receive allegations
from complainants, collaborate with the Integrated
Mission Training Centres and help the mission
leadership maintain a watchful eye on all issues related
to conduct and discipline. The field has largely
welcomed that important tool in the arsenal to combat
sexual exploitation and abuse as well as other forms of
indiscipline.

In addition, the conduct and discipline teams are
crucial in bringing the outreach to the host populations,
to which I referred earlier. They have been active in
making communities aware of the various methods -
by telephone, e-mail or in person - through which
complaints can be made in a confidential setting. In the
middle of the year, we will formally launch a new
comprehensive database to track and monitor all
allegations. In the interim, we have implemented a file-
sharing mechanism to report and store allegations
securely and confidentially. We have developed a
public information strategy and implementing
procedure to guide missions in responding actively and
transparently to local media and host populations on
sexual exploitation and abuse issues.

The DPKO conduct and discipline teams rely
heavily on an ever-growing collaboration in this area
with OIOS - the investigating authority for sexual
exploitation and abuse offences. OIOS is an essential
partner and a central element of our comprehensive
strategy with regard to those important issues, which is
why DPKO requested OIOS to undertake a global audit
on discipline, among many numerous other audits, to
help us identify and fix the most difficult problems in
the field. We need its help and expertise; we cannot
possibly be aware of all potential wrongdoing
occurring across the globe, in 18 missions, comprising
over 85,000 people drawn from over 100 countries.

The specialized capacity of the OIOS helps
ensure thoroughness in the handling and investigation
of complaints, and it has established an investigative
presence in six missions. But its hand must be
strengthened; currently, OIOS does not have all the
resources to do the job that it is being asked to do.

Investigations in the field pose certain problems.
While troop-contributing countries have been
requested to coordinate with OIOS in a manner that
satisfies the requirements of their national
jurisdictions, not all Member States are comfortable
with the investigative role given to OIOS by the
General Assembly, and have reserved their rights with
respect to their uniformed personnel on the ground. We
must sort through that issue to ensure rapid, reliable
means of determining the facts, preserving the rights of
the victims and the accused and discharging justice
fairly.

Those measures are what we have put in place
together with our partners in the United Nations
system, and we continue to develop those and other
initiatives the areas of prevention and enforcement.

Under the heading of what might be termed
remediation, we have made progress with our United
Nations partners in developing a policy regarding
support to victims. A United Nations-wide task force,
led by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) and DPKO, has overseen the
preparation of that policy, on which there have been
broad consultations over the past year, including
several meetings with Members States. It is being
transmitted to the Secretary-General this week for final
discussions and forwarding to Member States, as
requested in the Summit Outcome document.

The measures I have described are the beginning
of a programme of systemic and sustained change. We
have made significant progress. However, there is a
great deal yet to be done and for that, as we will make
clear in our discussions in the General Assembly, we
need greater support from Member States.

We will urge Member States to adopt a revised
memorandum of understanding to incorporate the
standards of conduct contained in the Secretary-
General's prohibitions. We will urge Member States to
firmly endorse the creation of fully fledged conduct
and discipline units at Headquarters and in the field,
and to establish such units in missions that are not
currently served by them. Those units, as I have
explained, are an essential tool for preventing
misconduct and monitoring compliance with United
Nations standards.
06-25109

We will urge Member States, including all troop-
contributing countries, to send an uncompromising
message against prostitution in peacekeeping missions.
Indeed, today, the single measure that would do the
most to reduce the level of allegations and strengthen
the policy of zero tolerance against sexual exploitation
and abuse is if all troop contingents had an active and
effective policy against all prostitution in mission
areas.

We will appeal to Member States not to conflate
the issues of procurement procedures being stretched
by honest peacekeepers trying to get a job done with
financial fraud and with sexual exploitation and abuse.
It is one thing for auditors - and I happen to be an
auditor by training - to disagree about whether
financial loss to the Organization has occurred because
a field manager chose to use mission aircraft to fly
rations to troops when fuel supplies in a country were
unexpectedly cut off and left a contractor unable to
deliver them; it is another matter altogether when
procurement officials deliberately defraud the
Organization. But let me stress that, regardless of any
divergence of views on methodology and accounting
for loss, DPKO takes all OIOS findings and
recommendations very seriously and is addressing the
weaknesses identified in peacekeeping procurement in
the same comprehensive, professional and sustained
manner with which we have addressed the sexual
exploitation and abuse issue over the past 18 months.

On that point, the Assistant Secretary-General for
Mission Support, the Chef de Cabinet, the Head of
OIOS, the Under-Secretary-General for Management
and I are all fully on board with the Secretary-
General's position that we need to be proactive and
aggressive in detecting and dealing swiftly with this
critical issue. If allegations are proven following due
process, dishonest people should be fired and face
justice. That is as important here as it is in the case of
sex crimes, which constitute a different and most
egregious category of offence and demand the highest
degree of vigilance.

And finally, we will be seeking formal support
from Member States on a longer-term reform agenda
for peacekeeping in general, as outlined in the
Secretary-General's report now before the General
Assembly's Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations. The implementation of those reforms
should also help to address some underlying structural
5
weaknesses that give rise to the acts of misconduct we
have been discussing over the past few days.

In conclusion, I want to say that we have tens of
thousands of extremely competent, honest and
courageous personnel in the field. Those are the
nationals - uniformed and civilian personnel alike -
of Member States. We cannot allow acts of serious
misconduct by some to betray their good work and
tarnish the reputation of United Nations peacekeeping.
It is an indispensable instrument, it is effective, and it
is helping maintain peace for tens of millions of people
around the world.

