Mr. Mohamad (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): As I
am addressing the Security Council for the first time, I
extend special congratulations to you, Sir, on your wise
and skilful presidency of the Council this month. We
have interacted with your distinguished presidency
throughout the month, including on all relevant
matters, and you have been a source of inspiration and
wisdom to us.

In that context, I must also offer you our full
appreciation for the importance that the Security
Council has continued to attach to the promotion of
peace in the Sudan.

In discussing the issue of women, peace and
security, we note the importance of the Security
Council's role, as manifested in its resolution 1325
(2000), which sets out a comprehensive plan of action
on the status and role of women in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the United Nations, the
obligations set out in the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action, and the provisions of the Outcome
Document of the twenty-third special session of the
General Assembly, on women, development and peace
for the twenty-first century, in particular those
concerning women in armed conflict, which

"Ensure and support the full participation of
women at all levels of decision-making and
implementation in development activities and
peace processes, including conflict prevention
and resolution" (GA resolution S-23/3, Annex, para. 86 (b)).

God abhors all conflict and war. Human rights
and international humanitarian law are violated
whenever wars erupt. War is war. War is a source of
deep regret that the great majority of those affected by
armed conflict are civilians and that women and
children are the most vulnerable and directly hurt
segment of society, often becoming refugees and
internally displaced persons.

We note in that respect the Security Council's
request to the Secretary-General to submit a system-
wide action plan to implement resolution 1325 (2000),
including major areas of action in the field of women,
peace and security and providing a framework for
relevant inter-agency activities, and to address this
issue through strategies to promote the gender
perspective, confidence-building, and the development
of local and regional women's organizations to
complement the role of the United Nations at the
regional and local levels.

The promotion of the gender perspective in areas
of conflict requires reconstruction and rehabilitation
programmes to incorporate the promotion of women's
practical participation in those areas by providing
technical assistance, particularly training programmes
for women in the fields of health and education. In that
respect, we rely on the relevant United Nations
agencies and bodies - including the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), the United Nations
Environment Programme, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the United Nations
Development Fund for Women, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
UNICEF - to coordinate inter-agency programmes for
women and girls.
We note in that respect the experience of the
UNDP project in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which encountered certain difficulties in
raising awareness in that country on gender issues in
the implementation of its disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programme.

At the national level, women's issues have been
among the Sudan's major priorities. The
Comprehensive Peace Agreement and the Darfur Peace
Agreement both included provisions to guarantee the
role and active participation in peacebuilding and the
implementation of its articles. Our traditions and
values accord women a particularly distinguished role
that takes into account their nature, preserves respect
for them and safeguards their rights, over and above
the requirements of these agreements and instruments.
Since independence, our national legislation has given
women a pioneering role and promoted their active
participation in all spheres.

Allow me to underline the fact that the Sudanese
parliament was the first legislative institution in the
region, during the period of national independence 50
years ago, in which women participated in free
elections, representing different segments of the
political spectrum. That principle has not changed
since independence; women are allocated a specific
quota in the parliament - more than in most countries
in the region.

Because of that early start, representation and
participation by women has continued to grow over
time. Women are represented at all levels of decision-
making, from the presidency of the Republic, to the
Cabinet, the parliament and, finally, various
institutions and ministries, in addition to their strong
presence in civil society organizations. Therefore the
participation of Sudanese women, side by side with
men, in the process of bringing about peace is already a
reality in terms of the issues with which we are dealing
today.

We are fully confident that today's Council
debate on the question of women, peace and security
will have a positive effect on the status and the role of
women in today's world. We would like to propose that
the remarks made by various delegations today lead to
a comprehensive action plan concerning women, peace
and security.

