Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing and for his
efforts and measures to combat sexual abuse within
the United Nations. France welcomes his determination
and exemplary mobilization to take all the necessary
measures to prevent and fight sexual exploitation and
abuse in the United Nations.

Sexual abuse committed by Blue Helmets, both
military and police, but also by United Nations civilian
personnel and international forces that do not operate
in the United Nations command, is unacceptable. That
is why France supports the Security Council draft
resolution on sexual abuse under consideration. It is
also why France supports the efforts of the Secretary-
General aimed at further strengthening the zero-
tolerance policy through concrete proposals. A number
of them have already been implemented; others are still
being considered in other forums. These exchanges,
this momentum, are positive and are encouraging with
regard to the future of peacekeeping operations.

The zero-tolerance policy regarding sexual
abuse must apply at all levels. First, at the level of
the United Nations, it must apply on the ground. In
peacekeeping operations, several operational measures
will make it possible to change the daily lives of the
local population: the repatriation of units suspected of
sexual abuse, the appointment of focal points within
peacekeeping operations to prevent sexual abuse, and
efforts to improve support for victims. All these steps
will contribute to changing the culture and reality of
peacekeeping operations.

However, zero tolerance does not concern only
the Blue Helmets. Unfortunately, among the civilian
personnel of the United Nations programmes and
agencies there have also been cases of sexual abuse,
including by those who tend to the needs of the most
vulnerable - refugees and displaced persons. That is
why France calls for stepped-up vigilance and efforts to
increase, through adapted infrastructure and means, the
protection of these populations, often marked by extreme
poverty and extreme weakness and are traumatized by
the violence of conflict. We owe special protection to
women and chilren, who are the first targets of various
acts of abuse, violence and exploitation in camps and
sites for refugees and displaced persons.

Zero tolerance must begin with its application at the
level of the United Nations, but zero tolerance applies
at the national level as well. It is the responsibility of
every State to take the necessary steps to prevent sexual
abuse and also to bring to justice those suspected of
such abuse. That is what we do in France.

With regard to prevention, our security forces in
France are systematically vetted regarding their history
in terms of respect for human rights, in keeping with
the policy required by the United Nations. Our security
forces are also systematically trained on the protection
of human rights and the fight against sexual abuse
before deployment. France intends to strengthen its
training and prevention system within the framework
of its security forces. France is also pleased to
announce that it will contribute to the financing of
the office of the Special Coordinator on improving
the United Nations response to sexual exploitation and
abuse,special Ms. Jane Holl Lute. We warmly welcome
her appointment.
Regarding the fight against impunity, France
deploys, as requested by the Secretary-General,
national investigation officers within its contingents in
order to respond rapidly to allegations. Furthermore, as
soon as allegations were reported in the Central African
Republic, French justice opened judicial proceedings to
shed full light on the situation. Justice must be carried
out ifthese allegations are confirmed, in a way mindful
of the fundamental principles of the law and with
respect for the independence of the judiciary.

Zero tolerance must also be applied at the regional
level. Regional organizations are not, unfortunately,
spared allegations of sexual abuse. That is why it is
essential to act at this level as well, especially as those
organizations are often key partners of the United
Nations in peacekeeping operations. Thus we call on
the African Union - which incudes countries that
contribute troops to the United Nations and through its
own missions acts both both upstream and downstream
of the Blue Helmets - to strengthen its cooperation
with the United Nations in these matters.

This public debate marks a movement for
peacekeeping operations from which there is no
turning back. They can no longer close their eyes and
remain silent about sexual abuse. Today the Concil
speaks publicly in order to break the silence and the
stigmatization that burdens the victims so as to send
them a message of hope.

Lastly, Iwould like to end on anote of encouragement
and thanks for the tens of thousands of soldiers and
police officers, from the United Nations or elsewhere,
who are not implicated in the allegations and who put
their lives on the line in order to save others. They
should know that we do not wish to stigmatize them for
the actions of others; on the contrary, we want to assure
them that they can continue to do their work with the
effectiveness it needs.

