Ms. Schlein (Israel): Gender equality and women's
empowerment comprise a core tenet of Israel's values.
Israel was the first country in the world to incorporate
parts of resolution 1325 (2000) into its national
legislation. The fourth amendment to the women's equal
rights law requires the Government to include women
from all parts of society in all national policymaking
teams and committees.

As part of Israel's international activities aimed
at achieving women's empowerment, Israel serves
as a member of the Commission on the Status of
Women. Beginning next year, Israel will also serve
as a member of the Executive Board of UN-Women,
with which we signed an agreement in 2016 that allows
for the advancement of joint projects. In addition,
Israel is a member of the Group of Friends of Women,
Peace and Security, headed by Canada. The group
promotes, inter alia, the integration of women into
decision-making forums.

Israeli efforts in the area of development and
the advancement of the Sustainable Development
Goals is expressed by means of a variety of
programmes and projects that are being promoted
by MASHAV - Israel's Agency for International
Development Cooperation - which works with United
Nations bodies to train women leaders. Already in
2003, the Golda Meir Mount Carmel International
Training Centre hosted an international conference
for women leaders entitled "Women's role in conflict
resolution and peacebuilding", which developed into a
series of training courses. Over the past 14 years, 36
seminars on women's role in conflict resolution and
peacebuilding, which promote dialogue between Israeli
and Palestinian women, have taken place, in which
1,075 women - Israeli and Palestinian - participated.

Some of the core elements of any successful policy-

development process, particularly in the areas of peace
and security, are cooperation, building partnerships,
sharing experiences and creating opportunities, all
of which are among the many negotiating strengths
associated with women. Last year, I was honoured to
be invited to join the Mediterranean Women Mediators
Network, a new framework initiated and supported by
the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Italy. This week,
I am privileged to participate in the regional women
mediator networks meeting here in New York, which
will bring together representatives of women mediator
networks from various parts of the world, United
Nations officers and representatives of civil society
and academia. My fellow participants bring to the table
the wealth of hundreds of years of combined experience
as mediators, diplomats, researchers and officers, but
also as community members, mothers and sisters.
This combined human wealth is incredible, creating
indispensable knowledge, insights and inner strength.

Inclusiveness serves goals far beyond that of
creating equal opportunities. It creates a significant
new value. We need to amplify women's voices and
incorporate their added value. It is not just a question
of women and gender issues; it is a question of peace
and security.

Scientific research has demonstrated a strong
correlation between inclusiveness and the sustainability
of peace agreements. In an article published in August,
Jana Krause of the University of Amsterdam and her
colleagues show that women's active participation
in peace negotiations leads to better accord content,
higher agreement-implementation rates and longer-
lasting peace. Their statistical results show a robust
relationship between peace agreements with women
signatories and peace durability. They further found
that peace agreements signed by women show a
significantly higher number of agreement provisions
and a higher implementation rate of such provisions
than those not signed by women. Women's direct
participation in negotiations therefore improves both
accord quality and provision-implementation rates. As
an illustration, they found a higher rate of provision
implementation 10 years after agreements were signed,
as compared to agreements not signed by women. Those
findings were substantiated with qualitative case-study
evidence derived from looking into decades of peace
processes and agreements.

Resolution 1325 (2000) calls for greater
representation of women in national decision-making,
especially in the areas of conflict prevention and
resolution. Yet, unfortunately, the voices of women are
still excluded from most peace-negotiation tables. It is
our collective duty to take concrete steps to get women
seats at the table. We can no longer afford to exclude the
talents and insights of half the population in the pursuit
of peace.

We need a more inclusive approach to peace and
security and a broader gender perspective - a shift
in paradigms and perceptions of and attitudes towards
women's participation. If we want a better future, we
need to adopt a new value-based approach and lobby for
inclusive peace processes. We need to open the doors
and provide women with access to decision-making,
negotiations and the actual table. That is the only way
forward. Let us all work together towards access and
seats at the table for women.

