Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French): We
thank you, Sir, for having convened this debate. The
participation of a number of ministers shows the
importance that Member States and the Security
Council attach to the topic of women and peace and
security. We also welcome the presence of Under-
Secretary-General Michelle Bachelet.

Switzerland associates itself with the joint
statement of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace
and Security, delivered by the representative of
Canada, and the joint statement of the Human Security
Network, delivered by the representative of Costa Rica.

When entering the building this morning,
participants passed by our exhibit "N0 Women - No
Peace" in the entrance hall. You saw the curtain with
the portraits of the 1,000 women nominated for the
Nobel Peace Prize in 2005, looking down at the rickety
peace table on the opposite side of the hall. I hope that,
10 years from now, these women will not be looking at
that table, but sitting around it, as active and respected
negotiating partners in all peace processes.

You are perhaps surprised, Sir, that I am wearing
a scarf today. As chair of the Burundi configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission, I travelled to
Bujumbura a few weeks ago, and I had the opportunity
to meet with women's organizations there. During the
elections, they had decided to wear a white shawl like
this in public to show their desire for peace. That
initiative had a significant impact in successfully
limiting the violence during the election phase. Today,
I would like to carry the voices of these women into
this Chamber, commending them for their courage and
determination. In fact, I had promised them that I
would wear this scarf at my first appearance before the
Security Council, and I am going to keep that promise.
As the Council can see, the word "amahoro" is still
here, which means, ifI am not mistaken, "peace" in
Kirundi.

But civil society is not the only one with the
capacity and responsibility to create peace. It is also up
to the Security Council, as the parent of resolution
1325 (2000). The Council must use of all the
instruments at its disposal.

We welcome the establishment, in that regard, of
a set of global indicators, which the Council will
endorse today. This represents important progress in
ensuring follow-up to resolution 1325 (2000).
However, the application of these indicators calls for
political leadership by the Council. Switzerland
therefore supports the idea of a "1325 lead country"
and the creation of a single comprehensive framework
to support the implementation of the resolution. UN
Women could contribute to this goal by creating a 1325
office within its institution.

We hope that Margot Wallstrom, who was
appointed under resolution 1888 (2009), will play a
significant role as an interlocutor for conversations
between the United Nations system and the Security
Council. We also hope that she will provide the
Council with detailed information on instances of
sexual violence. The recent events in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo remind us of the urgent need to
put an end to the cruel practice of using rape as a
method of warfare.

Resolution 1820 (2008) affirmed the Council's
intention to consider targeted sanctions against parties
to armed conflict who commit rape. In addition, we
have international criminal justice instruments at our
disposal, in particular the International Criminal Court,
to ensure that such crimes do not go unpunished.
However, it should be kept in mind that States bear the
primary responsibility to prevent such crimes and to
bring perpetrators to justice.

The representative of Liechtenstein just
mentioned the monthly action points of the NGO
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security, which
we support together with them. In addition, we are
offering the Council a handbook, prepared by
PeaceWomen, highlighting the various obligations that
derive from the resolution, with many best practice
examples as guidance. Here is the handbook, it is
available, and I urge participants to use it.

As Member States, we are also called upon to

systematically apply a gender perspective in our

political processes. Switzerland adopted a national

action plan early on, which has proved to be a useful

instrument. Our second and revised national action
plan will come into force within the next few days.

When participants leave the building today, I
encourage them to take another look at the exhibit in
the entrance hall. Walking on the red carpet, they will
see which countries have adopted national action plans
to date. And they will notice that there is still plenty of
space for many more.

