Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to thank you, Madam President,
for resuming this open debate on such an important
issue as the women and peace and security agenda. I
would also like to thank the briefers for their testimony
and the important elements provided.

Today's debate is highly symbolic, as it paves the
way for the celebration of the twentieth anniversary
of historic resolution 1325 (2000). Almost 20 years
after its adoption, a considerable gap remains
between the announced commitments on gender
mainstreaming - in peacekeeping, conflict resolution
and prevention - and concrete implementation on the
ground due to the multiple hurdles that have developed
over the decades. That raises the question of the
reasons, which are innumerable and multidimensional,
that explain the persistent distance between the stated
objectives on the one hand and their implementation on
the other. In response to that question, let me highlight
a few points.

First, decisive action is needed to prevent conflicts
and avoid crises. Conflict prevention is a central pillar
of the women and peace and security agenda, but also
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. It is
not just about ending war and violence; the aim is to
address the root causes, predictive factors and warning
signs of conflict, and to systematically integrate a
gender approach into peace processes. Secondly,
gender equality must be promoted and the rights of
women and girls, which are essential for international
peace and security, must be respected. Thirdly, there
is a need to fight impunity and strengthen access to
justice for victims of sexual violence. Fourthly, a gender
perspective must be included in the United Nations
architecture for sustainability and peacebuilding.

In order to promote the women and peace and
security agenda in accordance with resolution 1325
(2000), the Kingdom of Morocco has launched and
actively participates in a significant number of
initiatives, including the network of focal points
on the theme of women and peace and security,
the Mediterranean Women Mediators Network,
the FemWise-Africa network and the Arab Women
Mediators Network, as well as the Global Alliance
of Women Mediator Networks. Moreover, Morocco
organized an international conference on the theme
of women, peace, security and development under
resolution 1325 (2000), which examined the issues of
the role of women in mediation, conflict prevention and
the issue of deradicalization.

In addition, Morocco also organized the training of
imams and preachers from several African, European
and Arab countries, to give guidelines on the true,
peaceful principles of religion, based on tolerance and
acceptance of others.

Moroccan female personnel are regularly deployed
within Royal Armed Forces contingents. Currently, 37
Moroccan women are deployed in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic, and the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It is important to note that the
number of women deployed by the end of 2017 stood
at only eight, whereas in 2016 there were none. The
rapid deployment force in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo today includes a specific unit made up of
female personnel. Similarly, Morocco has achieved the
15 per cent of mission experts and military observers
target in that category. Morocco also deploys female
military observers in the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan.

In the context of child protection and conflict
prevention, the Kingdom of Morocco recently acceded
to the Safe Schools Declaration and the Vancouver
Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the
Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers.

Finally, I am pleased to announce that the Kingdom
of Morocco is at advanced stage of developing its
national action Plan on women and peace and security
for the period 2020 to 2022, as part of an inclusive
process involving all relevant ministerial departments,
representatives of civil society and United Nations
agencies, including UN-Women.

