Ms. Power (United States of America): I welcome
the chance to participate in this debate on issues that
are central to the mission of the United Nations and to
the future of us all. I thank the Secretary-General for
his recent report (S/2013/525), his presence here today
and the personal commitment he has made to women
and peace and security.

I also would like to thank Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-
Ngcuka for her testimony and for her tremendous
leadership of UN Women. We know that the best is
still ahead, and we are delighted to have her in that
role. I would like to thank High Commissioner for
Human Rights Pillay, who has spent her whole career
pressing the agenda, with significant returns. I also
thank Ms. Balipou, not only for her remarks and for
undertaking an arduous journey to be with us here
today but also for advocating with such eloquence on
behalf of women's participation and on behalf of the
rule of law, which go very much together in the Central
African Republic and beyond. What she does takes
courage, an we commend her for it.
Resolution 1325 (2000) was a landmark measure.
It affirmed the principle that women's participation
in conflict prevention, mitigation and recovery was
vital to the maintenance of international security and
peace - not a sideshow, but vital. That reality is in
turn linked to the achievement of all eight of the
Millennium Development Goals, whether directly, as
in women's empowerment, or as a logical consequence,
as in the areas of universal education, maternal health,
child mortality and environmental protection. Progress
towards one of those essential Goals will make gains
easier in the others. All are connected to women's
participation in peace and security.

Today's debate, as we know, focuses on one
particular aspect of that linkage, which is the rule
of law. That focus is appropriate because the law is
diminished in any country where half of the population
is denied the chance to shape it. Years ago, I bore witness
as a journalist to the brutal violence in the Balkans.
There mass rape was used as a tactic of war, and the
means of accountability had to be created through
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. However, it was created only after tens of
thousands of people had already died. We have learned
through hard experience that wars are increasingly
carried out less by professional troops than by irregular
forces, leading to more civilian casualties, economic
disruption and displaced families. During the chaos of
armed conflict, legal systems are often bypassed, and
sexual predators, we found, do their worst.

In the wake of such suffering, we understand that
inadequate governance and limited resources may
complicate the task of recovery and healing. There is,
however, one standard that we can live up to regardless
of the situation. That is the principle of inclusion.
Whether a country is rich or poor, there is no excuse for
denying women fair representation when negotiating
the terms of the peace, when enacting laws or when
forging a conflict-free future.

The United Nations should be a standard setter and,
according to the Secretary-General's September report,
some important progress is being made. In the past
year, as we have heard, women were included in every
formal peace-negotiating process led or co-led by the
United Nations. Gender experts were present in 85 per
cent of delegations. In each case, representatives of
women's civil society groups were consulted. Women
are playing a more prominent role in crisis prevention,
most notably in Darfur and the Great Lakes region. Since

2009, gender crimes investigators have been a part of
all United Nations commissions of inquiry, and as was
said, this year 3 out of 10 peace agreements in United
Nations-supported processes included provisions for
women's political participation or protection. That is
more than the year before.

An analysis of women and security is now included
in most reports by peacekeeping and special political
missions. The Secretary-General has established, and
my Government and other Governments vigorously
support, the policy of zero tolerance towards
sexual-related abuses committed by United Nations
personnel, something that still happens with alarming
incidence.

Less impressive, however, is the level of women's
participation in police and military deployments. The
figures of 10 per cent and 3 per cent, respectively,
remain well below the modest target of 20 per cent
that had been set for next year. Just as disappointing,
only 4 of the 27 peace-related field missions are led
by women. Moreover, we have all deplored the horrific
sexual crimes being carried out daily in Syria, where
rape has again become a routine weapon of war.

The Council is just back from the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where we met
with internally displaced persons, peacekeepers and
civil society who described a near pandemic of sexual
violence associated with the conflict there. Clearly,
the involvement of women in peace and security is a
goal that must be approached from many directions
simultaneously. That is why the United States
encourages every country to develop an action plan.

My Government announced its own blue print
two years ago, after broad consultations with civil
society. The plan lays out a comprehensive strategy
for incorporating women in efforts to prevent conflict,
provide humanitarian protection, foster food security
and ensure fair treatment under the law. That plan is
backed by leaders across the United States Government.
President Obama is personally determined to change
the DNA of the United States Government so that the
inexorable link between women's inclusion and lasting
peace is a premise, or an axiom, brought to every
policy discussion. President Obama and Secretary of
State Kerry have ordered its full integration into our
diplomacy. The Defence Department is spreading the
message of gender awareness to partners across the
globe. Our Justice Department is working with police,
prosecutors and judges to increase accountability for
sexual violence, and the Centers for Disease Control
have launched a system for monitoring abuse against
women and girls. As the Secretary-General's report
acknowledges, there remain troubling gaps in what we
know about women and security, but one thing we have
learned is that there is a correlation between gender
inequity and the potential for civil strife.

Let us consider, for example, the Central African
Republic, which ranks 138th out of 146 on the United
Nations Development Programme's Gender Inequality
Index. Even before the explosion of Violence, teen
pregnancy was out of control and the rate of unhealthy
births and maternal deaths was far too high. The
situation is now a catastrophe as rebels have replaced
law with anarchy and, as we have heard, a quarter of
a million people have been driven from their homes.
The depth of that crisis underlines the importance of
Ms. Balipou's presence here today. It is vital that her
message of inclusion be heeded.

The Secretary-General's report reminds us that
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) must go
forward with both the short and long terms in mind.
Our ultimate goal is a transformation in how people
everywhere think about security. Our daily focus is on
the incremental changes that will lead us in the right
direction. Because of UN Women and its partners,
numerous productive initiatives are under way. Those
range from the peacebuilding efforts of women in
Mali to new legal protection measures in Colombia to
smoother access to justice in Haiti to the enhanced role
for women in the police of Zimbabwe. Women are also
playing an important part in preparing for elections in
Sierra Leone and in harnessing new communications
technology to monitor and report on violations in the
Sudan and other areas of conflict.

There is cumulative power in the new voices being
heard, and when opportunities arise some civil society
leaders are making the leap from outside advocacy to
positions of political power. We have seen in Kenya
civil society deeply engaged in a five-year campaign,
endorsed by the United Nations, to enshrine the rights
of women to own land, live equally in marriage and
be free from the threat of violence, and on the election
day this past spring a record 87 women were chosen
for Parliament - a number that, pursuant to the
country's new Constitution, will increase further in the
years ahead. We also commend Rwanda, 62 per cent
of whose parliamentarians are now women, which is a
remarkable statistic.

We know too that what begins as a single voice
can sometimes become a mighty chorus. Like many
here, I recently had the honour of meeting Malala
Yousafzai, the young Pakistani with the soft smile
and the steel spine, as well as a powerful message of
inclusion. Whether discussing the right ofa girl to sit in
a classroom or the right of a woman to lead her country
in the quest for security and peace, the principle is the
same and the dividend for peace, for dignity and for
prosperity of women's inclusion is obvious.

At least since the adoption ofresolution 1325 (2000)
13 years ago, the international community has agreed on
the direction in which we want to move. As we continue
to go forward, let us confront honestly the obstacles
that remain before us. Let us create a spin-free zone on
resolution 1325 (2000) and its implementation and let
us not conflate effort with results. They are different.
Let us instead take concrete steps so that women share
fully in efforts to avoid and contain conflict, just as
they inevitably share in the suffering when such efforts
are poorly designed or when they fail.

Make no mistake - the engagement of women
in peace and security does not reflect a desire for
disengagement by men. The principle that guides
us is respect for the rights and dignity of all. To end
and recover from strife we seek the leadership and
participation of each gender and every nationality. Just
as all benefit from peace, so all must help to create
peace.

