Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate
on women and peace and security. We join others
in thanking the Secretary-General for his strong
message on the critical importance of realizing the
full implementation of this agenda. We also thank
Executive Director Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka for her
frank briefing and offer our continued support to UN-
Women for its work in advancing this agenda. Our
thanks also go to Ms. Randa Siniora Atallah for her
important presentation.

As a member of the Group of Friends of Women,
Peace and Security, the United Arab Emirates endorses
the Group's joint statement to be delivered by the
representative of Canada.

The United Arab Emirates also adds its voice to
those congratulating Ms. Nadia Murad and Dr. Denis
Mukwege on being awarded the 2018 Nobel Peace Prize.
They have tirelessly dedicated themselves to bringing a
spotlight to the plight of survivors of conflict-related
sexual violence. Their work has tangibly improved
the lives of those affected. It is a strong signal of how
individual voices can - and must - put women and

peace and security at the heart of the global agenda.

Ultimately, Member States hold the primary
responsibility for advancing the women and peace
and security agenda; the burden of action is on us.
As the Executive Director's briefing showed, we are
lagging woefully behind in our targets. The Secretary-
General's report (S/2018/900), as she stated, should
sound a loud alarm bell on systemic failures to bring
women into peacekeeping. In fact, the implementation
of this agenda on the ground remains a challenge due
to, as we know, a confluence of threats ranging from
the rise in terrorism and extremism to the targeting of
women and girls in conflict zones and the protracted
nature of the crises. However, the disappointingly low
number of women in peacebuilding - where women
make up only 2 per cent of mediators, 5 per cent of
witnesses and signatories and 8 percent of negotiators
in formal peace processes - is not acceptable. We must
all commit to improving those numbers - in fact, our
financial contributions should go hand in hand with a
demand that women's participation in peace processes
reach the 50 per cent mark.
The United Arab Emirates recognizes that
financing is critical for the effective implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda in order to
move words into action. That is why we have recently
launched a "100 per cent women" policy,which aims
to ensure that, by 2021, 100 per cent of bilateral and
multilateral foreign assistance will target or integrate
gender equality and women's empowerment as key
components of our policy and programming. We hope
that model is replicated and more widely adopted,
because research continues to demonstrate the direct
relationship between gender equality and the prevention
of conflict. We believe that such a policy is a real and
tangible way to achieve that.

The United Arab Emirates, like others, also
considers its partnership with UN-Women as a key
part of the global strategy to implement the women and
peace and security agenda. The 2018 contribution of
the United Arab Emirates to UN-Women of $5 million
is unearmarked, but we have urged UN-Women to
use part of those funds to ensure the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda around
the world. We urge others to join us in supporting UN-
Women with both words and financial action.

Responding to the Secretary-General's call to
increase the number of women in peacekeeping, the
United Arab Emirates General Women's Union, our
Ministry of Defence and UN-Women will organize
a military and peacekeeping training for Arab
women - the first of its kind in our region and certainly
a step in the right direction.

The United Arab Emirates would like to make
three recommendations as we work in partnership with
Member States, the United Nations and the international
community to drive global progress on this agenda.

First, to state the obvious, financing is essential.
The United Arab Emirates endorses the Secretary-
General's recommendation for all the relevant United
Nations operational entities to track targeted and
mainstreamed budgetary allocations and expenditures
related to women and peace and security. That data
will serve to indicate the progress achieved towards
reaching or exceeding the minimum 15 per cent target
for programmes that further gender equality and
women's empowerment in peacebuilding contexts. We
understand that financial support is required if we are
to truly promote women's participation in peace and
security, which is why we are directing our funding
that way.
Secondly, we reiterate the calls of the Secretary-
General to improve gender parity in peace operations,
not just for the sake of proclaiming gender parity but as
an operational imperative.

Finally, it is critical that we advance women's
meaningful participation in peace processes around the
world and that we continue to document our progress.
We must not neglect informal peace processes in that
agenda - we know that, since the end of the Cold
War, more than half of informal peace processes have
involved concerted efforts by women's groups to
forge peace. Track 1 and track 2 peace processes must
therefore both be supported in that endeavour.

Women's meaningful participation is at the heart
of the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda. The United Arab Emirates will
continue to promote women's participation as a key
principle of our global peace and security efforts.

