The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Japan.

Six years after the adoption of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000), it is again time to take stock of
the progress made and renew our commitment to move
towards achieving the goals set out in this important
resolution.

The consolidation of peace encompasses an
endeavour and a process that require a comprehensive
approach, involving all stakeholders and sustained
international support, including that of the United
Nations. Women play critical roles in such endeavours
and processes, and landmark resolution 1325 (2000)
has contributed significantly to enhancing women's
ability to fully commit themselves to rebuilding their
communities, ensuring sustainable peace and
preventing the recurrence of conflict. This has been
and continues to be an essential pillar in the
consolidation of peace.

I take this opportunity to commend all the efforts
made by the Special Adviser on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women, by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, by the United Nations
Development Fund for Women and by all other
development, humanitarian, human rights and
advocacy agencies, organizations and groups, both
inside and outside the United Nations system, for
promoting the goals set out in resolution 1325 (2000),
while fully admitting that there still remains a lot that
needs to be done.
We welcome the fact that, in the Peacebuilding
Commission, which is focusing on Sierra Leone and
Burundi, the importance of integrating gender
perspectives into peacebuilding activities is
specifically and emphatically noted. We expect that the
outcome of today's debate, along with useful
suggestions that have been made, will be reflected
appropriately in the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission so as to further assist in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

In our view, the debate on the role of women and
peace and security and the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) should inform and be informed
by the concept of human security and the people-
centred approach that it advocates. Promoting the
empowerment of each individual and protecting
individuals from threats to their safety and basic well-
being is the ultimate goal of human security.
Implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) should
contribute to enhancing human security for women. It
should also promote institutional reforms that integrate
the needs and priorities of women so as to strengthen
their empowerment and protection.

As part of its efforts to promote human security
in practice on the ground, Japan helped set up the
United Nations Trust Fund for Human Security in
1999. During the past few years, the Trust Fund has
supported over 160 projects in more than 90 countries
and regions, and many of them have contributed
towards the empowerment and protection of women
and children. With this end in mind, many of the
projects approved under the Trust Fund are
implemented in partnership with non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) and civil society groups active
in this field. One example is that of a local NGO,
Dushirehamwe, in Burundi, coordinated by Ms.
Christine Miturumbwe, who delivered a statement here
today. Among other activities, Dushirehamwe is
implementing a project that aims to help returnees and
internally displaced women to improve their economic
capacities, thereby facilitating communal reconciliation
and coexistence between the local population and the
returnees and internally displaced persons.

Women's participation has enormous significance
in ensuring the consolidation of peace and community
reconstruction. Resolution 1325 (2000) provides the
necessary framework, and it needs to be implemented
with all the vigour and support it deserves, and Japan
intends to continue to do its utmost to contribute to that
end.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

At this juncture, I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Comoros, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda.

In accordance with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the consideration
without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Aboud
(Comoros) took a seat at the side of the Council
Chamber.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.


