Mr. Kau (Fiji): Mr. President, I should like to
thank you and the members of the Council for the
opportunity to speak on the subject of women, peace
and security.

Fiji aligns itself with the statement made by the
Permanent Representative of Papua New Guinea on
behalf of the Pacific Islands Forum.

We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2006/770) on women, peace and security. The report
has identified the gaps and opportunities presented by
the System-wide Action Plan and accordingly provides
for some remedies. We urge the Council to adopt its
recommendations, and we also call on Member States
to play their respective roles as necessary.

Fiji regards Security Council resolution 1325
(2000) as the international instrument guiding national
policies and practices in all aspects of conflict
prevention, peace negotiations and post-conflict
reconstruction. More importantly, the resolution is the
authority on gender dimensions and the role of women
in these areas, in particular in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. We therefore support the call for the
expeditious implementation of actions that would
enhance and accelerate the implementation of the
resolution, in particular by the United Nations system
through the engagement of Member States and other
actors.

All parts of the United Nations system must, in
partnership with Member States, own and drive the
process if the gender equality measures outlined in the
resolution are to be realized.

We also call on the international community and
partners to help Member States in need of assistance in
the implementation process. An area needing
immediate attention is the development of national
action plans as a remedy for unsystematic and ad hoc
implementation at the national level. Small developing
countries such as Fiji need guidance and partnerships
in the areas of capacity and technical skills on the
formulation and implementation of national plans and
strategies based on resolution 1325 (2000). Such action
plans and strategies must be developed after wide
consultations with civil society organizations and other
stakeholders and should include monitoring and
reporting mechanisms.
For six years, the Security Council has been
seized of the issue, but, despite the achievement of
some milestones, - which include the formulation of
the Plan - we believe that more could be achieved.
The options of a focal point and an expert-level
working group to ensure the effective integration of the
resolution into the Council's work are propositions that
Fiji continues to advocate. As a member of the
inaugural Peacebuilding Commission, we will be
calling for more active efforts from both the
Commission and the Support Office to ensure effective
action-oriented programmes to ensure for women's
involvement in peacebuilding.

Our Pacific leaders, at their meeting held in Nadi,
Fiji, this week, reaffirmed their commitment to the
operationalization of resolution 1325 (2000) in Forum
Island countries. The secretariat of the Forum has been
charged with providing appropriate technical assistance
to member countries through the frameworks of the
Pacific Plan and the 2000 Biketawa Declaration.

We also commend other partners, and in
particular the United Nations Development Fund for
Women (UNIFEM), which has been a strong player in
advancing the resolution through its programmes on
women, peace and security in the region, for their
support and assistance in national programmes. Fiji has
been a direct beneficiary of UNIFEM. support
programmes in the Pacific, for which we are grateful,
and we ask other United Nations agencies to follow
suit.

A project funded by the United States Agency for

International Development (USAID) - "Resolution
1325 for policy makers and non-governmental
organizations" - in Solomon Islands, Papua New

Guinea and Fiji will see the training of a core group of
women's non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and
key policymakers on resolution 1325 (2000), ensure its
translation into local languages and adopt appropriate
strategies for its implementation.

Women in Fiji have been active in peacekeeping
efforts, even though we continue to be confronted with
challenges and limitations that include a lack of
capacity and of an appropriate policy to ensure their
full integration and empowerment. It is in that regard
that we seek greater assistance and partnership
opportunities, including the sharing of experiences, to
enhance the participation of our women in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Gender training

conducted by the Fiji Women's Crisis Centre for some
Fiji police and military units, particularly those
involved in peacekeeping activities, is an example of
effective partnership at the local level.

In Fiji's Women's Plan of Action 1999-2008 we
have clearly acknowledged our commitment to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) by bringing
about further progress in gender equality through
various empowerment strategies for women in Fiji.
Whilst we have yet to fully realize the potential of our
women, the prevalent political will and the efforts of
our Government and civil society, coupled with the
support of United Nations agencies and the
international community, should yield positive results
with respect to the implementation of the resolution in
Fiji and the Pacific region.

