Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania): We
too thank the delegation of Japan for organizing this
important debate on women and peace and security. In
our view it is important for the Security Council to
continue examining how resolution 1325 (2000) can
best be implemented. We are therefore grateful for the
insightful introductions this morning by Ms. Mayanja,
Mr. Guehenno, Ms. Heyzer and Ms. McAskie, as well
as those by the representatives of civil society this
afternoon. We wish to associate ourselves with the
statement to be made later by the Permanent
Representative of the Kingdom of Lesotho on behalf of
the Southern African Development Community
(SADC).

We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2006/770) on the review of the United Nations
System-wide Action Plan for the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000). We are
encouraged by the progress made in the
implementation of the Action Plan. The challenge is to
sustain the momentum and progress achieved while
striving to overcome the gaps and challenges in the
implementation of the Action Plan. In this regard, we
support the Secretary-General's recommendation that
the Action Plan be renewed beyond 2007. The wealth
of knowledge, information and good practices that
have been gathered in the implementation process
needs to be widely shared.

While there is a wide consensus on the positive
contributions that women bring to peacebuilding and to
consultations on peace, their effective participation
cannot happen without aid, for the magnitude of the
challenges we face remains great. In the name of
tradition, culture or even security, women have
continued to be excluded from decision-making with
respect to conflicts. Too often they have been set aside
while men brokered peace agreements. Thankfully,
more and more women are challenging this viewpoint
and are increasingly demanding involvement as
stakeholders in their communities. Their potential as
peacebuilders must be harnessed.

Concerted efforts are required to support and
strengthen the capacities of women and their networks
so that they can participate in all processes of
peacebuilding and peace consolidation. In this regard,
we commend the efforts that have been undertaken by
various stakeholders, in particular those in the United
Nations system and civil society and various national
political leaders, in promoting the participation of
women in peacebuilding and peace consolidation
processes.

While we are encouraged by the increased
participation of women in countries emerging from
conflict, we are still concerned with the low
representation of women across all areas and levels of
decision-making processes. Affirmative action is a
strategy that ought to be considered in areas that have
significantly low representation. This is an important
measure in all societies that have to address existing

gaps.
In addition to addressing this shortcoming,
women in conflict and post-conflict situations also
need support to ensure that their voices can articulate
issues of their concern and that they are heard and
taken into account. In this regard, gender equality
advocacy needs to be addressed consistently, not as a
single event. Men and boys also have a role to play in
the promotion of women's rights and gender equality,
and we need to actively engage them as well.

The promotion of gender equality needs the
commitment of the political leadership and needs
institutions that are gender-sensitive. The creation and
strengthening of national gender machinery in
countries emerging from conflict need to be supported,
so as to facilitate the implementation and monitoring of
the various gender-equality and women's advancement
instruments, including resolution 1325 (2000).

We note with concern persistent violations of
women's rights and, in particular, gender-based sexual
violence perpetrated against women in conflict and
post-conflict situations. We strongly condemn all such
violations. The perpetrators of these violations need to
be prosecuted, and redress must be made to women
who have faced such horrific acts.

In addition to protection from gender-based and
sexual violence, women need justice in many other
arenas, such as access to and control of productive
resources, for example, land. The economic
empowerment of women is necessary if we are to
protect women and children from their vulnerability to
sexual violence and abuse, exploitation and HIV/AIDS
infection. In this regard, the mainstreaming of a gender
perspective in judicial reform and the security sector
needs to supported as a priority issue.

While strongly condemning all acts of sexual
violence, it is encouraging to observe how the
Secretariat, especially the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, is confronting unlawful practices in
peacekeeping missions. We support measures
undertaken by the Secretary-General to curb these
shameful crimes. We urge all troop-contributing
countries to ensure that personnel are well informed
and properly trained to prevent the commission of such
offences. Furthermore, all acts of violations should be
investigated and the culprits brought to justice.
We are encouraged by the establishment of the
Peacebuilding Commission. The Commission, given
adequate resources, has a significant role to play in

addressing gender equality in all spheres, and in
particular during the process of developing country
strategies for peace consolidation. The Peacebuilding
Commission and its Support Office will, however,
require capacity-building and support in its endeavours
to mainstream a gender perspective. In this regard, we
would encourage that a gender expert be included in
the Support Office.

Resolution 1325 (2000) makes it clear that we
can no longer afford to neglect the abuses to which
women and girls are subjected during armed conflicts
and in their aftermath; nor can we ignore women's
contributions in the search for peace. We have a
responsibility to support the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) as a way of harnessing
women's contributions to peacebuilding, to our
communities and to our countries.

