Ms. Mehdiyeva (Azerbaijan): At the outset, we
would like to thank the presidency of the Plurinational
State of Bolivia for convening today's open debate on
women and peace and security, and to welcome the
focus of this discussion on the political and economic
empowerment of women.

We would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his yearly report on women and peace and security
(S/2018/900), which identifies the empowerment of
women and gender equality as cross-cutting issues
and outlines the main challenges affecting women
and girls, as well as the areas in which progress has
been achieved. We fully concur with the Secretary-
General that the significance of the equal participation
of women in the economy and in peace processes
cannot be downplayed, and that factors constraining
their inclusion must be tackled. Women have a critical
role to play in promoting and maintaining international
peace and security. Resolutions 1325 (2000) and 2122
(2013) have recognized the importance of women's
participation in conflict prevention and resolution
and peacebuilding.

Millions of women and girls around the world are
disproportionately affected by the impacts of armed
conflict, poverty, gender bias, discrimination and other
forms of disparity. Conflict-related sexual violence is
often used as a tool of humiliation and intimidation.
The devastating health consequences of violence
against women, their children and thus to society are
clear. Regardless of the circumstances and settings in
which violence takes place, perpetrators must be held
accountable for their action. It is the responsibility of
Member States to ensure that women and girls do not
suffer due to their gender.

As a country a part of whose territory is under
military occupation, with accompanying ethnic
cleansing and other atrocity crimes committed against
its civilian population, we consider the safety of
civilians to be of the utmost importance. More than
1 million Azerbaijani refugees and internally displaced
persons, half of whom are women, have been displaced
from their homes and have continued to suffer for the
past 30 years. The international community should not
remain indifferent to the plight of women and girls in
armed conflicts and has a duty to protect them from
harm. Among the pressing issues requiring urgent
action is that of civilians, including women and children
taken hostage and reported missing in connection
with armed conflict. Azerbaijan continues its efforts
to raise awareness of the problem at the international
level, including through the relevant General Assembly
resolutions and the Commission on the Status of
Women, of which my country is a main sponsor.

Prevention is the most effective strategy to empower
women and girls, as it allows us to pre-emptively
address obstacles limiting their ability to reach their full
potential. In that regard, enacting gender-responsive
policies and mechanisms can create an environment
that is supportive and conducive to women's success.
In recent years, a number of important policies and
programmes aimed at ameliorating the situation of
women have been implemented in Azerbaijan.

From 2016 to 2017, the State Committee for Family,
Women and Children Affairs of Azerbaijan, together
with the United Nations Population Fund and other
partners, carried out a project on the elaboration of the
national action plan on women and peace and security.
A working group on women and peace and security,
representing women from different organizations, was
established for that purpose and oversaw the preparation
of the draft national action plan. In May 2018, the State
Committee held the fifth women's forum, which was
dedicated to the hundredth anniversary of women's
suffrage in Azerbaijan. That event marked one of the
most important milestones in the history of Azerbaijan,
which in 1918 granted women the right to vote.

The economic empowerment of rural women and
girls, who represent 77 per cent ofthe female population
of Azerbaijan, is among the key priority areas of our
Government. Since 2011, the State Committee and the
United Nations Development Programme have jointly
implemented a project on promoting rural women's
participation in economic and social life. A number of
women with disabilities have developed business skills,
some of them have established businesses of their own,
and many women have benefited from gender equality
sessions held in schools. Water and sanitation systems,
which were installed in six locations throughout the
country, improved access to clean water and sanitation
infrastructure for schoolgirls.

We have made great strides in achieving gender
parity in State institutions. The representation ofwomen
in the National Assembly increased from 11 per cent
in 2005 to 17 per cent in 2015. At the municipal level,
women represented 35 per cent of elected candidates
after the 2014 elections, as compared to 4 per cent
in 2004. The proportion of women appointed to key
Government positions has also significantly increased
in recent years. By the end of2016, 80 ofthe 87 executive
power bodies in Azerbaijan had women deputy heads.
Azerbaijan has acceded to all major international
agreements in the field of women's rights and gender
equality. We remain committed to advancing the
rights of women and ensuring their full and effective
participation in the decision-making processes.
