Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): The delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic
would like to commend you, Mr. President, on your
initiative in convening this important meeting on
women, peace and security. This attests yet again to the
fact that the Security Council devotes particular
attention to the role of women and to their contribution
to the settlement of armed conflicts, peacekeeping and
peace-building.

Security Council resolution 1325 (2000)
represented a qualitative step in the work of the
Security Council to enhance the role of women in
establishing peace and sustainable development. That
resolution also contributed significantly to defining the
critical components that countries must address
scrupulously and with sincerity.

Allow me at the outset warmly to welcome the
statement made by Ms. Angela King, Assistant
Secretary-General and Special Adviser on Gender
Issues and on the Advancement of Women. We also
warmly welcome here Ms. Noeleen Heyzer, Executive
Director of the United Nations Development Fund for
Women.

It is a well-known fact that women and girls
constitute the main civilian victims in times of conflict
because of their vulnerability. It is estimated that 80
per cent of refugees and internally displaced persons in
many countries in conflict are women and girls.

We must therefore seek to determine the root
causes of these conflicts, in order to alleviate the
suffering of women. In many cases, these causes
include occupation, aggression and repression, not to
mention poverty. We believe that it is essential for
women to assume an important role. Indeed, women
should be key partners in the decision-making process
in order to move forward towards the establishment of
peace and development.

In this connection, we are in agreement with the
main ideas and opinions set out in the two statements
made earlier by Ms. King and Ms. Heyzer,
respectively.

One of the objectives of the Beijing Conference
on Women - set out in the 2000 Platform for
Action- in which Syria actively participated, was
addressing the growing role of women in the settlement
of conflicts at the decision-making level and in the
establishment of peace, peacekeeping and peace-
building. Of course, we support greater gender
mainstreaming in peacekeeping and disarmament, and
we stress the role of women in the decision-making
process aimed at putting an end to violence.

Here I should like to remind the international
community of the status of women in the Syrian Arab
Republic, in Palestine and in Lebanon and of their
suffering as a result of foreign occupation. Israel's
practices - oppression, killing, destruction, torture
and displacement - against Arab women represent a
flagrant violation of international humanitarian law, of
basic human rights and of all objectives set out by the
United Nations in this field.

Arab women in the occupied Syrian Golan and in
the occupied Palestinian territories live under tragic
and inhumane circumstances. They do not enjoy even a
minimum level of protection, health care, employment
or education, in addition to being denied their basic
human rights.

Under such circumstances, the status of Arab
women, who suffer from the oppression of occupation
and the inhumane practices carried out by the
occupying forces, will not improve unless those
practices come to an end. Those practices run counter
to everything we heard in the statements made so far
this morning. Furthermore, the establishment of a just
and comprehensive peace would help Arab women to
continue their struggle against poverty and all forms of
violence.

Here we would like to draw attention to the fact
that many of the victims of the Israeli massacre in the
Gaza Strip two days ago were women and children.

The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic is
determined to ensure full gender quality through its
national legislation as well as equal opportunities for
women and men in all walks of life. Syria's national
strategy for women, which is based on the Programme
of Action adopted by the Beijing Conference, is one of
my country's true achievements towards enhancing the
role of women in all aspects of building and
maintaining peace.

