Mr. Mbanefo (Nigeria): Let me congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of July. We recall with
satisfaction your role in the Economic and Social
Council, where you effectively coordinated the
mainstreaming of gender perspectives in United
Nations policies and programmes.

In situations of conflict, women and children
constitute the vast majority of civilians adversely
affected. They suffer tremendous deprivations. They
are abducted, tortured and recruited as domestic and
sex slaves. They become refugees and internally
displaced persons. Consequently, Nigeria believes that
an essential aspect of conflict prevention must include
the strengthening of the rule of law, and, within that,
the protection of women's rights based on gender
equality through constitutional, legislative, judicial and
electoral reform.

We observe that ever since the first World
Conference on Women held in Mexico in 1975, there
has been the recognition that women have an important
role to play in the promotion of peace. Furthermore,
the Platform for Action adopted by the Fourth World
Conference on Women, held in Beijing in 1995, and the
agreed conclusions of the Commission on the Status of
Women of 1998 called on Governments and
international organizations to protect women in armed
conflict and to support their participation in all aspects
of peace support, including conflict prevention and
post-conflict resolution and reconstruction. In this
regard, my country's constitution ensures participation
and representation of women at all levels of
government, with the objective of prevention,
management and resolution of conflicts.

The Security Council, in its resolution 1325
(2000), recognized the negative impact of armed
conflict on women and the need for effective
institutional arrangements to guarantee their protection.
The Council further recognized that the full
participation of women in peace processes can
contribute significantly to the maintenance and
promotion of international peace and security. The
Council therefore expressed willingness to incorporate
a gender perspective into United Nations peace
operations and called for measures that would ensure
protection of and respect for the rights of women and
children. Nigeria reiterates its support for this
resolution, especially the mainstreaming of a gender
perspective into peacekeeping.

It is gratifying to note that the International
Criminal Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and
Rwanda made important contributions in addressing
violence against women in armed conflict. Nigeria
welcomes the coming into force of the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court, which stipulates that
acts of sexual violence are war crimes when committed
within the context of armed conflict. The international
community cannot afford to continue to ignore the
continued exposure of women and children to the
dangers of communicable diseases such as HIV/AIDS
and other sexually transmitted diseases, and
tuberculosis in situations where conflicts have
devastated infrastructure needed for immunization. We
should therefore live up to our Charter obligations and
responsibilities with respect to compliance with
international humanitarian law that ensures adequate
protection for women and children. In this regard, it is
necessary for the Security Council to take effective
measures to alleviate the negative impact of economic
sanctions on women and children as well as to ensure
their timely release when taken hostage.
The global commerce in and proliferation of
small arms and light weapons, along with landmines
and unexploded ordnance, threaten the lives of women
and children more than others. War affects every aspect
of a child's development. Malnutrition increases due to
displacement and scarcity of food. Resources for social
services are diverted into the war effort, and this leads
to the deterioration of health services and thus of infant
and child mortality rates. The destruction of schools
naturally reduces school enrolment. All these elements
are common features of today's conflicts. If we are to
ensure the well-being of women and children in the
twenty-first century, they deserve special attention and
action.

In West Africa, the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) has taken a number of
initiatives as part of a broad commitment towards
enhancing the social, economic and cultural well-being
of women and children. These include the
establishment of a child protection unit within
ECOWAS to protect and enhance the rights of women
and children caught in conflict. This arrangement is in
constant review to ensure adjustment as the situation
demands.

The gender dimension in the peace process needs
to be adequately addressed. To ensure the effectiveness
of peace support operations, the principle of gender
equality must permeate entire peacekeeping operations
at all levels. This will guarantee the participation of
men and women as equal partners in all facets of the
peace process.

We commend the Secretary-General's target of 50
per cent of high-level positions to be filled by women.
We urge that a gender balance be maintained in the
appointment of women and men as special envoys and
special representatives, and in the pursuit of good
offices on behalf of the Secretary-General, especially
in matters relating to peacekeeping and peace-building.
Women should also be given the opportunity to serve
as coordinators in peacekeeping activities in the areas
of food distribution in refugee camps. In this regard,
we note that the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and the United Nations Fund
for the Development of Women (UNIFEM) have made
some modest efforts by including women in their field
activities. We urge them to do more.

The important role of women in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts and in peace-building
cannot be overemphasized. Women played a significant
role in the peace process in Afghanistan, especially
during elections to the Loya Jirga. In West Africa, the
Mano River Women's Peace Network continues to
make important contributions to the peace process
within the Union. In the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, we are aware of the gender issues being
negotiated by women in the inter-Congolese dialogue.
We also note and commend the efforts of Palestinian
and Israeli women in the Arias-formula meeting on the
situation in the Middle East, in the context of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000). Nigeria salutes the
efforts of these women.

Nigeria notes with satisfaction the contribution of
the Secretary-General in monitoring the compliance
with and commitment to international law by parties in
conflict. We commend the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations for the commencement of gender-awareness
training in United Nations peace missions. We
welcome the increased level of cooperation between
Governments, the international community, non-
governmental organizations and civil society in
providing education, training and humanitarian
assistance to women and children. We must sustain the
rehabilitation of women and children, as this will
facilitate their smooth integration into society.

Finally, let us hope that these measures will
impact positively on our women and children who are
unfortunately caught in conflict situations.

