Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, we express our solidarity with the Government
and the people of Sri Lanka in the aftermath of the
condemnable terrorist acts to which they fell victim.

We thank the German presidency for convening this
open debate on the issue of sexual violence in conflict,
which is a priority issue for Peru. We particularly
welcome your participation, Mr. President, as Minister
for Foreign Affairs, as well as that of the other high-
level officials and attendees today. We are also grateful
for the briefings and moving testimonies delivered by
the briefers.

Peru is a country committed to the women and peace
and security agenda, which addresses combating sexual
violence in conflicts. That commitment is manifested
in our leadership of the Security Council's Informal
Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security, which
Peru co-chairs with Germany - a country to which we
are grateful for its efforts to adopt a needed new draft
resolution on conflict-related sexual violence.

Ten years after the adoption of resolution 1888
(2009), which established the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, the issue remains particularly
relevant. We are faced today by new modalities ofsexual
violence, the systematic use of which - whether as a
tactic of war or terrorism or as an attack on collective
identities - constitutes a threat to international peace
and security. My country deplores the magnitude
and gravity of the problem. The latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/280) confirms the existence
of the nexus linking sexual violence, human trafficking
and terrorism, while also highlighting a number of
alarming trends, such as that involving sexual violence
perpetrated against children.

In that regard, we condemn in the strongest terms
all forms of sexual violence in armed conflict. Action
to combat those atrocity crimes must include not only
protecting victims, but also bringing those responsible
to justice. The Council has a very important role to
play in that task, in line with resolution 1820 (2008),
which states that amnesty cannot be granted for sexual
crimes committed in the context of conflict resolution
processes. It is also essential to address the root causes
of sexual Violence. To that end, we must recognize
and combat inequality between men and women
through the implementation of policies that promote
equality, the empowerment of women and the creation
of opportunities.

Evidence shows that greater participation of
women in decision-making processes results in a lower
likelihood of conflict and that the defence and promotion
of their rights reduces their vulnerability. We cannot
ignore that the majority of sexual violence cases are not
reported because of the stigma and fear of the victims
or the intimidation they face by their attackers. At the
same time, due care for and rehabilitation of victims are
indispensable to any sustainable peacebuilding process
and include understanding that their trauma is also
psychological and has the potential to destroy the social
fabric of a community.

The Security Council should also continue to
encourage and support specific commitments and plans
for the prevention of sexual violence in the conflicts
on its agenda by promoting collaboration with local
non-governmental organizations and United Nations
entities in the field.

In conclusion, I wish to express our appreciation
for the important awareness-raising work on sexual
violence in conflict that is being carried out by Ms. Nadia
Murad and Dr. Denis Mukwege, both Nobel Peace
Prize laureates in 2018, and the Special Representative
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila Patten, in
line with the priority that the Secretary-General assigns
to that issue.

