Ms. Diop: I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for the invitation to address the Security Council
this morning. I speak today on behalf of the NGO
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security.
I am also here today in my capacity as Founder and
President of Femmes Africa Solidarite, an international
non-governmental organization with over 15 years of
experience advocating for women's human rights in
Africa.
The theme of this year's open debate on women
and peace and security, which focuses on women's civil
society organizations, is timely. Twelve years after the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), the vital work of
civil society, particularly women's groups, in ensuring
international peace and security must be recognized
and supported, specifically with political access,
resources and respect.

I recently returned from the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, where I conducted a solidarity mission to
assess the situation of our sisters in the eastern part of
that country. I saw for myself the degrading situation of
women, in particular in the Kanyarucinya refugee and
displaced persons camp, and the immense suffering
of the women in HEAL Africa Hospital in Goma and
Panzi Hospital in Bukavu, where women's bodies are
being repaired after sexual assaults and other violence.
I was caught in the fighting during the taking of Goma
by rebels from the Mouvement du 23 Mars, and I saw
people who were already displaced become displaced yet
again with nowhere to go. I promised the women whom
I met that I would echo their voices calling urgently for
peace, security, protection and humanitarian assistance
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I promised
them that I would come to talk to the Security Council.
We should not let them down this time.

Today, I will highlight three key issues - first, the
contribution of women's organizations to international
peace and security; secondly, the importance of conflict
prevention; and, thirdly, the security threats women
and women's human rights defenders face in conflict
settings.

First, despite the constraints and barriers we
face, women play a central role in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts and in peacebuilding at
community, national and international levels, from
early warning to post-conflict reconstruction. For
example, in the women's "situation room", mentioned in
the report of the Secretary-General, established during
the 2012 elections in Senegal, it was the combination of
women mobilizing communities for peace, mediating
between opposing groups, and monitoring and reporting
incidents of irregularity that contributed to peaceful
elections in Senegal.

Regarding conflict resolution, despite much
rhetoric and many commitments, the percentage
of women and gender expertise included in the
implementation of peace accords is unacceptably low.
That continuing exclusion is demonstrated in recent
data in the Secretary-General's report, as presented to
us by Ms. Bachelet. We also see a lack of women at the
table in current peace processes, such as those under
way in Colombia and Myanmar; in the negotiations
between the Sudan and South Sudan; and, as the Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations has just
told us, in the regional negotiations in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

Women are not absent because they lack negotiating
skills or because they cannot make vital contributions
to peace processes. In Colombia, women's groups have
united to create Women for Peace, a new movement
offering concrete recommendations and proposals
for the nascent peace process. Malian women, as the
Deputy Secretary-General mentioned, together with
women from across West Africa, have been active for
months over the crisis in Mali, asserting their right to
engage in the efforts to bring about a political solution
to the crisis, and reminding all actors that women have
been specifically targeted in the violence, especially
in northern Mali. Women in Syria have been raising
their voices but are vastly underrepresented, if not
completely excluded, from efforts to seek a diplomatic
solution to the ongoing conflict.

Women's priorities are not secondary or
special-interest concerns in these processes. They are
integral to making peace more robust and sustainable,
and it is the responsibility of all relevant actors to ensure
that women representatives, women's human rights
and gender expertise are embedded in all efforts to
prevent and resolve conflict, be they informal or formal
conflict-resolution processes or related to rebuilding
after conflict. This includes disarmament programmes
and security sector, judicial, political and constitutional
reform.

Secondly, the most effective way to fulfil
commitments and obligations in the area of women and
peace and security is to prevent conflict from occurring.
We must challenge the underlying causes of human
rights violations against women and girls in armed
conflict, including gender discrimination, gender-based
violence, militarization and the proliferation of small
arms and light weapons. That means ensuring women's
active participation in designing and implementing
disarmament and prevention strategies; it also means
that Member States should adopt a comprehensive
arms trade treaty with legal and enforceable prevention
criteria for gender-based violence.
Thirdly, as we observe the 16 Days of Activism
against Gender Violence, violence against women and
girls remains widespread and far too often is committed
with impunity. During conflict and long after conflict
end, violence against women and girls is unacceptably
high and remains an enormous barrier to women's full
participation in social, economic and political life. Due
to their work exposing violence against women and
other human rights violations, women's human rights
defenders are exposed to threats, intimidation, violence
and at times alienation from their own communities.
Those in Afghanistan, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and throughout the Middle East often face
serious personal risk and sometimes death.

Last month, Denis Mukwege, an outspoken
supporter of victims of sexual violence in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, who has continually called for
peace in his country and who is well known to many
in this Chamber for his advocacy of women's rights,
was attacked in his home. I was there visiting the Panzi
Hospital, and the women are asking for his return.
There are thousands of advocates like Mr. Mukwege
who, despite such risks, are working to implement the
Council's resolutions on women and peace and security.

The Security Council and all Member States
should offer concrete support to efforts to achieve
accountability for violations of women's rights, and
particularly of international humanitarian and human
rights laws. In addition, protection and prevention
measures must ensure the safety of women, including
those who are displaced, refugees or disabled.

I would like to conclude my statement with a call
for action to the international community, including
United Nations Member States and Security Council
members in particular. I urge them to engage women's
groups as key partners in peace, mediation, negotiation
and governmental processes; demonstrate leadership
and prioritize women's rights by implementing
national and regional action plans for compliance with
resolution 1325 (2000); meet regularly with women's
groups and women leaders - and I commend the
proposal just made for the holding of regular meetings
rather than an annual one, particularly under the
leadership of UN-Women and other women's groups;
and ensure that women's priorities are substantively
incorporated into all relevant negotiations. We call on
the Council to make those priorities non-negotiable
and to allocate the political and financial resources to
women's civil society organizations that are necessary
to their engagement and authority as partners in
national, regional and international communities.
Finally, we call on Security Council members to show
themselves to be role models by consistently and fully
implementing resolution 1325 (2000).

Women whose communities and lives are affected
by conflict demand that the Security Council, with
its mandate for maintaining international peace and
security, and all Member States and United Nations
actors support them and champion women's human
rights. From the women in Sri Lanka seeking to rebuild
their lives, to the women in Afghanistan demanding a
voice in shaping their country's future; from the women
seeking protection and medical care in the Kivus, to
the women driven from their homes by violence in
Colombia; from the women in Sierra Leone, Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the Sudan still seeking justice,
to the human rights defenders in Iraq and the women
disarmament activists in C6te d'lvoire - these women
are rightly expecting the Council to turn its words into
action. Women suffering count on us. Together, we
have innovative ideas, solutions and means. What are
we waiting for?

