Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I thank the Uruguayan presidency for
convening this debate and for providing us with an
opportunity to participate.

My delegation fully aligns itselfwith the statements
delivered on behalf of the European Union and the
Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security.

The fight against sexual violence is a priority for
Belgium. We are about to adopt our third national
action plan on resolution 1325 (2000). The issue of
sexual violence against women, including conflict-
related violence, is of great importance. For Belgium,
accountability is critical in the fight against impunity
for crimes of sexual violence. Justice is a prerequisite
for building peace and breaking the cycle of conflict. I
would like to quickly highlight a few points.

First of all, we welcome the countries mentioned
in the Secretary-General's report (S/2017/249) that have
worked actively to establish a legislative framework and
take effective measures. We commend the outstanding
work of the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and
Sexual Violence in Conflict in supporting national
efforts leading to tangible results - for example,
in Guinea.

My delegation therefore wishes to highlight the
importance ofthe Secretary-General's recommendation
calling on the Security Council to fully include the
issue of conflict-related sexual violence in the work of
the sanctions committees. The undeniable legitimacy
of the sanctions adopted in that context will indeed lead
to strengthened collective efforts in the fight against
the scourge.

As for sexual violence in Syria, we believe that the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
recently established by General Assembly resolution
71/248 also plays an important role. The Mechanism
aims to assist in the investigation and prosecution
of those responsible for the most serious crimes
committed in Syria, including, of course, the issue of
sexual violence addressed in this debate. In the same
vein, allow me to welcome the work of the joint rapid
response units and UN-Women and the firm impact of
the personnel on the ground in Syria, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Burundi as they seek to
ensure justice and accountability.

In addition to the fight against impunity,
reintegrating the victims of sexual violence is
paramount. Those victims must not become victims a
second time because of stigmatization by their families
and communities. It is the perpetrators of crimes of
sexual violence who should be ashamed, not the victims.
It is therefore important to provide socioeconomic and
psychosocial support for the victims.

In that regard, Iwould like to mention, as an example,
the excellent work of Dr. Mukwege at Panzi Hospital
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, a region where, unfortunately, sexual violence is
often used as a weapon of war. Dr. Mukwege's hospital
not only provides victims with access to medical care,
it provides psychosocial support as well as lawyers to
assist victims in obtaining legal redress. Unfortunately,
the perpetrators of sexual violence respond with threats
and acts of revenge, as demonstrated by the recent
murder of a close collaborator of Dr. Mukwege. We
therefore reiterate our call on the Congolese authorities
and the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
take all the measures necessary to protect Dr. Mukwege,
his team and his patients.
I cannot end without taking my turn in expressing
our appreciation to Ms. Zainab Bangura, former Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and her team
for their outstanding commitment. We welcome the
appointment of her successor, Ms. Pramila Patten, and
assure her of our full support.

