Mr. De Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
taken the initiative to hold a public meeting of the
Security Council on this very serious matter affecting
the Organization. I would also like to express
appreciation to Mr. Guehenno for the efforts the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) is
making to combat sexual exploitation and abuse. My
thanks go also to Prince Zeid for his briefing updating
us on efforts to eradicate those crimes since 31 May
2005.

We believe it very appropriate that the Security
Council should take up the subject of sexual
exploitation and abuse. Such crimes are a perversion of
the spirit and letter of the Charter. They are crimes that
cut to the humanist heart of the Organization - the
defence of human rights. Ultimately, they undermine
the legitimacy of peacekeeping operations and the
international community's confidence in the
functioning of our multilateral system for peace.

As has been said, we, the Member States, must
have zero tolerance for cases of sexual exploitation and
abuse in peacekeeping operations. In order to do away
with such crimes, we must implement preventive
measures and apply exemplary punishment through due
process. We therefore welcome the efforts of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to prevent the
entrenchment within the United Nations of what was
called a few days ago a culture of inaction, which
could lead to a culture of impunity.
With regard to preventive measures, my
delegation supports the annexing to memorandums of

understanding - the agreements that govern the
participation of Member States in peacekeeping
operations - a code of conduct that personnel must

observe. Such a code of conduct will enable States -
Governments, which have responsibility in this area -
to have full prior knowledge of the ethical and legal
commitments required of their troops taking part in a
peacekeeping operation. Furthermore, the training
process should be intensified with a view to ensuring,
if possible, that every single peacekeeper is trained.
Information and training should also be provided to
multilateral forces authorized by the United Nations
with regard to the Geneva Conventions, the
Convention against Torture and other relevant human
rights instruments.

According to the report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of the recommendations of the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
(A/60/640 and Add.1), between January 2004 and
October 2005 investigations were carried out into
accusations of acts of sexual abuse and exploitation
committed by 264 peacekeeping personnel. However,
more up-to-date figures indicate that there may be as
many as 400 accusations. That means that, over the
past two years, approximately 25 per cent of the
accusations made have not been investigated. That may
be the result of a lack of sufficient human and financial
resources to carry out the investigations.

Another aspect of sexual exploitation and abuse
is the reluctance of the victims themselves to denounce
such criminal acts - reluctance that might be due to
ignorance or, perhaps, to their reverential feelings
towards international authorities.

One system that could prove helpful would be the
establishment of some sort of office of ombudsman for
peacekeeping operations that would work in the field
and report directly to Member States on acts of sexual
exploitation and abuse. Moreover, the ombudsman
would ensure that factual information could be
obtained directly in the field, allowing the victim and
the defendant to provide their own version of the
incident. Such a practice would allow for greater due
process in the investigation and sanctions system.

In his report, the Secretary-General states that, in
the second half of this year, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations will establish a general

database to track such crimes. In that regard, we
believe that the database should be even broader than
that described in the report. It should not only identify
the accused, but provide information on the accusers,
as well as on allegations under investigation and the
reasons why other allegations have not been
investigated.

It is said that the United Nations sends its
peacekeeping forces to do work that no one else wants
to do. Now we are faced with an aberration, whereby
wicked elements in peacekeeping operations do what
no one wants them to do - that is, perpetrate sexual
exploitation and abuse. I conclude by stressing that, in
response to the crimes of sexual exploitation and
abuse, Member States must cooperate and initiate a
policy of zero tolerance. Disciplinary bodies must be
created so that the United Nations does not lose its
legitimacy in world public opinion.

