The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.

Next year my country - and, we believe, others
far from its borders - will mark the centenary of an
event that has left a deep imprint on world history, the
October Revolution. As we look back on it today, our
assessments of its impact may be mixed, but one is
indisputable - it enshrined the full equality for women
in our country that has become firmly established on the
global socioeconomic and political agenda. In a certain
sense, the work the Security Council has been doing
in the past 16 years is a continuation of that process,
begun a century ago.

Since 2000, the Security Council has traditionally
held an open debate on women and peace and security in
the month of October. Sixteen years ago, our delegation
wholeheartedly supported the Security Council's
consideration of this agenda item. As Mr. Sergey
Lavrov, the then Permanent Representative of Russia to
the United Nations, noted at the Council's first meeting
on the subject, women

"are an enormous strength and can provide
invaluable assistance in reconciling belligerents
and tending the wounds of war" (S/PV4208, p. 21).

The annual debate in the Council always evokes
great interest among delegations and presents a good
opportunity for analysing progress in achieving
the goals that have been set and how to increase the
effectiveness of our efforts. In the years since the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), much has been
done to turn its provisions into concrete action aimed at
improving the protection of women in armed conflicts
and ensuring their full and effective participation in
efforts to prevent and resolve conflicts.
The women and peace and security agenda has
had increasing attention both from the Security
Council and the United Nations system in general,
as the Secretary-General's latest report (S/2016/822)
testifies. While it is vital to ensure that the work begun
continues, it is important to ensure that in developing
complex approaches we do not end up neglecting the
specifics of a given situation, and that the inclusion
of gender perspectives in that work does not become
an end in itself. The best results come when we avoid
grandstanding and focus on specific returns. That fully
applies to developing national action plans, which can
be an effective tool for concerned States when they
become involved in an armed conflict.

Where my country is concerned, we are not about to
start preparing this type of national plan. Instead, work
is under way in Russia on a document of a different
kind - the Russian Federation's national strategy for
action for women 2017 -2022. Its key areas of focus
include increasing women's participation in political
life and the decision-making process; improving
their economic situation, including promoting
entrepreneurship for women; creating conditions
conducive to better women's health; preventing
violence and protecting women from it; and overcoming
stereotypes about men's and women's social roles.

We should point out that in our country women
occupy a number of leading Government posts - the
President of the Federation Council of the Federal
Assembly, Deputy Prime Minister, President of the
Central Bank, the Ministers of Health and Education
and a number of other responsible positions. Women
also play a very significant part in the work of the
State Duma. They make up 17 per cent - six of 36
officers - of Russian police contingents abroad.

We agree with the Secretary-General's
recommendation on the need to strengthen the
coordination of United Nations entities in order to
accommodate gender mainstreaming in the context
of armed conflict. However, it is important to ensure
that they avoid duplication and contradictory action
and that their efforts are based on reliable sources of
information. The programmes and projects produced
by the Secretariat's experts should be submitted for
intergovernmental discussion and follow-up approval.
It is after all the States that play the lead role in
implementing the women and peace and security agenda.

No less important is ensuring that the Security
Council's work is focused on issues related to its
mandate. Artificially connecting the entire gamut
of gender issues to Council activity will lead to
an imbalance from the point of view of system-
wide coordination and create obstacles to effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). The Council
should focus its attention primarily on the situation
of women in extremely serious, large-scale armed
conflicts. That goal corresponds to the inclusion of a
gender component in the Secretary-General's reports
on specific country situations. Needless to say, that
does not diminish the urgent task of combating threats
women's lives and security caused by the barbarities of
terrorist groups.

I would like to once again affirm our belief in
the importance of ensuring that the international
community gives proper attention to the situation of
women in armed conflict and their participation in
peacemaking. At the same time, of course, we should
remember that there is no more reliable way to protect
humankind, including women and children, from the
horrors ofwar than resolving crisis situations as quickly
as possible.

In conclusion, I am compelled to make one
more observation. Not for the first time, today the
representative of Ukraine strayed a long way beyond
the confines of our discussion to touch on the general
topic of the conflict in eastern Ukraine. That would not
exist were it not for the fact that Kyiv took the route of
armed suppression of the mood of protest that emerged
in the country after the Government was overthrown
with direct support from external forces. Ukrainian
forces have been shelling residential areas of Donetsk
and Luhansk for two years now, killing peaceful
civilians, including women and children.

As far as the attitude of the Ukrainian authorities to
women is concerned, I will simply cite a few facts from
a recent report of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights. On 19 January 2015, some men in masks and
camouflage arrested a woman in her home. For more
than a week, they kept her in a basement in a Ukrainian
Security Service building, where they beat and
tortured her with electric shocks and burning plastic.
They threatened to rape her daughter if she refused to
confess. In another case, in June 2015, 10 armed men
in masks and black uniforms arrested another woman.
They put her in the basement of an unfinished building
where they beat her head and body with their fists and
a metal tube while threatening to rape and kill her. As
of August, the woman was still in detention. Those are
just two of the many examples that members can read
about in the report.
I would like to add that the conflict in eastern
Ukraine would have been resolved long ago had the
Kyiv authorities not time and again tried to rewrite or
tinker with the Minsk agreement reached a year and a
half ago. There was a reference to Nadiya Savchenko
in the statement by the representative of Ukraine. She
returned to Russia, where she stated that Kyiv should
apologize to the inhabitants of Donetsk and Luhansk. It
is a pity that the Government has neither the humanity
nor the political will to do so.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I wish to remind all speakers to limit their statements
to no more than four minutes in order to enable the
Council to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations
with lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate
their texts in writing and to deliver a condensed version
when speaking in the Chamber. 1 would like to appeal
to speakers to deliver their statements at a normal speed
so that interpretation can be provided accurately.

I should like to inform participants that, given the
long list of speakers, we will continue with this meeting
through the lunch hour, and perhaps into the evening.
Speakers who wish to make a second intervention will
be able to do so once all those on the list of speakers has
been exhausted.

I now give the floor to the representative of Sweden.

