Mr. Denisov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation attaches great
significance to upholding high moral and ethical
standards of conduct for all categories of United
Nations peacekeeping personnel. This matter deserves
ongoing attention by the Organization and its Member
States. Today, when peacekeeping activities are
increasingly serving as a gauge of the effectiveness of
the United Nations in matters of international peace
and security, we cannot allow the good reputation of
peacekeepers to be sullied by actions of sexual
exploitation and abuse. We believe that the United
Nations must undertake comprehensive and vigorous
actions to combat this scourge.

In that regard, we would like to express our
appreciation to the Under-Secretary-General,
Mr. Guehenno, and to the Secretariat as a whole for
their report today, which, in our view, is indeed of a
comprehensive nature.

I should like also to express our appreciation to
the Adviser to the Secretary-General, the Permanent
Representative of Jordan to the United Nations, Prince
Zeid Al-Hussein, for his contribution to the
development of a "zero tolerance" policy for sexual
exploitation and abuse. We also welcome the efforts
being undertaken in that regard by the General

Assembly and by its Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, and we are prepared to
participate actively in that work. We will be interested
to see the results of the work of the legal experts on a
seldom-studied question: that of eliminating impunity
among the civilian personnel of peacekeeping
missions.

In our view, critical tasks in terms of eliminating
instances of sexual exploitation and abuse in
peacekeeping operations would involve the following
steps.

The first step would require a harmonization of
the existing rules of conduct for peacekeepers and their
articulation in a clear and accessible form, so that they
could become an important part of the training of
peacekeeping personnel.

Secondly, a system should be established for
interaction among the Secretariat, the troop-
contributing countries and the host States, within their
respective competencies. Success in that regard would
lie not in redistributing responsibilities among
participants in peacekeeping work, but rather in
establishing channels for their interaction.

The third step would involve the establishment of
a mechanism that is effective and as transparent as
possible to ensure accountability with respect to the
investigations conducted and the measures taken. We
believe that all of those measures must receive in-depth
consideration so as to make them effective in the long
term.

The Security Council can also play an important
role in combating sexual crimes. The role of this body
must be first and foremost to draw up the mandates of
peacekeeping missions with great care and to establish
a reliable political monitoring mechanism for their
implementation. Peacekeeping contingents must
receive clear instructions as to what actions they are
allowed to take, and their preparation and numbers
must be in line with their functions. We, too, believe
that there is a need to develop a strategy better to
organize leisure and recreational activities for the
contingents. Nevertheless, we believe that what is even
more important is the rational organization of the on-
duty time of the peacekeepers. Here it would be good,
perhaps, to remind ourselves of the old saying that
exists in the military that a soldier's idle mind is the
devil's workshop.

