Mr. Nguema Ndong (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I would first like to welcome your presence
in the Chamber, Mr. President, and that of the other
Ministers here today.

We associate ourselves with the statement to be
delivered later by the observer of the African Union.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea acknowledges
the release of the Secretary-General's latest annual
report on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2019/280)
with concern. The report is the reason we have to thank
Germany and France for their initiative in convening
this important open debate focused on promoting
measures for preventing and ending this evil. We also
want to extend a warm welcome to Dr. Mukwege,
Ms. Murad, Ms. Clooney and Ms. Miloud, and to thank
them for their informative briefings.

Equatorial Guinea firmly condemns the use of
sexual violence as a tactic of war, terror or subjection.
Sexual violence in conflict is increasingly being used
as a weapon of war, and as one of the most horrific
expressions of human cruelty it deserves to be utterly
repudiated. We therefore commend Germany on
its initiative and its commitment to strengthening
a holistic process that will help us make progress on
preventing and eliminating conflicted-related sexual
violence and improving the related United Nations
infrastructure. We believe that this initiative is vital
to advancing that crucial agenda and taking action to
mark the tenth anniversary of the establishment by
resolution 1888 (2009) of the mandate of the Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Armed Conflict.

Equatorial Guinea's fundamental law recognizes
gender equality and actively promotes women's
participation in every sector. We understand and
believe in the critical role that a gender perspective
and women's participation can play at every level in
implementing plans for peace, security and sustainable
development. From that point of View, we believe
firmly that in order to support States' strategies and
efforts to combat sexual violence more effectively, the
international community must commit to working with
States on approaches that support and sustain women
and children, displaced persons and refugees, minorities
and other vulnerable groups far beyond a conflict's
actual duration. In regard to the issue of migrants and
displaced persons, the President of Equatorial Guinea
has been entrusted by the African Union with the role
of African Leader for Refugees and Displaced Persons
in Africa. Equatorial Guinea will work to give its very
best in collaborating on the issue and contributing to
the quest for lasting solutions to this human tragedy.

As the Secretary-General says on page 1 of
his report,

"Preventing sexual Violence requires the
advancement of substantive gender equality
before, during and after conflict, including by
ensuring women's full and effective participation
of women in political, economic and social life
and ensuring accessible and responsive justice and
security institutions."

The strengthened cooperation between the
Security Council and the African Union's African
Peace and Security Architecture, which also reinforces
subregional initiatives for implementing the Council's
resolutions in order to advance the agenda for women
and peace and security, among other things, is an
example of the type of alliances to which we should
continue to give more predictable support.

In emphasizing that the most effective way to
combat the crime of conflict-related sexual Violence
is the prevention of conflict itself, the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea calls on the parties involved in
conflict to commit themselves to ensuring the protection
of civilians, in accordance with international law, while
always bearing in mind the primary responsibility of
States in that regard by respecting State sovereignty and
supporting their efforts in implementation of the relevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions.

As the testimonies of the speakers show, despite
the achievements, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
remains concerned about the slow progress in preventing
and eliminating conflict-related sexual violence. In that
regard, we support the preventive approach advocated
by the Secretary-General in his report, as well as his
recommendations to address gender inequality, in
times ofwar and peace, as the main root cause of sexual
violence in armed conflict.

The growing complexity of armed conflicts has
resulted in sexual violence being increasingly used as a
tactic of war and a source of income for parties involved
in conflict, such as groups of violent extremists,
terrorists or organized crime in those territories or
neighbouring countries. Uneven development and the

displacement, within and between countries, of people
fleeing conflict further complicate the situation.

In that context, despite the progress made by
States, including with the support of the United
Nations, in efforts to advance towards and to eliminate
impunity for such crimes, protecting all victims and
their families and ensuring accountability remain
significant challenges. In that regard, ending impunity
for crimes of sexual violence is an important objective
of the Council.

As has already been recommended on other
occasions, we must ensure that sexual violence is a
designation criteria in the relevant sanctions regimes.
At the same time, the international community
should support countries that request assistance in
strengthening the capacity of their legal and social
protection institutions and their cooperation with other
social sectors, thereby ensuring that their gains can be
transformed in a sustainable way.

In February, under the presidency of Equatorial
Guinea, the Council adopted resolution 2457 (2019) on
silencing the guns in Africa by 2020 (see S/PV.8473).
The spirit of that resolution is broadly reflected in the
issue that we are discussing today, since, as Africa
is the continent with the highest incidence of rape in
conflict, the effective implementation of resolution
2457 (2019) would implicitly mean the elimination
of that horrendous phenomenon in Africa. In order
to achieve that goal, the international community's
cooperation is essential. That same cooperation is
critical to the adoption of the draft resolution on the
financing of peacekeeping operations in Africa, which
is pending before this Council and which the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea hopes will be adopted in the
course of this year.

I would like to acknowledge the commitment and
dedication of the Informal Expert Group on Women
and Peace and Security, UN-Women and the Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Armed Conflict, led by Ms. Patten,
to this issue. We support its strategic initiatives, such as
the framework of cooperation with the African Union
Commission concerning the prevention and response
to conflicted-related sexual violence in Africa,
among others.

In conclusion, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
will continue to support the various components of
the United Nations architecture for combating sexual
Violence in armed conflict and to promote cooperation
among them and the United Nations agencies
responsible for counter-terrorism, organized crime,
humanitarian response and sustainable development in
order to ensure a victim-centred approach to that crime
so that they may not only survive but also thrive.

