Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
would like to thank the Togolese presidency for
convening this important open debate on women and
peace and security. We thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Margot Wallstrom; the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Herve Ladsous; and Ms. Amina Megheirbi for their
statements.

Civilians are entitled in all circumstances to
respect for their persons, their honour, their family
rights, their religious convictions and practices, and
their manners and customs. They are to be at all times
humanely treated and protected, especially against all
acts of violence or threats thereof.

12-2393]

The reality, however, is different. Indeed, a
defining feature of most, if not all, conflicts is still the
failure of parties to respect and ensure respect for their
obligations to protect civilians. Civilians continue to
suffer from inadequate protection in situations of
armed conflict, including discriminatory treatment,
torture, sexual violence, extrajudicial executions, mass
population displacements and ethnic cleansing. In
many situations of armed conflict, sexual violence has
been used as a weapon of war to strike terror and to
force civilians to leave their native lands.

Azerbaijan strongly condemns all acts of violence
committed against women and girls in situations of
armed conflict. It is imperative that all parties to armed
conflict strictly abide by their obligations under
international humanitarian and human rights law.

Azerbaijan's interest in the issue under
consideration is obvious and stems from its efforts to
contribute to achieving sustainable peace and
development and its practical experience of addressing
the impact of armed conflict on civilians, including
women and children.

In three days, we will commemorate the twentieth
anniversary of atrocious crimes committed against the
Azerbaijani civilians of the town of Khojaly, where
during one night hundreds of civilians were killed only
because they were Azerbaijanis. Not even women and
children were spared by the invading troops. In its
resolutions adopted in 1993 in response to the
occupation of Azerbaijani territories, the Security
Council referred specifically to Violations of
international humanitarian law and attacks on civilians.
We are confident that consistent measures being taken
at the national level, as well as the existing
international legal framework, will serve to bring to
justice those responsible for crimes in Khojaly and
other grave offences committed during the occupation
of Azerbaijan's territories. It is incontrovertible today
that no official or political status cloaks the person
concerned with immunity for the most serious crimes
of concern to the international community.

The adoption by the Security Council of the
landmark resolution 1325 (2001) was an important
milestone that took up the issue of women and peace
and security as a separate thematic issue and brought
international visibility to the plight of women and girls
in situations of armed conflict. The subsequent Council
resolutions, presidential statements and other relevant
documents have contributed to developing a solid
framework and raising awareness of the impact that
sexual violence has on victims' families and societies.

The heightened vulnerability of civilians in
wartime - in particular forcibly displaced persons,
refugees, women and children - brings an element of
urgency, dedication and strong commitment to our
protection efforts, which must be free of selectivity and
politically motivated approaches and preferences.
Azerbaijan notes the role that the mandate of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict must play in that regard.

Among the pressing issues requiring urgent
action and attention is that of women taken hostage and
reported missing in connection with armed conflict. We
are continuing our efforts to address that disturbing
phenomenon, including through the relevant biennial
resolution of the General Assembly and the
Commission on the Status of Women, of which
Azerbaijan is a main sponsor. In that regard, I would
like to recall that, inter alia, at its fifty-fourth session,
the Commission called for the immediate release of
women and children taken hostage in armed conflicts,
including by strengthening international cooperation to
that end.

More resolute and targeted measures are required
to end impunity for the most serious crimes of concern
to the international community, including those
committed against women in situations of armed
conflict. Combating impunity is important not only for
the purposes of prosecuting such crimes and bringing
those responsible to justice, but also for ensuring
sustainable peace, truth and reconciliation.

