Mr. Patriota (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): Mr. President,
I congratulate you and the Mission of Chile for having
organized this meeting and for having drawn up a very
informative concept note (S/2015/32, annex).

(spoke in English)

I would also like to thank Assistant Secretary-
General Kyung-wha Kang, as well as Ms. Helen
Durham and Ms. Ilwad Elman, for their enlightening
presentations.

Today's meeting can be seen as the starting point
of a vital year for gender issues at the United Nations.
While the Security Council prepares for its high-level
review on women and peace and security, we expect
both the report of the Independent High-Level Panel on
Peace Operations and the results of the 10-year review
of the peacebuilding architecture to be informed by
a progressive gender perspective, and we associate
ourselves with the words of the Foreign Minister of
Sweden in highlighting the importance of coordination
in that respect. Brazil looks forward to cooperating
constructively with these interrelated endeavours.

Women play a vital role in all societies and cultures.
Unfortunately, however, they continue to find many
obstacles in terms of equality of opportunity, access to
justice, economic and social rights, and participation
in decision-making systems. Their protection,
advancement and empowerment should be at the heart
of all activities fostered by the Organization.

Any debate on the protection of civilians must
consider, first and foremost, that preventing armed
conflict from arising is the most effective way to shield
the civilian population, including women and girls,
from the dangers of war. In this regard, we cannot
stress enough the importance of using all political
and diplomatic instruments available, including
good offices and mediation, to promote the peaceful
settlement of disputes. The spiral of violence that leads
to war, displacement and abuses against vulnerable
groups such as women and girls is not unavoidable.
It is often the consequence of misguided judgment,
questionable concepts of morality, and an inability to
learn from experience.

The use of force carries the risk of causing
unintended casualties and disseminating violence and
instability. Even when force is employed with the aim
of protecting civilians, it does not make collateral
damage or unintended destabilization less tragic. In this
sense, full compliance with international human rights
law, international humanitarian law and international
refugee law is required ofthose attempting to safeguard
the well-being and integrity of women and girls.
Bending the rules weakens the multilateral system and
has brought much misery to civilians.

In this regard, it is crucial that the Council employ a
non-selective approach when discussing the protection
of civilians. One cannot condemn the horrid attacks in
Syria, Afghanistan and Nigeria while remaining silent
before blatant violations against civilians in Gaza. All
violations must be condemned with equal vigour. Every
civilian casualty is a tragedy and every life should be
equally valued by the Council.

As the report on the strategic review of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2014/956)
recently stressed, the protection of civilians in armed
conflicts may also be carried out through political
and civilian processes, reconciliation efforts at the
community level, and the establishment of a protective
environment. None of this can be accomplished without
including women in a meaningful way.

The presence of women among negotiators
substantially increases the effectiveness and legitimacy
of peacekeeping and peacemaking initiatives, from
mediation efforts to power-sharing agreements. The
same logic applies to the long-term processes of
reconstruction, recovery and peacebuilding in the
aftermath of conflicts. The greater participation of
women in the civilian and military leadership of
peacekeeping missions, as seen in the United Nations
Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus, would be a positive step
in that regard.

The Brazilian Government is translating these
calls into concrete action: in 2014, both the Ministry
of External Relations and the Ministry of Defense put
in place mechanisms to foster gender equality and
recommended women-oriented policies within the
Foreign Service and the Armed Forces of Brazil. We
have also sought to enhance protection mechanisms for
vulnerable groups in regional and multilateral forums.
For instance, the differentiated protection needs of
women refugees were given special emphasis in the
Cartagena+30 Brazil Declaration, adopted by Latin
American and Caribbean countries in Brasilia last
December.

Physical protection, while clearly vital, is merely
part of the range of gender-oriented measures that the
United Nations and its Members should promote. We
must also strive to advance the position of women in
society at all times, not only during conflicts and in
their aftermath. Empowering and emancipating women
requires concrete and specific policies to foster their
social inclusion and economic self-determination, while
tackling all forms of descrimination and impunity.
Men must be mobilized, as in the He-For-She solidarity
campaign for gender equality, which we fully endorse.

The benefits of mustering the support of women
in war-torn societies have also been observed in many
of the situations being followed by the Peacebuilding
Commission.

Social development is the ultimate form of
protection for vulnerable groups, particularly women
and girls. Gender equality and the protection of women
should be everyday concerns. The whole range of
political, humanitarian and development-related bodies
of the Organization, including the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council, the Peacebuilding
Commission and UN-Women, should be part and parcel
of our joint efforts towards a world where women and
girls are not only protected from violence, but also fully
empowered in every way.

