Ms. Marinaki: I speak on behalf of the European
Union (EU) and its member States. The candidate
countries Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, and Georgia,
align themselves with this statement.

A little less than a year ago, we all commemorated
the first International Day for the Elimination of Sexual
Violence in Conflict. On that occasion, the European
Union reaffirmed its strongest support for zero
tolerance to any form of sexual violence. We said it then
and we say it now - sexual violence is a flagrant and
unacceptable violation of human rights, and we stand
in solidarity with its victims and survivors, as well as
with their families.

Today, I would like to extend my special thanks
to Uruguay for organizing this open debate, and to the
Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Amina Mohammed;
Under-Secretary-General AdamaDieng; and Ms. Amina
Jaf, who spoke on behalf of civil society, for their
statements. Let me also take this opportunity to also
congratulate Ms. Pramila Patten on her appointment
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict and to wish her every
success in her new challenges. We also would like to
thank the outgoing Special Representative, Ms. Zainab
Bangura, for her commitment and determined service
over the past five years and wish her the best in her
future endeavours.

The European Union applauds the measures taken
by the Government of cote d'Ivoire that led to the
delisting ofthe Forces arme'es de Cote d'Ivoire from the
annex of the Secretary-General's report (S/2017/249).
We welcome the report submitted by the Secretary-
General. The European Union emphasizes the continued
importance ofa holistic approach that addresses sexual
violence in conflict as part of the broader women and
peace and security agenda, recognizing that sexual and
gender-based violence are also the results of gender
inequalities and of women's subordinated position in
too many parts of the world. In addition, the issue of
stigma should be analysed and addressed within the
broader context of sexual and gender-based violence
that may or may not be related to conflict.

While sexual and gender-basedviolence predominantly
targets women and girls, men and boys are also among
the primary and secondary victims of these crimes.
We fully support the Secretary-General's focus on
conflict prevention. Efforts to prevent sexual and
gender-based violence fall in line with the key objective
of the European Union's Global Strategy for Foreign
and Security Policy - addressing conflicts at an early
stage while building resilience as a key priority for
States and societies. The European Union also remains
determined to lead by example in preventing sexual and
gender-based violence and protecting individuals and
communities from it.

We know that accountability starts at home, and in
that spirit we have launched a series of actions in 2017
to combat violence against women and girls in all its
forms in the European Union and worldwide. We are
also pleased to inform the Council that last Friday, the
Council of Ministers of the European Union decided
to accede as a full party to the Council of Europe's
Istanbul Convention on preventing and combating
domestic violence and violence against women.

We welcome the focus of the Security Council
on the issue of trafficking in human beings in armed
conflict, and we have built an ambitious, gender-
specific and comprehensive legal and policy framework
for combating it. Anti-trafficking action is also a key
part of our external policies. Since 2015, our naval
operations in the Mediterranean have saved more than
240,000 lives.

The European Union strongly supports the
Secretary-General's zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse, and his leadership in dealing
with that challenge. We are working to ensure that the
highest standards of professionalism and conduct in
both civilian and military operations are upheld, and
to lay the ground for stronger preventive, protective
and accountability measures. We have also funded
the International Organization for Migration to enable
it to develop tools that will help the humanitarian
community prevent and respond to sexual exploitation
and abuse by humanitarian staff, and we hope they will
also be useful for reform of the wider United Nations
system on this issue, which we very much welcome.

We have been firmly advocating for and promoting
women's equitable and meaningful participation
in conflict prevention, crisis management, conflict
resolution, mediation and peacebuilding, and we aim to

improve the representation and participation of women
throughout our civilian and military deployments. We
want to see practical steps taken to tackle impunity for
the use ofrape by State and non-State actors as a weapon
of war and to continue to change global attitudes to
such crimes. Accountability and access to justice are
a must, and victims, survivors and witnesses of sexual
violence have to be ensured access to impartial and
gender-sensitive tribunals and to reparations, including
as a form of transitional gender justice.

We have adopted a framework for transitional
justice for ensuring that gender is a variable that those
processes take into account. Efforts to fight sexual
violence in conflict should also include measures to
ensure adequate information, fact-finding, analysis
and data collection through proper documentation, as
well as the rapid and effective investigation of such
crimes. We acknowledge the key role of civil-society
organizations in this area, and we will continue to work
with them in that shared endeavour.

We underline the importance of making full use
of the mechanisms and tools created by the Security
Council to combat and prevent conflict-related sexual
violence, and we welcome and encourage further use of
the human rights and sexual violence-related criteria
in the Council's sanctions regimes. To date, 18 of the
28 European Union (EU) member States have adopted
national action plans in compliance with resolution
1325 (2000). We continue to follow up systematically
on the 2014 Global Summit to End Sexual Violence
in Conflict with a comprehensive, multisectoral and
multidimensional approach. We have worked to ensure
that all our humanitarian assistance systematically
tailors its responses to the different and gender-specific
needs of women and men of all ages.

I would like to flag a few concrete EU initiatives
around the world for preventing and responding to
conflict-related sexual violence. The Madad Fund,
the EU Regional Trust Fund in Response to the Syrian
Crisis, launched the EU's biggest-ever response package
to the Syrian refugee crisis. Among other components,
the programme strengthens access to protection from
sexual and gender-based violence to at least 700,000
Syrian refugees and internally displaced persons in
neighbouring countries.

In Somalia, we have been funding the International
Rescue Committee's provision of integrated, lifesaving
health services to victims of gender-based violence in
eight health clinics and one hospital. Furthermore, High
Representative Federica Mogherini, who represented
the European Union at the Somalia conference held
on 11 May in London, has announced an additional
€200 million aimed at strengthening our leading role
in supporting the country's development, stability
and security, and together with the EU member States
we have already allocated more than €460 million in
humanitarian development assistance. In that regard,
combating gender-based violence is an important part
of our humanitarian effort.

For a decade in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the European Union has been funding the Panzi
hospital, which specializes in treating women who are
victims of wartime gang rapes. In 2014 its founder, Dr.
Denis Mukwege, was awarded the European Union's
Sakharov Prize for saving the lives of thousands of
women. We have also allocated €3.5 million to a
project implemented by UN-Women to ensure that
transitional justice processes in Kosovo, Colombia
and the Philippines are tackling gender-based abuses
against women. All in all, more than 84 different
projects in countries around the world have reached
almost 3.5 million beneficiaries.

In conclusion, in order to accelerate implementation
of our commitments, in 2017 we will give priority to
specific support to women refugees and victims of
violence in the most remote and fragile areas. We are
also strengthening efforts to ensure that women and
girls arriving in the European Union after fleeing
conflict, persecution, instability or poverty have access
to medical care, legal support, appropriate trauma
counselling and psychosocial care if they are victims
of discrimination or any kind of sexual violence. While
much has been achieved, we must also acknowledge
that much work remains to be done. The European
Union will continue to stand by the efforts of the United
Nations to combat these violations together, because all
women, men, girls and boys all over the world deserve
to be able to lead a life free from fear and full of hope.

