Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the United States presidency for
organizing today's meeting.

We are grateful to the Secretary-General and
Ms. Wallstrom, Mr. Le Roy and General Gaye for the
important information that they have provided.

Unfortunately, in spite of the existence of an
entire arsenal of international instruments on human
rights and international humanitarian law, civilian
populations continue to be subjected to violence and to
suffer in armed conflicts and in post-conflict situations.
Sexual violence is, of course, a repulsive crime that
requires decisive condemnation and severe
punishment. We are thus especially alarmed at
situations where this phenomenon is becoming
widespread and systematic. It is becoming an
instrument in armed conflict.

Recent events in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo have shown how acute the problem can be. We
advocate a thorough investigation of all incidents and
punishment of the guilty. Only in this way can we put
an end to the reign of impunity that criminals enjoy, in
the overwhelming majority of cases, and thereby
eradicate that reprehensible practice.

We are, however, of the view that combating
sexual violence is one of the major components of all
of the measures that can be used for settlement and
post-conflict recovery. We are convinced that, in
concentrating efforts on combating sexual violence, we
must pay due attention to other abuses committed
during conflict. Civilian populations - most of all,
women and children - are still victims of other crimes
as well, such as premeditated attacks, including
terrorist acts, and indiscriminate or excessive use of
force. Often, the criminals escape punishment here as
well.
As we see it, the diverse nature of violence
during armed conflict requires appropriate attention to
all its categories. The issues of women and peace and
security must be based on a comprehensive approach,
which is the approach that is enshrined in resolution
1325 (2000), which is the fundamental document for
the protection of women and which ensures their rights
in conflicts. Moreover, we believe that women should
not be perceived only as victims. We must remember
that an important precondition for overcoming violence
against women is their full-fledged participation in
peace talks and in post-conflict peacebuilding.

We are grateful to the Secretary-General for his
thematic report for today's meeting (S/2010/604). A
number of proposals in the document to strengthen our
fight against sexual violence have been embodied in a
practical manner in today's resolution. We support the
recommendation of giving the Secretary-General the
right to make lists of parties suspected of sexual
violence in conflict. Such an instrument, as we have
seen in our Council experience with children's issues,
is a very effective way of having an impact on
violators. With respect to agreements on monitoring,
analysis and accountability regarding sexual violence
in conditions of armed conflict, that mechanism is
undoubtedly extremely important. The timelines,
accuracy, objectivity and reliability of its information
will determine the effectiveness and usefulness of
Council decisions to rectify the situation.

There are many different types of conflict around
the globe. However, from the standpoint of the
Council's purposes under the Charter, the Council's
attention must be focused only on those conflicts
which are a threat to peace and security. Consequently,
the instruments adopted today, such as the practice of
making lists of violators and agreements on
monitoring, analysis and accountability, must also be
used in that context.

I would also like to emphasize that the efforts of
the international community will be in vain without the
consent and active participation of national
Governments, which have the major responsibility for
handling the entire range of issues to care for and
protect their people.

In conclusion, we would like to express our
conviction that today's resolution will play an
important role in dealing with the problems of violence
against women in armed conflicts.
