Mr. Kapambwe (Zambia), President of the
Economic and Social Council: Thank you, Madam
President for inviting me to address the Security
Council, in my capacity as President of the Economic
and Social Council, on the important issue of women,
peace and security.

The Security Council's consideration of the
subject of women, peace and security 11 years ago,
which resulted in the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), was a landmark event in the recognition of
importance of women's equal participation and full
involvement in the maintenance of peace and security,
including in conflict management, peacekeeping and
post-conflict peacebuilding. The engagement of the
Security Council on this issue built on the work done
by the Economic and Social Council on gender
equality and women's empowerment. I wish to believe
that the Economic and Social Council was catalytic in
that regard by virtue of its historic adoption of agreed
conclusions on gender mainstreaming at its substantive
session in 1997 and of the annual follow-up that it has
carried out on the matter since then.

Those of us from the continent, which has
suffered so many conflicts, know and understand the
terrible impact of war. We also know that women and
girls suffer disproportionately - indirectly and
directly - as victims of violent conflict.

We also know that unless women are key players
in rebuilding their societies, including by playing key
roles in negotiating peace agreements, national
reconciliation and in relaunching economic recovery,
such efforts will not succeed. We also know that gender
equality and the empowerment of women are cross-
cutting issues for all development policies and, indeed,
should be a cornerstone for all policies, including for
peacemaking and peacebuilding.

The Economic and Social Council devoted its
2010 annual ministerial review last year to the
internationally agreed development goals and
commitments in regard to gender equality and the
empowerment of women. The ministerial declaration
adopted by the Council broke new ground in that, for
the first time, an intergovernmental body highlighted a
number of cross-cutting issues where action was
expected to positively enhance gender-related goals.
These cross-cutting issues are also relevant with regard
to the role of women in contributing to peacemaking
and peacebuilding.

I wish briefly to highlight some of these cross-
cutting issues, which are of particular relevance to this
debate and call for a common approach by the United
Nations system at the normative, programmatic and
operational levels.

First, discriminatory attitudes and gender
stereotypes, including in the education sector, must be
ended. This implies a strong advocacy role by the
United Nations for women's human rights and the
elaboration of media strategies and tools for outreach,
in particular when these rights are violated or
threatened to be violated.

Secondly, all forms of discrimination and
violence against women and girls must be ended. The
United Nations system is called upon to develop a
more coherent response to this phenomenon, including
through the Secretary-General's campaign on violence
against women. Special attention should also be paid to
the recognition that sexual violence can be both a cause
and a consequence of HIV/AIDS, as shown in conflict
settings where both are endemic.

Thirdly, the full empowerment of women must be
promoted, including equal participation of women and
men in decision-making. While the need to involve
women in peace processes has been extensively
addressed, progress is needed in all spheres of society
in order to strengthen the potential of women as agents
of change and their ongoing contribution to conflict
prevention.

Fourthly, it is important to address the critical
role of men and boys as an important component of
gender policies. Special initiatives should be taken to
mobilize civil-society organizations which are male-led
or working on male engagement for gender equity,
especially in conflict-prone countries, where women
and girls pay a terrible price.

Fifthly, promoting the full integration of women
into the formal economy is also particularly relevant in
post-conflict recovery and peacebuilding contexts,
where new opportunities should be offered to women
as part of the dividends of peace and as a way to
consolidate social peace. The development and security
pillars of the Organization are strongly interconnected
in this respect.

Sixthly, ensuring that women and girls with
disabilities are not subject to multiple and aggravated
forms of discrimination. Women with war-related
disabilities deserve particular attention and support.
The coordinated involvement of humanitarian,
development, health and protection actors should be
promoted by our intergovernmental bodies in order to
target this category of women and girls.

By highlighting these cross-cutting issues, I have
tried to propose a method for action through which the
United Nations can act more coherently and our work
can have increased impact. If we - the General
Assembly, the Security Council, the Economic and
Social Council and its Commission on the Status of
Women, as well as the Peacebuilding Commission -
act in concert and in an integrated way, we can help to
ensure progress in the many areas highlighted by the
indicators to track the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) highlighted in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2011/598*) that is before us today.

As my predecessor suggested last year at the
tenth-anniversary celebration of the adoption of that
important resolution, the Economic and Social Council
could do its part by ensuring follow-up and monitoring
of the indicators developed by its Statistical
Commission on violence against women. Given its
strong experience in reviewing the achievement of
development objectives, particularly the Millennium
Development Goals, the Council could engage in this
task with real know-how and institutional backup from
the United Nations system at large and by its
subsidiary bodies.

The members of the Economic and Social
Council also commit to providing the requisite
guidance to the agencies, funds and programmes on
implementing the actions required to implement
resolution 1325 (2000), particularly those linked to the
coordination of humanitarian action, the transition
from relief to development and the promotion of the
active role and participation of women in sustainable
development.
