Mr. Braun (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
thank the Secretary-General and the briefers, who have
enriched this debate. Our thanks also go to Bolivia
for organizing this debate under its presidency of the
Security Council.

The upcoming twentieth anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000) offers an opportunity to highlight and assess
the progress made since its adoption in 2000. However,
we deem regrettable the delays in its implementation
as well as the continued existence of a wide range of
structural and systemic barriers to the full realization
of women's rights and their political, economic and
social empowerment.

This year, the Security Council's Informal Expert
Group on Women and Peace and Security highlighted
a series of obstacles to women's effective participation
in peace and security processes. These include the fact
that women's economic, social and cultural rights are
not sufficiently guaranteed and that they have a low rate
of participation in politics and continue to suffer from
poverty and, in many cases, sexual and gender-based
violence. Misogynistic prejudices and institutionalized
discrimination continue to hinder sustainable peace. It
is incumbent upon us all to support the rights of women
and girls and promote gender equality as a matter of
priority in order to enable the effective implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda. In that
respect, my country fully endorses the statement
made by the observer of the European Union and will
contribute to the implementation of the commitments
that it laid out.

This year, my Government adopted its first
women and peace and security action plan for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). It is a
five-year plan that sets national and international
objectives in four areas - the equal participation of
women and men at all levels of peace and security
processes, prevention, protection against sexual and
gender-based violence along with relief and recovery,
and the promotion of the women and peace and security
agenda at the international level.

The national plan concerns all areas of Government
action relating to our foreign policy, in particular
diplomacy, defence and development, justice, refugee
reception and health, as well as internal security. My
country will support the participation of women in
decision-making on peace and security issues, including
in international organizations, and the increased
participation of women in peacekeeping operations and
electoral observation missions. The Government also
aims to strengthen predeployment training for military
and civilian personnel, including the training of gender
advisers and experts.

The women and peace and security action plan
complements our national gender-equality plan,
which promotes gender parity in decision-making and
employment and advocates the systematic integration
of the gender dimension into the strategies we pursue,
particularly with regard to our official development
assistance, which, as representatives perhaps know,
amounts to 1 per cent of our gross national income.

My country of course supports United Nations
action to implement resolution 1325 (2000). I would
like to recall our support for the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and our partnership with
Justice Rapid Response, UN-Women and the Institute
for International Criminal Investigations. We are also
one ofthe top 20 contributors, in absolute terms, to UN-
Women. I would also like to highlight our support for
the work of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Patten,
and our contributions to the Trust Fund in Support of
Victims of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse.

Finally, I would like to note that, at the end of
March 2019, Her Royal Highness the Grand Duchess of
Luxembourg will organize an international conference
in Luxembourg to strengthen support for survivors of
sexual violence, which will, we hope, contribute to the
objective of ending sexual violence in high-risk areas.

We know that gender equality is a prerequisite for
peace and sustainable development. Each State and
each regional and international organization has a role
to play in advancing the role of women in the interest
of peace and security. Only by redoubling our efforts
to end discrimination against women in times of war
and peace will we succeed in advancing the peace and
security agenda.

