Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like at the outset to congratulate you once again, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council this month, as well as your initiative to
convene this open debate on women and peace and
security to mark the tenth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000).

That resolution led to the adoption of the
2008-2009 System-wide Action Plan for implementation
across the United Nations system and to the
identification of standard indicators to measure progress
and the time frame needed to apply the indicators at the
regional and international levels. Here we recall the
prior report of the Secretary-General on women and
peace and security (S/20lO/l73), which set out
strategies and principles to guide the forging of a strong
framework for addressing gender equality and the status
of women, especially in situations of armed conflict.

On this occasion, we note the need to move
forward with the full implementation of the resolution
over the next decade by adopting comprehensive and
robust regional action plans in this field. These must
include capacity-building for developing countries that
have been afflicted by conflict, especially since the
item "Women and peace and security" has been one of
the most active on the Council's agenda over the past
10 years, as evidenced by the subsequent adoption of
three other resolutions - resolutions 1820 (2008),
1888 (2009) and 1889 (2009) - and presidential
statements and statements to the press on the same
topic. All of this has been accompanied by a substantial
body of periodic reports of the Secretary-General on
women and peace and security.

When considering the status of women, we are
able to say proudly that the Sudan has deep-rooted
pioneering experience in this field, as Sudanese women
have always been genuine partners in the political and
decision-making structures of our country since their
participation in the election of the first Sudanese
parliament in 1954 on the eve of our declaration of
independence. These gains for women developed
further when women were elected as members of the
Sudanese parliament in 1964, following independence.
Moreover, my country has applied the concept of equal
pay for equal work for men and women since 1967. It
was therefore only natural that the gains of Sudanese
women in terms of political participation continued to
develop, reaching the level of 25 per cent
representation in the federal parliament as well as in
provincial councils, in accordance with the laws
governing the elections that were held in my country
last April. This means that a quarter of the seats in
Sudan's federal and provincial legislatures are held by
women, which was mentioned by Ms. Michelle
Bachelet, Under-Secretary-General for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women, in her
statement at the opening of this debate. It is worth
mentioning as just one example that in the judiciary

alone 79 judgeships are held by Sudanese women,
many of whom have presided as judges of the Supreme
Court. Sudanese women have also held high-ranking
diplomatic positions, including ambassadorships, and
have been commanders in the armed forces, the police
and the security forces.

As for combating the phenomenon of violence
against women, the Government of the Sudan has
adopted a national strategy that was prepared by all
relevant official and public actors. The strategy has
been implemented at the central and provincial levels.
The fruits of the strategy include the establishment of
social police units which deal with women's issues and
combat all forms of discrimination and violence
against women, including sexual violence.

Many specialized centres have also been founded
at the central and provincial levels in order to
coordinate women's efforts in the fields of peace and
development and to offer women-oriented guidance
and consultations on bolstering the concept of gender
equality and dealing with the status of women in areas
afflicted by war, be it in the southern parts of the
country or in Darfur. It is worth noting here that
disarmament, demobilization, resettlement and
reintegration programmes have given special priority
to the situation of women, in close coordination with
relevant United Nations agencies, including the United
Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM).

Today, we would like to commend the existing
cooperation with UNIFEM. and its active role in
translating the aforementioned action plan into tangible
reality. We look forward to seeing UNIFEM, through
the new gender Entity at the United Nations, play a
larger role in terms of building national capacity and
supporting efforts aimed at the advancement of women
and improvement of their status, especially in
post-conflict areas.

We would also like to recall aspects relating to
the status of women within the framework of
attainment of the Millennium Development Goals.
Building the capacity of developing countries and
enabling them to achieve the Goals would be the most
efficient way to improve the status of women, bearing
in mind the Beijing Platform for Action and especially
in the light of the close link between the Platform for
Action and the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals and their impact on factors relating
to progress in improving the status of women.

The Government of the Sudan has been
celebrating the tenth anniversary of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security since 10 June. In Khartoum, our capital, we
held an expanded workshop and an open day to
celebrate the anniversary, in coordination with the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) and the
Sudan country offices of United Nations agencies, at
the forefront of which was UNIFEM.

It is also worth noting that preparatory work for
the open day included workshops attended by women
in several parts of the Sudan, including Khartoum and
Juba, the capital of the southern province, the Warab
province in the south and the provinces of East and
Central Equatoria, as well as the three provinces of
Darfur. We would also note that, in coordination with
UNMIS and the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), 88 women members
of provincial councils have been trained on
mainstreaming a gender perspective on all levels, and
female police units in the south and in Darfur have
been trained in capacity-building.

The situation of women in armed conflict has
always been part of dealing comprehensively with the
root causes of conflict. Therefore, we endorse the
report's reference to a work plan covering the
underlying causes of conflict, such as poverty,
socio-economic and gender inequalities, endemic
underdevelopment, weak or non-existent institutions
and the absence of effective governance. This approach
is based on the fact that war is war. Wherever war
breaks out, its negative impact affects the vulnerable
parts of society: women and children. Accordingly, we
affirm that a comprehensive and sustainable political
settlement of conflicts is the mother of all solutions for
all issues pertaining to the situation of women in armed
conflict.

We also affirm that the Security Council's
effectiveness in implementing and following up on
resolution 1325 (2000), including the specific measures
undertaken to that effect, must be based on accurate
information. I repeat: all these actions and measures
must be based on accurate information contained in the
Secretary-General's periodic reports on the issue, not
on information cited in the reports of certain
non-govemmental organizations and media
organizations.

We also affirm the need for the Council to rely on
the country reports submitted by Member States on
their implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We urge
the United Nations and its missions to organize
workshops and consultative round tables with those
involved in countries affected by conflict in order to
exchange experiences regarding the overall situation of
women in armed conflict.

