Ms. Jaf: I was born a refugee during a chemical-gas
attack in Kurdistan. Thanks to my mother. I was also
born a feminist. After spending the first 15 years of my
life in camps and asylum centres, I am now dedicating
my life to working with and empowering other refugee
women and girls. I am speaking today in my capacity
as founder and Director of Women's Refugee Route and
on behalf of the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace
and Security. I am speaking here in complete safety.
Yet many displaced women and girls do not have that
luxury, especially since one in five of them have been
raped or experienced other forms of sexual violence.

Sexual violence is a gender crime used to shame,
demonstrate power and reinforce gender norms. It
sustains fear and insecurity. The stigma associated
with sexual violence prevents many survivors from
reporting abuse, accessing medical and psychosocial
services and seeking justice. I want to focus on the
need for gender-sensitive support for refugees and the
critical importance of empowering refugee women. I
also want to highlight the urgent need for programmes
that cater to all populations at risk, including refugees
with disabilities, lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender
and intersex (LGBTI) individuals, and men and boys.

More than 65 million people around the world
have been displaced from their homes as a result of
persecution, conflict or human rights violations, often
intensified by the flow of arms. In times of crisis,
women and girls are at a heightened risk for all forms of
gender-based violence, from rape to assault, domestic
violence and early marriage, as well as exploitation by
smugglers. Displaced women and girls also experience
disruptions to their education and livelihoods and often
have to take drastic measures to survive. Women have
told me that they have engaged in prostitution for as
little as a couple of euros in order to be able to feed
their families. One woman in particular has stayed in
my heart ~ she was the same age as me and had to sell
her body to buy milk for her baby.

I founded my organization when I realized that
international humanitarian responses to refugee
populations were largely gender-blind. For example, a
woman I worked with at a refugee processing centre
wanted to report her violent husband. I went with her
to help translate for her, but the shelter insisted that she
speak using their interpreter, who was a man. She did not
feel comfortable doing that and cancelled the meeting.
In every refugee setting I have worked in, there is a
huge lack of trained women interpreters, volunteers and
specialized service providers for dealing with survivors
of sexual and gender-based violence, and a lack of
understanding of the ways in which services must be
adapted if they are to be gender-sensitive.

The fear of stigmatization and of breaches of
confidentiality also compound access issues. I met a
17-year-old woman who had fled the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham and been raped by soldiers at a border
crossing. She left her family so that she would not have
to tell them what had happened, and continued on her
own. She was too scared and ashamed to report the rape
and so received no medical assistance until she reached
her final destination in Northern Europe, where she
gave birth. That is despite the fact that international
humanitarian law says that donor aid must be delivered
in a non-discriminatory manner that includes access to
sexual and reproductive health care such as abortion.
In Greece, I urged a 16-year-old unaccompanied minor
from Afghanistan who had been gang-raped to report it
and thereby get access to services. She refused, asking
me what the point of reporting it was if the system
would not protect her.

It is also very urgent that we address the protection
needs of groups that are at risk. I recently met a refugee
woman in a wheelchair who had to struggle even to
maintain basic hygiene. She could not lock the shower
once her wheelchair was in it, and she was too scared
to take a shower when the door was open. The tools and
guidelines to protect displaced women and girls from
sexual and gender-based violence already exist. We
need the political will to consistently implement them.

Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex
refugees, because of their sexual orientation, gender
identity or sex characteristics, face an increased
risk of discrimination and violence compared to the
larger refugee population. Many flee persecution, but
subsequently do not disclose their sexual orientation,
gender identity or intersex status to service providers
out of fear of becoming the victim of more violence.
Moreover, notions of masculinity prevent abused and at-
risk men from admitting their vulnerabilities to sexual
violence and from seeking support. My colleagues
who work with refugee men also talk of the challenges
encountered in getting those who were raped to report
it. They say they need to "remain men".

Time and time again, I see humanitarian agencies
working to implement standardized programmes
instead of adapting responses to the survivor's concerns
and needs. Yet, not all refugee camps and protection
programmes are the same. Those where refugee women
have been consulted in designing and implementing
protection strategies are much safer. Refugee women are
resilient. They have survived the unimaginable. When
empowered to advocate for themselves and to be part of
the decision-making on providing a safe environment
and work opportunities, refugee women become the
bedrock of peaceful and sustainable communities.
Investing in women and women's organizations that
support empowerment is critical.

Sexual violence in conflict does not happen in a
vacuum. It is the result of systematic failures on the
part of the international community to address the root
cause of conflict, gender inequality and impunity. That
must end. I call on the Security Council and all Member
States to undertake the following: promote gender
equality and women's and girls' empowerment as
fundamental to all efforts to prevent and address sexual
violence in conflict and support women's organizations
working on the front lines; join and support the Call
To Action on Protection from Gender-based Violence
in Emergencies; ensure that the Global Compact on
Refugees, to be completed in 2018, is progressive in
meeting the needs of refugee women and girls; uphold
the rights of all refugees by urgently improving access
to international protection through humanitarian visas,
increasing refugee resettlements, granting greater
access to information and fair hearings; ensure that aid
complies with international humanitarian law and is
not subject to donor limitations, including the denial of
sexual and reproductive health care, such as abortions;
commit to programmes that are informed by gender
analysis, meet the needs of all survivors and include
sex- and age-disaggregated data, which must involve
gender-sensitive training on working with survivors for
all field workers and including survivors in consultations
on their individual protection strategies; lastly, curb the
flows of small arms by ratifying the Arms Trade Treaty
and implementing it through enforced national laws
and regulations.

It is not enough to condemn acts of sexual violence
in conflict. Everyone here today is responsible for
putting an end to such violence, bringing all the
perpetrators to justice and putting women at the front
and centre of all responses to prevent it.

