Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to start by thanking the Russian Federation for
its efforts in the framework of its presidency of the
Security Council this month. I wish you, Sir, every
possible success at the head ofthe Council. Iwould also
like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
report (S/2016/822). We welcome the recommendations
contained therein.

We reaffirm the importance of women's full
participation in efforts to achieve peace and security
and the ensuring that the necessary resources and funds
are available to implement these programmes. We are
here today to assess the efforts of the international
community, in terms not only of the settlement of
conflict, but also of the empowerment of women in
the context of forging of lasting peace. We are also
here to assess women's role in peace negotiations, the
prevention of conflict, humanitarian assistance and the
fight against extremism.

We are pursuing our efforts to strengthen the
participation of women in decision-making and have
made qualitative progress, as reflected in the results
of the most recent parliamentary elections, which were
held in September. The number of women in Parliament
has increased from 12 to 24 per cent and 18 per cent of
our magistrates are now women. There are also a great
many Jordanian women who hold high positions.
Jordan is a pioneer regionally and internationally
in its contributions to peace and security. We are a
troop-contributing country and participate in dialogue
and mediation efforts. Jordan is one of the largest
contributors of troops to the United Nations. We also
contribute police to peacekeeping missions, including
21 Jordanian women, and the number of women
participating in such missions will grow. This clearly
underscores the importance we attach to strengthening
the role of women in peacekeeping operations.

We would like to stress the importance of adopting
and taking this aspect into account in peacekeeping
operations. Jordan continues to suffer from an
unprecedented flow of refugees, including Syrian
refugees, but despite the social, economic and security
burden that this places on us and the chronic lack of
water and electricity, Jordan is committed to sparing no
effort to provide protection and basic services to Syrian
refugees, including female refugees, who constitute
51 per cent of refugees in the Kingdom. This is in
keeping with the priorities for women and peace and
security and the relevant Security Council resolutions.

As members know, the Security Council recently
adopted resolution 2250 (2015), on youth, peace and
security, following the call ofhis Royal Highness Prince
Al-Hussein bin Abdullah II in favour ofa strengthening
of the participation of youth in peace efforts. Youth
are drivers of peace and they contribute to the fight
against violent extremism and their participation in
decision-making must be strengthened.

The Government of Jordan has committed itself to
drafting anational plan forwomen and peace and security
and to accelerating its adoption. Indeed, we firmly
believe that the main victims of conflict are women and
girls. Women play an essential role in forging peace,
and peace cannot be established in societies without the
serious and concrete participation of women. Similarly,
we cannot implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development without empowering women and girls,
achieving gender equality and, of course, eradicating
all forms of discrimination.

The Jordanian National Commission for Women,
in cooperation with UN-Women and other bodies,
has organized participative consultations, bringing
together all relevant stakeholders and actors, including
communities hosting refugees. These consultations have
underscored the need to strengthen the participation of
women in peacekeeping operations and to enhance the
training provided and to fight against violence against
women, which is often rooted in social causes.
Official bodies, civil society and international
organizations all provide various forms of assistance
in Jordan with the objective of eliminating the
violence and discrimination aimed at marginalized
and discriminated populations. A great many projects
managed by women deployed in refugee camps
and communities hosting refugees also enjoy our
support. Jordan is working alongside the international
community to counter extremism by all means and to
fight against the exploitation of women and girls by
Da'esh and other similar organizations.

In conclusion, Jordan will continue to work at all
levels to strengthen the United Nations programme
on women and peace and security in order to provide
a better future to refugee women and girls. The
international community must also mitigate the
suffering of women and girls under Israeli occupation,
including those detained in Israeli prisons. Their rights
must be upheld. We must also work hand in hand to
build peace in post-conflict situations and to eradicate
the causes of conflict. Women play a very important
role in that regard.

