Mr. Islam (Bangladesh): We thank the Peruvian
presidency of the Security Council for organizing this
open debate.

The Secretary-General's report on conflict-related
sexual violence makes for difficult reading. The report
aptly observes that:

"[w]hile significant normative progress has been
achieved in recent years words on paper are not
yet matched by facts on the ground." (S/2018/250, para. 10)
It is also perhaps telling that the majority of the 47
listed parties from 19 country situations enumerated
in the report happen to be non-State actors. The
analytical perspectives shared on the underlying
causes of sexual violence in times of war and peace
and the multidimensional motivations and drivers that
the perpetrators take recourse to in unleashing such
violence reinforce the complexity and depravity of this
scourge. We consider the report's recommendations
to be objective, pragmatic and urgent. We urge the
Security Council to ensure concrete deliverables on
the basis of the recommendations to further validate
its recognition of conflict-related sexual violence as a
threat to international peace and security.

At the previous open debate on women and peace
and security, held in October 2017 (see S/PV.8079), we
flagged the need for Rohingya women and girls to have
an opportunity to have their voices heard in the Council.
We acknowledge the powerful testimony given today
by Ms. Razia Sultana, a Rohingya representative, on
behalf of the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace
and Security. It is a credit to Ms. Pramila Patten, the
Secretary General's Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, that she could help amplify the
voices of the Rohingya women in the Chamber. We hear
and share Ms. Sultana's concerns about the protection
needs and challenges faced by the displaced Rohingya
women and girls in Bangladesh.

It continues to be a race against time to ensure
humanitarian assistance and protection for nearly
700,000 displaced people, the majority being women
and children. Humanitarian actors have identified
more than 2,000 pregnant women requiring particular
attention. In general, considerable unmet needs remain
in terms of providing reproductive health care and
services to survivors of sexual violence and others.
It will be critical for the international community
to support the work of the United Nations agencies
concerned and their partners by providing services to
those in need.

In an otherwise socially conservative milieu, the
women- and child-friendly spaces in the camps provide
a lifeline for the survivors of sexual violence and
related trauma. We encourage community leaders and
service providers to help the affected women and girls
to come forward to articulate their needs and register
their voices in decisions that impact their lives and
futures. The concerns over stigma need to be addressed
and must be shifted from the victims to the perpetrators
in a demonstrable manner.
Our authorities have looked seriously into reports
of the trafficking and sexual exploitation of Rohingya
women and girls. It would be regrettable if such
incidents were to take place despite the overwhelming
presence on the ground of law enforcement personnel
and humanitarian actors. While recommendations
for additional safeguards are being duly considered,
there is no guarantee against such aberrations other
than restoring hope among the displaced Rohingya by
ensuring the safe, secure and dignified return to their
homes in Myanmar's Rakhine state. We believe that
Security Council members will be in a position to gather
further insights into the possibilities for the Rohingya's
voluntary repatriation during their forthcoming visit to
Myanmar and Bangladesh.

It is crucial that priority be given to preventing
conflict-related sexual violence and that we remain
committed to responding to such violence. The Special
Representative's three-pillar strategy deserves to be
further discussed and elaborated on in the context of
the mutually reinforcing agenda on women and peace
and security, sustaining peace and the Sustainable
Development Goals.

There is no denying that a bulwark against the use
of sexual violence as a tactic of war and of terrorism
can be created only when the structural and gender-
based inequalities that are inherent in our mindsets
and societies can be effectively addressed. The 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development provides many
cross-cutting pathways for advancing women's
empowerment and gender equality. Yet even that
universal and ambitious Agenda will continue to fall
short unless the gender-related targets are pursued in
parallel with progressive change in prevailing gender
norms across societies.

The culture of impunity often surrounding conflict-
related sexual violence also perpetuates the vicious
cycle. In cases where the State concerned is unwilling
or unable to ensure accountability and justice for such
crimes, the international community, especially the
Security Council, cannot avoid its responsibility. There
have been resounding calls for the Council to consider

referrals to the International Criminal Court and for
appropriate sanctions against the entities listed in the
Secretary General's report. In particular, the Secretariat
also has a responsibility to ensure that the State actors
listed are barred from United Nations peacekeeping
operations. The shrinking resources for protection
and gender experts in peacekeeping missions must
be reversed.
Against the backdrop of the immediate crisis faced
by the Rohingya women and girls, our authorities are
moving ahead with work on developing a national
action plan on women and peace and security through
consultations with all the actors concerned. We look
forward to continued engagement with the Special
Representative's Office and other partners to translate
our plans and commitments into results-oriented action.

