Mr. Hamer (Netherlands): First of all I want to
join others in congratulating you, Sir, and your
delegation for your initiative in organizing today's
important and timely meeting. We welcome the
increased attention of the United Nations to the
position of women in situations of conflict. Women and
children constitute a disproportionate number of the
civilians affected by armed conflict. This open debate,
taking place on the fifty-fifth United Nations Day, is an
important step in focusing attention on women victims
of conflicts and in getting women more actively
involved in conflict prevention and conflict resolution,
as well as peace-building.

The representative of France will make a
statement on behalf of the European Union to which
my delegation fully subscribes. I will therefore limit
myself to a few observations on the issue of women
and peace and security.

We were briefed today by Assistant Secretary-
General King and by Ms. Heyzer of United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) on the
special needs of women in conflict situations and on
the important contributions they can make to peace and
security. I was struck in particular by Ms. Heyzer's
important analysis of the way the Security Council can
involve these women. For instance, she made the points
that the security of women is the best indicator of the
security of a nation, and that an early-warning system
must take women's voices into account. Ms. Heyzer's
lucid comments underscore once again the critical
input that others can give - and, in the Council's own
interest, should be encouraged to give- to improve
the functioning of the Security Council.

Ms. Heyzer's comments also underscore the
importance of yesterday's Arria formula meeting,
chaired by Ambassador Durrant, with some key non-
governmental organizations active in this field. These
non-governmental organizations play an essential role
in ensuring that the Security Council receives the
information it needs to allow women to play their
important role in peacemaking.

The Netherlands has been working actively with
these organizations to increase the involvement of
women in peace-building activities. In Sudan and in
Israel and the Palestinian territories, the Netherlands
has supported women's organizations taking a more
active part in conflict resolution and peace-building.
We have also supported UNIFEM. in the work it has
undertaken in this regard - work that was referred to
by Ms. Heyzer today.

A peace agreement in which half the population
plays no part has little chance of success. We would
welcome more of such joint efforts to increase
women's involvement in peace-building activities, and
we are ready to share with others the lessons learned
from the activities undertaken.

The twenty-third special session of the General
Assembly encouraged the United Nations system to
involve women in peacekeeping and peace-building
activities, for instance by appointing more women as
special envoys or special representatives of the
Secretary-General. A gender perspective should be
included in all policies and programmes addressing
armed conflicts - not only within the United Nations
system, but also in regional organizations involved in
issues of peace and security, such as the Organization
of African Unity, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the Inter-
Governmental Authority on Development. In this
regard, the Netherlands has decided to fund a gender
adviser for the OSCE. We hope that with the necessary
political support such gender advisers can help to
mainstream a gender perspective in peace and security
matters.

A landmark breakthrough in the protection of
women in armed conflicts was of course the inclusion
of the issue of gender-based violence in the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court. Rape,
sexual slavery, enforced prostitution, forced pregnancy,
enforced sterilization and other forms of sexual
violence are war crimes when committed in the context
of armed conflict, and under defined circumstances
they constitute crimes against humanity. We have to
aim at preventing such gender-based violence, take
measures to support the prosecution of all persons
responsible for such crimes, provide victims avenues
for redress and increase awareness of the extent to
which such crimes are used as weapons of war. Above
all, the message must be that there can be no impunity
for perpetrators of sexual violence against women.

Refugees and internally displaced persons are
likely to suffer most in times of armed conflict. In such
situations women, children and the elderly are most
vulnerable. In its emergency aid programmes the
Netherlands pays particular attention, therefore, to the
needs of women refugees, focusing, for instance, on the
issue of reproductive rights. We have supported
projects of the United Nations Population Fund, the
United Nations Children's Fund and the non-
governmental organization CARE in Sudan and
Somalia.

We must not forget that women and children are
particularly vulnerable in post-conflict situations. As
they go out to the fields in search of food and firewood
they are at risk of becoming victims of landmines, for
instance. When setting up mine-awareness campaigns,
it is therefore essential that particular attention be paid
to women and children.

To conclude, we believe that this Security
Council debate constitutes an important step in the
protection of women in armed conflict and in realizing
their potential as an important part of the solution. In
the follow-up to this debate the Council should further
consider concrete ways and means of protecting the
human rights of women during armed conflicts and of
ensuring adequate participation and representation of
women in peacekeeping activities. The draft resolution
presented to the Council seems to us the right way
forward.

