Ms. Laj (Denmark): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The countries of
Central and Eastern Europe associated with the
European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia, Slovenia - and the associated countries
Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, as well as the European
Free Trade Association country member of the
European Economic Area Iceland, align themselves
with this statement.

We appreciate that this important issue is once
again on the agenda of the Security Council and
welcome the Report of the Secretary-General on
women, peace and security.

In the statement to the Security Council on 25
July 2002 I presented the European Union views with
regard to conflict, peacekeeping and gender. Based on
this, I then provided some practical proposals for
consideration in the study on women, peace and
security. The report of the Secretary-General in front of
us today highlights the major findings of the study and
it would therefore be appropriate for me to offer some
comments on this report.

Allow me first of all to congratulate the
Secretary-General and his staff on an excellent report.
The 21 action points provide some very practical
recommendations that are possible to implement. Once
implemented, the action points will ensure important
progress towards the full and equal participation of
women and men in all stages of conflict resolution,
peacekeeping, peace-building and reconstruction
processes. The European Union (EU) is a firm
supporter of human rights for all, and welcomes and
fully agrees with the recommendations of the
Secretary-General regarding the human rights of
women and girls.

Allow me to bring forward four mainly positive
points from the report that the European Union
believes should be highlighted in today's meeting, and
one less positive point. First, the European Union
supports the proposal to fully integrate gender
perspectives in the planning, the mandates and all the
phases of peace processes. This will require
appropriate tools, such as guidelines and training
programmes. In that regard, the European Union is
happy to note, that the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) is developing concrete tools to
help mainstream gender perspectives into the daily
work of all mission components. With that in mind, the
European Union looks forward to receiving the long-
awaited handbook on multidimensional peacekeeping
operations, with a chapter on gender mainstreaming.

Secondly, we would like to reiterate our support
for the establishment of gender offices or focal points
in all field missions and for their being provided with
the necessary support. That support would also mean
proper back-stopping in DPKO, with the establishment
of a focal point on gender issues, as has been
recommended by the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations. We would, therefore, urge
the Secretary-General to take the necessary steps to
ensure the establishment of this gender capacity in
DPKO.

Thirdly, we regret the continued lack of gender
balance in all aspects of peace operations, but we note
with appreciation that the Secretary-General will make
an even more determined effort to increase the
appointment of women at the Special Representative
and Deputy Special Representative levels. The States
members of the European Union will continue to
provide the Secretary-General with qualified female
candidates to serve in such positions.

Fourthly and finally, the findings of the report
with regard to the inclusion of women, girls and child
soldiers in disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) programmes are important lessons
learned. They need to be considered carefully in all
future missions where DDR programmes are to be
developed and implemented.

In the view of the European Union, there is one
less positive point in the report. That is the lack of
reference to the Secretary-General's bulletin on
observance by United Nations forces of international
humanitarian law (ST/SGB/1999/ 13). That bulletin
includes some valid gender paragraphs, and we believe
that all United Nations-mandated military operations
should operate in accordance with the bulletin.

At the Council's meeting in July, I provided
information on an EU-Latin American conference on
women in peace operations. The conference is to take
place in Chile in early November and will include key
players from Latin American and EU countries. The
report of the Secretary-General and the considerations
of the Security Council will undoubtedly be the subject
of extensive discussions, with a focus on the
implementation part of the report.

This leads me to my final point. We will all be
looking for guidance on the way forward in the report
of the Secretary-General and in the recommendations
of the Security Council. But the full and equal
participation of women in peace processes is the
responsibility of many more - that is, the Member
States, the United Nations system, non-governmental
organizations, civil society and others.

The European Union and its member States look
forward to doing our part. We hope that the Security
Council will carefully consider the recommendations
made by the Secretary-General to protect women in
crisis situations and to enhance their role in peace
processes.

