Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French): Madam
President, Switzerland would like to thank you for
organizing this open debate, even if its very holding
is admission that we have all failed in our collective
efforts to eradicate sexual Violence against women. The
recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/203) is
bleak testimony to this fact. It reports on rape, sexual
slavery and forced marriage perpeatred mostly by armed
groups, sometimes as a tactic of terror, especially in
Iraq, Syria, Somalia, Nigeria, Mali, Libya and Yemen.
We previously heard examples of this in the past.

The many statements that we have heard today are
undoubtedly important, but we must act and adjust our
strategy in order to tackle this issue. In that regard,
Switzerland would like to put forward three specific
suggestions.

First, the examples that I have just given show
that acts of sexual violence are often committed by
non-State armed groups. To prevent such terrible acts,
we must engage in dialogue with these actors, even if
these are groups that we would rather not speak to. This
dialogue, of course, must be led in a way that is adapted
to each situation, but experience shows that it can help
to reduce sexual violence if it is led competently. For
example, the Swiss non-governmental organization
Geneva Call has already been able to obtain specific,
time-bound commitments from non-State armed actors
to put an end to sexual violence and to comply more
closely with humanitarian law and human rights law.
Switzerland supports the activity of such organizations.

Secondly, we must strengthen the implementation
of the Secretary-General's recommendations to
prevent sexual violence with measures to fight extreme
violence. Conflict-prevention measures must take
gender specificities into account of course, and only
the inclusion of women in the analysis of conflicts
will enable States to design appropriate replies. We
must also support civil society, particularly women's
organizations, and ensure that they are included in a
significant way in all preventive measures in ongoing
peace processes.

Thirdly, Switzerland believes that security and
justice institutions can have a decisive impact on
conditions that promote an increase or a reduction in
sexual violence. On 9 September, Switzerland will
convene a meeting in Geneva on resolution 1325 (2000),
at which we will take stock of innovative measures to
address the root causes of gender-based violence on the

women and peace and security agenda, including efforts
to reform security andjustice institutions. Our aim is to
develop concrete recommendations to that end.

Finally, we commend the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Zainab Bangura, for her leadership and initiatives.
We also thank her for her update on the efforts deployed
by the United Nations system to date, including through
the inter-agency network United Nations Action against
Sexual Violence in Conflict. Switzerland stands ready to
deploy experts within United Nations Action to support
Governments in the development of comprehensive
national strategies.

