Mr. Tangara (Gambia): The Islamic Republic of
the Gambia would like to align itself with the statement
made on behalf of the African Union.

At the outset, I wish to congratulate the Russian
Federation for being at the helm ofthe Security Council
for the month of October. I commend the President for
the able manner in which he has conducted the affairs
and proceedings of our meeting and for including the
issue of women and peace and security on the agenda
of the Security Council. It is an issue to which my
delegation attaches great importance. I also thank the
Secretary-General and the Executive Director of UN-
Women for the very exhaustive briefings they presented.

As a country in which women represent 51 per
cent of the population, the Islamic Republic of the
Gambia welcomes this debate on women and peace
and security. Over the years, we have come to recognize
the importance of women in peacebuilding and the
peaceful resolution of conflicts, yet we have not been
able to give women the requisite power or even status
to play a role in the achievement of peace and security.
We recognize the gallant efforts of the United
Nations as exemplified in many resolutions, especially
resolution 1325 (2000), which enjoins us all to involve
women in peacekeeping, the prevention of conflict
and post-conflict reconstruction. Unfortunately, time
and circumstances have shown that lack of political
will, intolerance leading to conflicts, and archaic laws
continue to serve as obstacles to the full participation
of women in the quest for peace and security.

The only effective way to facilitate the direct
involvement of women in efforts aimed at creating a
culture of peace in the world is to ensure that women
have access and a voice at the table where policies
and programmes are articulated. In almost all cases,
women in peacekeeping operations are relegated to
secondary roles. Yet there are many roles, especially
in the negotiating process, in which women can play an
effective role and make effective contributions.

As a start, we should encourage the appointment of
more women to key and pivotal positions in peacekeeping
operations. We note the positive move in Darfur, where
the Commissioner of Police is a woman. In Abidjan, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General is also
a woman. There are other such appointments, but more
needs to be done.

We cannot speak of peace without taking concrete
steps to outlaw violence against women. It is sad,
indeed tragic, that women and girls are still subjected
to rape and other forms of violence. Women are the
soft targets in any conflict, and now we are witnessing
the alarming rate at which the rape of women is being
used as a weapon of war. This atrocity must stop, and
we wish to add our voice in condemning it as a gross
violation of human rights.

Rape, with all the pain and indignities it entails,
should not only be condemned but also prosecuted.
It should be prosecuted as a human rights violation
punishable by stiff penalties. Rape in war zones should
be made a crime against humanity and prosecuted by
all countries. Those who use rape and violence against
women should have no place to hide, and we should
articulate international laws that will give all countries
the right to prosecute the perpetrators of this horrible
act if they enter our jurisdictions.

I also wish to underscore the importance of
education in our quest to further peace and security.
Our experience in the Gambia is that when given
opportunities, women constitute a formidable force
capable of transforming a nation. That is why we in the
Gambia regard women as agents ofchange and progress.
The world will benefit from the vast knowledge and
experience of women if we empower them in the context
of the peacekeeping operations of the United Nations.
As pillars of our societies and natural pacifiers, women,
along with men, can be valuable agents that can change
the world.

We have made some progress, but much remains
to be done. There is a need to work on breaking down
the barriers of age-old prejudices against women.
Traditional society's entrenched notions about women
must be eradicated through education and persuasion.
We call on all national Governments and the United
Nations to adopt a policy of affirmative action that will
bring women into the mainstream of activities. What
is at stake is crucial, because the continued exclusion
of women from the peace and security processes will
render our efforts invalid.

