Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): Austria commends you,
Mr. President, and the Ghanaian presidency, for
holding this open debate on women and peace and
security, because we all agree that women are affected
severely by conflict. All too often, however, they have
no say in peace negotiations, peacebuilding and
reconstruction. The adoption of resolution 1325 (2000)
seven years ago was a milestone in acknowledging the
crucial role that women should have in all efforts to
promote peace. Despite certain developments, the full
potential of women in conflict resolution and
peacebuilding has not been harnessed so far. There is
no question that we need to address that gap as a matter
of urgency.

Women across the world are ready to bear a key
responsibility in conflict prevention, conflict resolution
and peacebuilding. Allow me to give you an example:
women in the Arab world and throughout the Middle
East have become a driving force for political, social,
economic and cultural development. The international
conference on "Women leaders - networking for
peace and security in the Middle East" held in Vienna
in May 2007 proved that women are ready to reach out
for dialogue to establish networks for overcoming
barriers and finding sustainable solutions. The Austrian
Foreign Minister, Ursula Plassnik, has therefore raised
the need for sustained involvement of women with the
new Envoy of the Middle East Quartet.

Austria has also invited women leaders from
Serbia and Kosovo to meet in Vienna in November at a
symposium entitled "Shaping our European future" in
order to contribute to peaceful coexistence and
cooperation in the region and to a common European
future with Serbia and Kosovo. The role of women
within the United Nations system needs further
improvement. Until very recently there was not a
single woman among the more than 50 United Nations
Special Representatives and Envoys for conflict and
post-conflict situations.

The Women Leaders' Network, co-chaired by
Austrian Foreign Minister Ursula Plassnik and
Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice, adopted at its
recent meeting in Vienna a set of recommendations on
the empowerment of women in the area of conflict
resolution and peacebuilding. One of its key demands
is a fair share of international mediation and
peacebuilding positions for women. The
recommendations were brought to the attention of the
Secretary-General (A/61/ 1036). We are encouraged by
his strong support and the recent appointment of Ellen
Margrethe Loj as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Liberia and of three women as
Deputy Special Representatives. We hope to see more
appointments of women to such leadership positions in
the near future. Of course, we the Member States, have
to make sure to nominate more female candidates for
such positions.

We are deeply shocked by the recent reports of an
unprecedented wave of mass rapes of women in the

Eastern Congo. Widespread sexual and gender-based
violence is ongoing in other conflict and post-conflict
situations as well. Those acts are horrendous crimes,
for which those responsible must be brought to justice.
They also have far-reaching implications for the
development of affected societies in general. For that
reason, Austria is increasing its support for campaigns
against sexual violence and assistance programmes for
victims of sexual violence in the Eastern Congo.

Austria strongly supports the zero-tolerance
policy concerning sexual abuse and exploitation by
United Nations personnel. It is simply unacceptable
that peacekeepers and field personnel are still involved
in cases of sexual exploitation and abuse. We therefore
lend our full support to the ongoing work on a draft
policy statement and comprehensive strategy on
assistance and support to victims of sexual exploitation
and abuse by United Nations staff and related
personnel.

Effectively mainstreaming a gender perspective
into all peace and security issues is a prerequisite for
addressing the reality of women in conflict and post-
conflict situations. That requires an intricate
understanding of the gender dimension and
comprehensive information and data on the particular
situation of women. To that end, the Security Council
should consider - as previous speakers have already
indicated - the establishment of a permanent
monitoring mechanism on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).

In August this year, the Government of Austria
adopted a national action plan for the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). The plan was developed in
close consultation with all stakeholders, including non-
governmental organizations and academics. It foresees
actions to be taken at the national, regional and
international levels, including the following actions:
the percentage of women among Austrian personnel in
peace missions shall be raised, including by offering
specific incentives to women; training programmes for
Austrian personnel in peace missions shall be reviewed
in order to systematically address gender aspects and
the rights of women, including a firm zero-tolerance
policy on sexual abuse and exploitation.
Austria will continue to lobby for the full
implementation of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000) in the European Union and other regional and
international organizations. Austrian development
cooperation in post-conflict situations will continue to
focus on gender-specific programmes.

The Austrian action plan is designed as a living
document and will be reviewed annually. We are,
therefore, very interested to share experiences and
good practices with all countries. I am confident that
the national action plan will be an effective tool for
reinforcing our efforts to fully integrate gender aspects
into our activities in the field of peace and security.

