Mr. Doubane (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): Like Ms. Bangura, I had prepared a speech,
but given the changing situation I will deliver only the
last part of what I had prepared.

Allow me at the outset to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of January. I take
this opportunity to pay tribute to your predecessor, the
Ambassador of the Kingdom of Morocco. I thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2012/956) on my
country, the Central African Republic, which is the
subject of our meeting today. I also take this opportunity
to express our thanks and friendship to Ms. Vogt,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in the Central African Republic and her team for
their tireless work to support peace and development in
my country.

Since we are at the dawn ofa new year, I would like
to offer my best wishes to all representatives and their
families.

The Central African Republic takes note of the
report that has just been presented, and welcomes
the progress noted therein towards bringing peace
and development to my country after so many years
of suffering due to multiple internal revolts and the
presence of foreign insurgencies on our territory. Despite
some ongoing difficulties, my country's Government is
progressively establishing genuine rule of law and has
made further progress since 10 December; indeed, the
report of the Secretary-General has been superceded by
developments on the ground.

We can say that, as of 10 December, the international
community was again showing signs of fatigue. The
Special Representative's video teleconference briefing
reflected this fact since, for a number of days, she has
been managing the situation in the Central African
Republic not from Bangui as she did previously, but
from Yaounde, where she is living, since the entire
delegation and all agencies have been moved to
Cameroon. That is also why she introduced her report
from Libreville while the talks are being held. Hence,
the report has become completely obsolete since it was
published.

As I was saying, the international community and
the Central African people themselves are without
doubt tired of this ongoing instability and insecurity,
which is caused by the ready and abusive use ofthe gun
as a means to settle the disputes and other problems that
unfortunately beset my country, the Central African
Republic. This is certainly an understandable attitude,
but I can assure the Council here and now that the
Central African people are well aware of the situation
and can together say, "we have understood this and
understood it well".

That is why the meeting of Heads of States of
the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) included a discussion on ways to resolve this
latest of many crises that have affected the Central
African Republic and undermined its national unity
and cohesion. Everybody is now convinced that the
talks in Libreville are the last lifeline for the Central
African Republic because the threat of war is clear in
our fragile State and among its people.

In the light of this situation, the Government favours
dialogue and, like the people of the Central African
Republic and the entire international community
represented here, places considerable hope in the
implementaiton of fair, balanced, realistic and practical
solutions that will lead to lasting, even definitive peace
in the Central African Republic. We thank God that the
signing of the three agreements has led to some easing
of the tension. The Government is now committed,
with the support of the follow-up committee to be
established, to implement the recommendations,
resolutions and other decisions that have emerged from
the talks in the interest of peace and reconciliation
between the daughters and sons of the Central African
Republic.

In conclusion, my delegation would simply like
to thank from the bottom of our heart all those who,
despite the various challenges, have continued to
support the Central African Republic in its pursuit of
peace and stability, in particular States members of
ECCAS, friendly countries, the African Union, the
European Union, the United Nations, the International
Organization of la Francophonie, international financial
institutions, multilateral and bilateral partners, without
forgetting national and international non-governmental
organizations or simply those who, out ofgoodwill, have
worked on the sidelines. In that connection, I would like
to say that the Gabonese people, who were critical in
providing hospitality to the African delegation, deserve
all our thanks.

Finally, in closing, I would like to end by saying that
acting to restore peace in the Central African Republic
is to act in favour of the stability of the subregion and
of Africa as a whole.

