Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We were unable to support resolution 2467
(2019), submitted by Germany.

The Russian Federation firmly condemns sexual
violence in armed conflict. We have consistently
advocated eradicating that abhorrent war crime.
Any type of violence against civilians in wartime is
absolutely unacceptable, and sexual abuse is equally
unacceptable at any time, notjust during armed conflict.
In the circumstances, we are truly disappointed with
the approach of the coordinators of the negotiation
process, who in hastily preparing for today's open
debate submitted a non-consensus draft text. That is
a dangerous precedent that could have an extremely
negative effect on the Council's working methods in the
future. It was only at the last minute that we succeeded
in agreeing to exclude the provisions that were wholly
unacceptable, enabling us to abstain in the voting.

The previous version of the resolution could
have taken the Council's mandate beyond its remit
of maintaining peace and security and expanded the
powers of the Secretary-General and the functions
of his Special Representative on Sexual Violence in
Conflict. There was no explanation of the attempts
to use a thematic resolution to intrusively expand
the mandates of various United Nations mechanisms
and bodies by directing the9m to tackle the issue of
combating sexual violence. Nor did we see any reason
for the request for numerous reports from the Secretary-
General on various aspects of sexual violence. We are
concerned about the efforts to increase the number of
bureaucratic United Nations bodies in order to create
the appearance of robust activity. It is unacceptable to
constantly promote concepts and terms that have either
previously failed to achieve consensus or been rejected
by the Council.

No one should even try to set us up as adversaries
in the fight against sexual Violence in conflict. Our
position on the issue remains firm and unwavering. It
is an evil that must be eliminated. But as a permanent
member of the Security Council, we have a special
responsibility to the international community not to
allow the issue of sexual Violence in conflict to be
exploited and manipulated. The Council is a serious
body, and we cannot damage its reputation in the eyes
of the international community. It must make balanced
decisions, set clear, achievable objectives and leave no
room for arbitrary or biased interpretations of them.

Together with China we drafted our own alternative
text on the subject of sexual violence in conflict, which
in our View corresponded much more accurately to the
objectives of today's meeting. However, following the
adoption of the resolution submitted by Germany, we
decided not to take it further.

