Mr. Perera (Sri Lanka): I commend the Spanish
presidency of the Security Council for organizing this
open debate. I also wish to thank the Secretary-General
for his briefing and to acknowledge the contributions
of the Executive Director of UN-Women and the other
representatives.

Resolution 1325 (2000) was a landmark resolution
that rightly focused on the differing impact of armed
conflict on women and girls and their exclusion from
conflict prevention, peacebuilding and peacekeeping.
There is undoubtedly an inextricable link between
gender inequality and international peace and security.

Sri Lanka has emerged from a 30-year conflict
that left deep-seated scars in our society and torn
apart the socioeconomic fabric of our nation. Women
were major victims of that conflict. A new President
and Government were elected in January, committed
to democratic values and to Sri Lanka moving
forward as an engaged member of the international
community. We have already begun taking steps aimed
at achieving meaningful reconciliation, strengthening
democratic institutions, good governance, the rule
of law and confidence-building among communities
affected by conflict for many years. We have renewed
our commitment to gender equality and women's
empowerment.

Historically, Sri Lanka has made strides in the area
of women's empowerment. Universal adult franchise
was introduced in Sri Lanka in 1931. Free education
for both boys and girls and free health care were
introduced very early after independence in 1948. Sri
Lanka adopted a women's charter two years before the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action. And we
have in place a national action plan on women, which is
currently being updated.

Yet we know that more remains to be done. Sri
Lanka takes very seriously and as a matter of urgent
priority the responsibility of ensuring the promotion
and protection of the rights of women, including with
regard to conflict-related sexual violence and sexual
exploitation and abuse. Sri Lanka's new Government
has demonstrated the political will not merely to make
international commitment statements, but also to make
time-bound national commitments with a View to their
speedy and effective implementation.

We are aware that the long drawn-out conflict has
resulted in a large number of victims - orphans, war
widows, single mothers and female-headed households.
We are committed to addressing their immediate
concerns and making them participants in all areas
of peacebuilding and peacekeeping. Successful
peacebuilding requires gender equality and women's
empowerment, security, human rights and development
to mesh together. Financial stability is also an important
factor in that regard.

It is also vital that we engage domestic actors from
the grass roots to the highest echelons of Government
to ensure ownership of the peacebuilding processes
and to guarantee long-term sustainability. In all those
endeavours, we are committed to including women as
essential participants in the conversation. That can be
done only by acknowledging the existence of structural
institutionalized gender bias, identifying the problems
and sincerely seeking solutions.

For over five decades, Sri Lanka has been making
modest contributions to United Nations peacekeeping
efforts. Sri Lanka acknowledges the importance of
women in peacekeeping and peacebuilding. We are
committed to purposefully including women at all levels
of those processes, including at the decision-making
and policymaking stages. We are equally committed
to including our highly trained and disciplined female
forces in peacekeeping efforts.

We welcome the formal launch today of the
publication of the global study on women and peace and
security. We congratulate the contributors and experts
and the lead author, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, We
will closely review the recommendations in the global
study to further the shared goal of women remaining at
the centre of the peace process.

I wish to assure the Council that as we proceed
with our reconciliation and peacebuilding process with
the active participation of women at all levels, we will
continue to share our experiences and best practices,
especially in relation to the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda.

