The President (spoke in French): As this is the first
formal meeting of the Council for the month of June, I
should like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on
behalf of the Council, to His Excellency Ambassador
Amr AbdellatifAboulatta, Permanent Representative of
Egypt, for his service as President ofthe Council for the
month of May. I am sure I speak for all members of the
Council in expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador
Aboulatta and his delegation for the great diplomatic
skill with which they conducted the Council's business
last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Women and peace and security

Responding to human trafficking in situations
of conflict-related sexual Violence

Report of the Secretary-General on
conflict-related sexual Violence (S/2016/36l)

Letter dated 27 May 2016 from the Permanent
Representative of France to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2016/496)

The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Argentina,
Australia, Bangladesh, Belgium, Brazil, Canada,
Colombia, cote d'Ivoire, Estonia, Georgia, Germany,
Hungary, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Kazakhstan,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Morocco,
the Netherlands, Nigeria, Portugal, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, the Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, Turkey and the United Arab
Emirates to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict;
Ms. Maria Grazia Giammarinaro, Special Rapporteur
on trafficking in persons, especially in women and
children; and Ms. Lisa Davis, of the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Ioannis Vrailas, Deputy Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2016/36l, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual violence.

I wish to also draw the attention ofCouncil members
to document S/2016/496, which contains a letter dated
27 May 2016 from the Permanent Representative of
France to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-
General, transmitting a concept note on the item under
consideration.

I warmly welcome His Excellency Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon, to whom I now give the floor.


