Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me first to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
should also like to express my thanks to the delegation
of the Arab Republic of Egypt for its presidency of the
Council during the past month.

At the outset, my delegation commends the French
presidency for organizing this open debate on the
theme of "Women and peace and security. Responding
to human trafficking in situations of conflict-related
sexual violence". We also welcome the Secretary-
General's briefing this morning.

I hope that the four minutes assigned to me, as to
all other delegations, will allow me to set out before
members what the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict has
failed to do. Since I presented my credentials to the
Secretary-General in August 2015, I have requested a
meeting with her more than once. To date I have had no
reply. Nevertheless, we thank her for her attention to that
issue and for her draft report of 11 February. We replied
to the paragraphs related to the Sudan in the report on
19 November 2015, in both English and Arabic. To date
we not received no answer, despite our wish to discuss
those paragraphs with her. Furthermore, no references

are given for the facts presented in paragraphs 63 to
67 on the Sudan in the Secretary-General's report
(S/20l6/361), nor could we find any information that we
presented to her in those paragraphs.

Today I am certain that the Secretariat - which
is supposed to be the Secretariat of all Member States,
large and small, of countries that established and
created the United Nations, with which the Secretariat
should cooperate closely - instead of working with
all countries, targets only certain States. Without such
information the Secretariat's, reports would mean
absolutely nothing. We find them distasteful. We
therefore believe that the Security Council should take
account of the following facts.

First, a report of the Secretary-General is presented
to Member States only 24 hours before the Security
Council takes it up.

Secondly, the aforementioned report claims to
cover the period from January to December 2015
while it reiterates its accusation against the Sudanese
Armed Forces of collective rape in Tabit village in
October 2014, while also claiming that the rape began
in October 2015. We find it odd that this rape began and
never ended despite the fact the United Nations-African
Union Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) report
of 9 November 2015, I recall, denied that the Sudanese
Armed Forces had perpetrated any such crime. The
fact that some have called for a new investigation
into the Tabit events merely shows that they intend to
take this opportunity, and certainly not to squander
it, to condemn the Government of the Sudan and the
Sudanese Armed Forces, and to insist on condemning
them based not on facts but on very narrow interests.

Thirdly, why does the report not take up the
accusations and allegations that some individuals
associated with the United Nations perpetrated acts of
sexual violence despite the zero-tolerance policy that
has been in place since 2003?

Regardless of what the Secretary-General's report
may say, my Government is particularly concerned
with women's issues. That is demonstrated by a number
of initiatives that have led to the implementation of a
number of strategies and national plans, such as the
25-year strategy for women, the national strategy to
combat violence against women, the national policy
to empower women and the national policy to protect
women. In addition, the Government has established
both a unit to combat gender violence and a national
independent human rights commission based on the
Principles and Guidelines on Children Associated with
Armed Forces or Armed Groups. We have accorded
particular attention to the issues of violence against
women, particularly for women in camps for internally
displaced persons in Darfur, the Blue Nile region and
South Kordofan, in cooperation with the United Nations
Population Fund and the human rights division of the
country team in the Sudan.

In order to mitigate the threat of human trafficking
in women and girls, and since Sudan is a sub-Saharan
transit country that has witnessed a number of such
crimes, my Government approved a national law
on human trafficking aimed at women and girls in
particular. In 2014, my capital, Khartoum, hosted
the high-level African Union Regional Conference
on Human Trafficking and Smuggling in the Horn
of Africa, with broad international and regional
participation, leading to the Declaration of the
Ministerial Conference of the Khartoum Process. The
Government also signed treaties to secure its borders
with a number of neighbouring countries in order to
prevent the movement of arms and to curb the actions
of rebel groups that violate human rights.

I shall be brief in my few remaining minutes.

We believe that this issue is very important and that
it should be accorded the appropriate degree of priority,
but we regret the information provided in the Secretary-
General's report on conflict-related sexual violence, in
which information from unreliable and biased sources
is used to distort the truth. It makes reference to events
of collective rape that took place in 2014. How ironic it
is that the information provided in the report came from
UNAMID, which has denied the occurrence of such
crimes following a visit by its officials to the area and
the conduct of an urgent investigation. We observe such
a lack of credibility in a number of reports presented
by the Secretary-General. Paragraph 63 of this report
states that 53 per cent of acts of sexual violence take
place in "isolated areas", that is outside State control. It
is illogical for the State to be held responsible while, at
the same time, the report states clearly that the activities
of rebel groups led to the isolation of those regions and
those groups failed to provide security to the citizens
living there.

Finally, the report also refers to the difficulty of
reaching areas where the alleged violence takes place.
It references cases of stigmatization and a fear of
retaliation, but can cite no data to back up such claims,
revealing the flaws in its methodology. The report and
the figures it cites lack credibility. It denies that the
police forces followed up on reports of the incidents,
and instead blames them for not following up.

Regardless, we shall continue to cooperate with the
Secretary-General and the United Nations to achieve
the objectives of the Organization in that regard.

