Mr. Shingiro (Burundi) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to thank the President personally,
and his country of Chile, for having organized this very
interesting open debate on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. Allow me also to thank those who have
spoken before me for the quality of their statements,
which shed light on the ongoing challenges despite the
progress made since 1999.

Civilians have always been the main victims of
conflicts. In most contemporary conflicts, protagonists
regularly flout the various resolutions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly as well as the
reports of the Secretary-General and other studies that
explicitly recommend that warring parties should spare
civilians. They also violate the Geneva Conventions
of 1949 and their Additional Protocols of 1977 and all
international treaties on the subject.

Today the responsibility to protect, which was
launched at the 2005 World Summit of Heads of State,
compels States to protect civilian populations from
genocide, ethnic cleansing, mass killings and other
cruel and inhumane treatment. If a State fails to do so,
then the international community must take its place.
Obviously, any intervention of that kind must take
place in strict respect for the principles enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations.

Since the nineteenth century, as I mentioned
previously, many conventions and resolutions
recommend the protection of civilian populations in
times of conflict. But it must be noted that civilians are
still being massacred, mutilated, raped or deprived of
humanitarian assistance by various parties to conflicts,
all of this with disregard for the rules and conventions.

Among those attacking civilian populations there
are first the fighters ofnegative forces in several regions
of the world, especially those striking in our region of
the Great Lakes of Africa. They terrorize the civilian
populations to force them to provide unconditional
support. They thus blatantly violate the Additional
Protocol to the Geneva Conventions which, in article
13 prohibits acts or threats of violence with the main
objective of terrorizing the civilian population. Then
there are the illegal actors, especially armed gangs
and organized crime, which also sow terror in civilian
populations by seizing goods and property and/or by
practising various kinds of trafficking. In this category
it is difficult to distinguish among those involved in
conflict, which are a mixed bag of evil-doers, including
fighters, traffickers, mercenaries and even the general
population in some areas.

All civilians need protection against deliberate
acts of abuse and violence. We must act collectively to
defend the rights of vulnerable religious communities,
which are persecuted in situations of armed conflict
because of their religious convictions.

Women and girls throughout the world continue to
fall victim to sexual violence in armed conflicts. That
is why we must continue to work to prevent sexual
violence, especially rape as a weapon of war and sexual
slavery. In that connection, I am of course thinking in
particular of the young Nigerian girls kidnapped by
Boko Haram terrorist sect, a heinous act that we firmly
condemn.

Attacks against civilians are unacceptable wherever
they are committed. We denounce the strategies of
using populations as human shields or weapons of
war, as well as the threat created by mines and other
explosive devices, which lead to heightened civilian
casualties and a broader displacement of populations.

We see a bitter result, even a very bitter one. The
situation of civilians is deteriorating in many areas of
conflict. In Africa the situations in the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in Mali, in the
Central African Republic, in Somalia, in South Sudan
in areas where the Lord's Resistance Army has been
striking, and in Cote d'Ivoire during the latest post-
electoral crisis in 2011, have all revealed the degree
of violence and atrocities to which combatants subject
populations. Those who are most vulnerable - women,
children, older people and handicapped people - pay
the price of this senseless violence.

We stress that the protection of civilians in
armed conflicts should not be a simple concern for
the international community. To that end, we call on
the Security Council to commit itself further, both
at the political and the legal levels, to put an end to
these atrocities, especially by applying targeted
sanctions - that are non-discriminatory - against the
authors of these acts of violence against civilians, in
order to put an end to impunity.

We recall that the prevention of conflicts is the
best way to protect civilian populations from armed
violence. Preventive diplomacy should therefore play a
leading role, as it has several advantages. Not only does
it make it possible to save human lives, but it is also
less expensive when it comes to those paying dues as
Members of the United Nations.

It is true that the Security Council has seen some
progress in terms of efforts to reduce the effects of
conflicts on civilians, especially with the establishment
of peacekeeping missions with mandates containing
provisions and strategies to protect civilians. However,
it is essential to recall that efforts to protect civilians
must be inclusive. We must also ensure that such efforts
are not used towards adverse ends, by avoiding as far as
possible the use of selective focuses or double standards
to the detriment of some civilian populations in distress
in some highly politicized conflict areas.

We would point out that any use of force to defend
civilians must take place with total respect for the
Charter of the United Nations. Any unilateral action
taken in the name of any kind of theory of protection
of civilians with disregard for the Charter of the United
Nations should be discouraged.

Burundi highlights the need for a reaction by the
international community that is always proportionate
to the situation to which we are responding on the
ground when it comes to protecting civilians. For
example, the protection of civilians should not be an
excuse for regime change, and no body of the United
Nations should serve as a tool for such a change. That,
as is very well known, is a prerogative for the people of
the country concerned.

My delegation would like to make some brief
proposals with regard to our common efforts to protect
civilians during armed conflicts.

First, parties to a conflict must respect international
humanitarian law and human rights law. Any violation
of those rights calls for the attention and action of
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations.

Secondly, there is an urgent need for more frequent
interactions with non-State groups to ensure that
they respect standards for the protection of civilians.
However, that does not mean that these groups are
being recognized. It simply means that those groups
must be made aware ofthe need to respect international
humanitarian law, without, however, legitimizing their
position.

Thirdly, peacekeeping missions mandated to
protect civilians must be able to call on the resources
and the necessary forces to carry out their tasks. And
we must heighten the percentage of representation of
women in all peacekeeping operations and special
political missions after conflicts.

Fourthly, we must work much harder to facilitate
the provision of humanitarian assistance to ensure the
survival of populations that are trapped in conflicts,
because those who do not die from gunfire can certainly
die of hunger in areas that are made inaccessible
because of fighting.

Fifthly, and lastly, when national authorities do
not protect their own civilians nor take the necessary
measures to bring those who commit war crimes
and violate human rights to justice, the Security
Council must exercise leadership for a response at the
international level, while respecting the standards of
the Charter of the United Nations.

