Mr. Le Hoai Trung (Viet Nam): Viet Nam
commends the German presidency for having convened
today's debate on women in peacekeeping operations.
We would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his insightful briefing.

Viet Nam is convinced that women are active,
key players and agents of peace who make unique and
substantive contributions to lasting peace in conflict
areas. Their important roles can be strongly felt in a
number of aspects.

Female peacekeepers can have access to parts of
populations and areas that are usually closed offto men.
They can provide a presence within local communities
that empowers women and girls in host communities,
giving opportunities for United Nations missions
to address the gender-specific issues and needs that
women and girls face. They can act as role models
for women and girls in male-dominated societies to
further push for their rights and participation in peace
processes, including joining national security sectors,
thus in turn potentially increasing the number of women
participating in peace operations.

Greater gender parity can also lead to a reduction
in sexual exploitation and abuse, crimes that have
weakened support for peacekeeping operations.
According to a recent study, a small increase in the
number of women in military peacekeeping units can
reduce abuse allegations by more than half. Viet Nam
is also of the view that women participating in peace
operations continue to face many obstacles that can
bar them from reaching their full potential while in
missions and even prevent them from joining in the
first place. Viet Nam therefore wishes to make the
following recommendations.

First, resolution 2242 (2015) should be further
effectively implemented.

Secondly, we propose that the Secretary-General
conduct thorough research on country-specific barriers
to women's participation in security forces and their
deployment as peacekeepers, and we recommend an
overarching framework of solutions for troop- and
police-contributing Member States that could be based
on the Uniformed Gender Parity Strategy 2018-2028
submitted by the Department of Peace Operations.

Thirdly, we encourage developed countries to
increase their support to the Elsie Initiative Fund to help
accelerate progress towards achieving the targets to
increase the proportion of women serving in uniformed
military and police units.

And last but not least, it is important to underline
the need for United Nations peacekeeping missions
to abide by the principles of non-interference in the
internal affairs of sovereign States, consent of the
parties, impartiality and the non-use of force except in
self-defence and defence of the mandate.

Since 2014, Viet Nam has been sending its
military officers to United Nations peacekeeping
operations in South Sudan and the Central African
Republic. Vietnamese women are committed to greater
participation in peacekeeping at all levels and in key
positions. Throughout Viet Nam's history, Vietnamese
women have played an important role in both national
defence and national construction. In October 2017, the
first female Vietnamese peacekeeper, a major, joined
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).
One year later, in October 2018, Viet Nam deployed
its first level-2 field hospital to South Sudan, with
10 women among its staff. We strive to continue this
positive trend.

I wish to thank you, Madam President, and I also
wish to pay tribute to all peacekeepers around the world
for their contributions to and sacrifices for international
peace, security and prosperity.

