Mrs. Chatardova (Czech Republic): The Czech
Republic aligns itself with the statement just delivered
by the observer of the European Union and that to be
delivered by the representative of Canada on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security.

It is clear that there is a well-established link
between peace and women's political and economic
empowerment. The women and peace and security
agenda has broadened since its launch nearly 20 years
ago, and it is no longer solely concerned with women's
physical security. Increasingly, the necessity for
women's participation in public and economic affairs
has become a frequent topic of discussion at both
the national and international level. Despite all the
progress, however, increasing the number of women
who participate meaningfully in this area requires
human resources, sufficient funds, a recognition of the
value that women's involvement brings and the political
will to push against stereotypes and negative social
norms. We, the Member States, must take the initiative
and incorporate the effective, swift and thorough
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda into all our endeavours, along with holding
the United Nations accountable for including it in all
its activities.

We are proud to say that the Czech Republic has
made some concrete steps towards those goals. We are
currently implementing our first national action plan on
women and peace and security for the period from 2017
to 2020. The plan contains specific measurable tasks
and sets out concrete steps. These include increasing
the number of women in decision-making positions
in politics and in the security forces, achieving
work-balance and ending all forms of discrimination
against women, girls, men and boys as a violation of
human rights.

We believe in a participative approach to our
national action plan. Therefore, we are cooperating
closely with academics on reviewing our current plan
to provide for the creation of an even more effective
document for the upcoming period. In that context,
I would like to take this opportunity to encourage
countries that have not yet done so to adopt a national
action plan, a uniquely effective tool in implementing
the women and peace and security agenda at the national
and international levels.

The right to participate in public affairs is a key
human right that enables the enjoyment of a number of
other rights. Its effective implementation is also crucial
for the achievement by all countries of the Sustainable
Development Goals. The Czech Republic therefore
selected Goal 16, which includes the target "to ensure
responsive, inclusive, participatory and representative
decision-making at all levels", as the priority theme of
our presidency of the Economic and Social Council in
2017 and 2018.

My country also backs up its words with practical
action. The Czech Republic actively addresses the root
causes of inequality by implementing projects aimed
at the economic empowerment and equal participation
of women. Such projects are being implemented in
Georgia, Zambia, Ethiopia, Afghanistan, Pakistan and
Sri Lanka. We are also a lead nation ofthe Jordan III Trust
Fund, a capacity-building project aimed at supporting
servicewomen in the Jordanian armed forces.

At the outset of our recent successful campaign
for membership in the Human Rights Council, we
pledged to continue challenging stereotypes in society
and creating equal opportunities for women and men.
Let me assure you, Mr. President, that the Czech
Republic remains committed to those pledges in all its
activities and will support the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda across United
Nations initiatives.

