Mr. Schaper (Netherlands): Let me begin by
aligning myself with the statement delivered by the
representative of the presidency of the European Union
(EU), as well as by thanking you, Mr. President, for
making this an open debate. The very large number of
speakers today makes clear the importance that the
membership of the United Nations as a whole attaches
to the subject of women and peace and security.

There are two dimensions to this subject. The
first one is women and girls as victims of violence. As
the discussion in the Security Council last week again
made clear (see S/PV.6195), such violence is often
employed as a weapon of war. That necessitates a
different way of operating in crisis management and
peacekeeping. For instance, military patrols need to
take place between villages and water points at the
crack of dawn to protect women fetching water. We
also need to be aware that brutal forms of violence
against women in sudden outbreaks of violence can be
early warning signs of instability.

But even women who have been violated have a
voice. These are not merely voices of victims, but
voices of citizens who want to contribute directly to
conflict prevention, the maintenance of peace and post-
conflict reconstruction in their countries. That is the
second dimension: the empowerment of women in
matters of peace and war.

We therefore welcome resolution 1888 (2009),
which the Council adopted last week, as well as
resolution 1889 (2009), which was adopted today and
which the Netherlands would have wished to sponsor.
That is because those resolutions give women more of
a voice in these matters - for example, through the
country reports to the Security Council. They also give
us new tools, such as the set of indicators that the
Secretary-General is requested to submit for use at the
global level to track implementation. These can be very
useful for monitoring progress and for results-oriented
planning.

Furthermore, we welcome the fact that, in the
resolution adopted this morning, the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Peacebuilding Support Office are
encouraged to systematically include women in
peacebuilding efforts and to improve the participation
of women in political and economic decision-making
from the earliest stages of the peacebuilding process.
But enhancing the role of women in matters of peace
and war is not limited in its impact to countries in
which conflicts take place or have taken place, it also
has consequences for the other Members of the United
Nations.

As far as military operations are concerned, a
study by Sweden, Norway, Finland and the Netherlands
on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in the
provincial reconstruction teams in Afghanistan showed,
among other things, that the effectiveness of the
International Security Assistance Force in cooperating
with, and winning the trust of, the Afghan population is
improved if the armed forces of troop-contributing
nations include more women. Incorporating more
women into armed forces is an important element of a
coherent and comprehensive approach to the issue that
we are discussing today. A seminar being organized by
Spain and the Netherlands, to take place on 13 and
14 October in Madrid, will focus on how to make
progress in that respect.

This also implies working closely with civil
society in our countries, as we are doing in the
Netherlands. We have had a very positive experience in
working together with non-governmental
organizations, both in developing and implementing
and monitoring our national action plan.

As far as our bilateral cooperation with other
countries is concerned, let me give the Council two
examples. Burundi and the Netherlands collaborate in
the integration of elements of resolution 1325 (2000)
into the ethics training course for Burundi's uniformed
services. And in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the Netherlands supports the establishment of
collective funding arrangements to address sexual and
gender-based violence under the stabilization plan for
that country, in collaboration with its Government and
with other donors.

Let me end by underlining that our discussion
today forms part of the wider debate on gender issues
and should also be seen in the light of the decision by
the General Assembly to establish a United Nations
composite gender entity (see General Assembly resolution 63/311). We look forward to an early
proposal on the details of that entity, including
regarding its cooperation with the relevant advisers and
special representatives. The coherence of United
Nations efforts with regard to gender issues should be
ensured. We therefore expect the swift appointment of
the new Under-Secretary-General. As the Swedish
Ambassador said earlier today in his statement on
behalf of the EU, we must not lose momentum on this
matter.
