Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank the United States for convening this
meeting. We are also grateful for the briefings by Deputy
Secretary-General Jan Eliasson; Mr. Yury Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, and Mr. Nick Grono, Director of the
Freedom Fund, as well as for the invaluable testimony
of Ms. Nadia Murad Basee Taha. We commend the
representatives of civil society who are with us today
and thank them for their contribution to this meeting.

The presidential statement we adopted today
(S/PRST/2015/25) sends a united message from the
Council on the need to address human trafficking in
conflict situations. We appreciate the text's emphasis
on the complementarity that should exist within the
United Nations system.

Millions of people worldwide are victims of
trafficking, and in one way or another every State is
affected by this scourge. Reporting, exposing and
prosecuting this crime is complicated in situations
of armed conflict owing to States' inability to
control their own territory and protect their civilian
population. Currently this activity, from which criminal
organizations have traditionally benefited, has been
aggravated by the emergence of terrorist and armed
groups that profit from trafficking in persons in order
to sustain their illegal activities. Denouncing such
activities is not enough; it requires collective action.

The abduction, exploitation and trafficking of
persons by terrorists and armed groups is being used
not only for economic purposes but, far more seriously,
as a strategy for sowing terror among those who do not
share their ideas and aims. The situation is aggravated
by the incidence of gender-based violence and sexual
exploitation, Whose victims are mostly women and
children - a phenomenon experienced by vulnerable
populations in a number of conflict situations that the
Council is considering. The situation of the Yazidi
people is particularly serious, due to the sectarian
persecution they have suffered over the past decade
and that they are enduring today as victims of terrorist
groups. It is urgent that we improve the mechanisms
for protecting such populations, take concrete steps
to prevent abductions, and prosecute the perpetrators
of human trafficking and everyone involved in it.
In that regard, we urge the Council to ensure that
implementation of resolution 2225 (2015) provides
measures for preventing the abduction of children in
situations of conflict.

Improving medical and psychological support to
victims of trafficking is also an urgent matter. We need
cultural efforts that change existing perceptions of
women and girls who have been abducted and abused
so they can reintegrate into their communities and the
cycle of exclusion is not perpetuated. The actions taken
should avoid making victims of these people a second
time and should protect their dignity and rights. We
must strengthen capacities to prevent and act in crisis
and post-conflict situations. This type of illicit activity
should be more closely investigated. We believe it is
important to expand reports in the United Nations
system on this subject in order to take appropriate
measures for protecting civilian populations. It is also
vital that the Organization's peacekeeping operations
be able to expand their work on protecting civilians
in this area. That will require that peacekeepers and
civilian personnel be better trained in order to enable
them to identify such illicit activity and improve the
protection of vulnerable populations and victims.

Unless States provide the impetus for the political,
economic and social transformations needed to combat
the factors that increase the vulnerability of victims,
including, among others, inequality, poverty, lack of
information, and discrimination at all levels, we will not
see the structural changes that will prevent trafficking
and lead to punishment for the perpetrators.

