Ms. Freimane-Deksne (Latvia): I have the honour
to speak on behalf ofEstonia as well as my own country,
Latvia. We would like to thank Jordan for organizing
this debate on sexual violence in conflict. We also
thank Ms. Zainab Bangura, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
and Ms. Hamsatu Allamin, representing civil society,
for their statements and their tireless work on this
complex and sensitive issue.

We align ourselves with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union.

We welcome the Secretary-General's comprehensive
report on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2015/203).
It also addresses very disturbing new challenges in
the form of sexual violence perpetrated in a context
of rising Violent extremism. Sexual violence, in the
form of rape, sexual slavery, forced marriage, forced
pregnancy, torture and human trafficking, has been
used by terrorist groups, notably the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant, as a tactic for spreading terror,
persecuting minorities and suppressing or forcibly
displacing communities that oppose their ideology.
Women and children are deliberately targeted and their
rights violated.

Latvia and Estonia strongly condemn all forms
of sexual Violence and its use as a tactic of terror and
persecution on any grounds. In that regard, we share
the Secretary-General's view that efforts to prevent
and address sexual violence should be closely and
strategically aligned with efforts to prevent violent
extremism. Empowering women and girls and
establishing respect for their human rights, as well as
ensuring women's full participation in decision-making
processes, including conflict prevention and resolution,
are crucial to ending conflict-related sexual Violence.

The effectiveness of efforts to prevent and
address conflict-related sexual violence can also be
undermined by under-reporting, impunity and a lack
of necessary support to survivors of sexual violence.
Better coordinated efforts are needed to ensure that
survivors of such crimes receive comprehensive
care and assistance, including access to sexual and
reproductive health services. The international
community must work to end the culture of impunity
for crimes of sexual violence in conflict. Ensuring
the accountability of perpetrators of crimes of sexual
violence among State and non-State actors alike is
crucial if we are to discourage and ultimately eliminate
sexual Violence and bring justice to its survivors.
While States are primarily responsible for ensuring
accountability, the International Criminal Court (ICC)
has a central role to play in cases where States lack the
capability or political will to do so. Latvia and Estonia
support Victims of gender-based and sexual violence in
countries affected by armed conflict through the Trust
Fund for Victims set up by the ICC.

This year is a special one for the women and peace
and security agenda, as we will be marking the fifteenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).
Latvia and Estonia look forward to the high-level
review of the resolution's implementation and have
already made national contributions in that regard. Our
Governments also endorsed the 2013 Declaration of
Commitment to End Sexual Violence in Conflict and
supported the Statement of Action issued at the Global
Summit to End Sexual Violence in Conflict, held in
London last year.

Moreover, we see the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) as an important element in our development
cooperation strategies. Latvia has implemented
projects aimed at supporting and promoting the role of
women in Iraq, Afghanistan and other parts of Central
Asia. Similarly, Estonia has contributed to different
projects and provided financial support to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and the Team of Experts on the
Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict.

Too many individuals, families and communities
have been affected if not devastated by conflict-
related sexual violence. Preventing and responding
to sexual violence is vital to resolving conflicts,
enabling development and building sustainable peace.
The international community has to work together to
respond to the urgency of this issue, and Latvia and
Estonia are ready to be an active part of those efforts.

