Mr. Martinez Flores (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish): El Salvador welcomes the convening of this
open debate by the Security Council in observance of
the fifth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000) on women, peace and security. That is an
innovative mechanism, in which efforts to advance and
promote women cut across every area of conflict
prevention - from the peace negotiation process to
post-conflict reconstruction. In that regard, my country
is grateful to the Secretary-General for his report on
peace, women and security (S/2005/636), which
outlines a United Nations system plan of action to
implement resolution 1325 (2000).

Five years have elapsed since the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), and we would point out that
positive and concrete results have been made through
incorporating a gender perspective in this area - both
in terms of measuring the impact of armed conflict on
women and girls, as well as in the role of women in
peacebuilding.

Our heads of State and Government lent their
political support to the world summit outcome
document (General Assembly resolution 60/1), which
undertakes to transform the commitments made in
resolution 1325 (2000) into concrete action. The
threats faced by civilians during armed conflicts, in
particular women and children, underscore the
importance of mainstreaming a gender perspective as a
fundamental part of early warning activities as well as
conflict prevention measures. Therefore, we welcome
the initiatives designed to establish early warning
indicators with a gender perspective. That would
contribute substantially to a better understanding of the
ties that exist between gender and security. We are
convinced that that linkage should be examined more
thoroughly, both within the framework of the Security
Council, as well as within the Commission on the
Status of Women.

We support the decision of the Security Council
to include gender issues targeted by resolution 1325
(2000) in the mandates of the various peace assessment
and peacekeeping missions. Thus far, we have seen that
that policy has been welcomed in the field and that it
has helped improve the image of members of United
Nations peacekeeping missions. In that context, we
should point out that the Government of El Salvador
has made a similar commitment along those lines, and
we are pleased to recall that, at the request of the
United Nations a few months ago, we have been
participating with women police officers in the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara. This is a recognition of the successful
establishment of the civilian national police of
El Salvador as an institution - established after the
peace agreements. It is also a pleasure to be able to
return to the international community today the
assistance that was given to us under the auspices of
the United Nations during our own peace process.

In that regard, we hope that countries such as
ours, which have made the transition from violent
conflict to peace, will obtain the opportunity we
deserve to share our experiences with other countries
in the future Peacebuilding Commission.

In resolution 1325 (2000) the Security Council
recommends that Member States and all the parties to a
conflict should include women in the decision-making
processes of peace negotiations, as well as in the
implementation of political peace agreements. El
Salvador shares that point of view. Given our own
experience, we suggest that we should also consider
the active participation of women in initiatives to
educate for peace through the transmission of values
that foster reconciliation and coexistence based on a
culture of peace.

The United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization has made a fundamental
contribution to El Salvador by promoting a series of
initiatives, including, in particular, for the training of
women to instil dialogue, tolerance and respect for
difference in the rest of society. Restoring public
confidence after an internal conflict involves civic
participation, where the role of women is essential. We
know that women contribute, through their
complementary vision of reality, to identifying both
short- and long-term priorities. That is why their
presence is necessary in consolidating democratic
institutions, in strengthening gender justice and in
legislative debate. All of those reasons indicate that a
gender balance should be maintained in decisions that
affect public life.

When possibilities are open to them, women
assume responsibility in the transition process,
becoming the backbone of the fight against poverty. In
El Salvador we have learned that the transformation of
society requires structures that foster equal
participation in the new national project. However, it is
important to train a society so that it can enter the
transition process, where a new coexistence based on
peace, development and respect for human rights can
be realized. In that vein, it is up to the political parties
to stimulate an extensive debate on equal participation
and also to bring national policy decisions in line with
the spirit of resolution 1325 (2000).

In conclusion, I would like to stress the
Government of El Salvador's desire to always include
the participation of women and the defence of their
rights in our ongoing effort to preserve a lasting peace.
The spirit of the resolution will show us the way. We
have confidence in the coordinated work of the organs
of the United Nations system.

