Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): Thank
you, Mr. President, for having convened this important
meeting, which is not just an opportunity of noting the
second anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), a
historic resolution, but also a moment for us to discuss
the Secretary-General's report on women, peace and
security. I would like to add my voice to those who
thanked the Secretary-General for having introduced
this important report. Personally, we would commend
him on the preparation of this report, which is very
detailed and comprehensive. I would also pay tribute to
Ms. Angela King, Assistant Secretary-General and
Special Adviser on Gender Issues and on the
Advancement of Women, and all her team, in the
preparation of the report, and also to Ms. Noeleen
Heyzer, Executive Director of the United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM).

The presidency of the European Union, through
the representative of Denmark, will shortly be making
a detailed statement, and Bulgaria, an associate country
of the European Union, associates itself with that
statement.

The report of the Secretary-General on women,
peace and security, and the study on which it is based,
is unique in the sense that it gives a systematic account
of gender-specific activities in the context of peace and
security. It highlights the fact that women and girls are
disproportionately vulnerable in an armed conflict and
represent the majority of the victims, as well as the
majority of refugees and forceably displaced persons.
They are vulnerable to all kinds of harassment, sexual
violence in particular. At the same time, women have
to undergo discrimination in violation of their
fundamental rights.

Given the magnitude of the impact of conflict on
women and girls, the international community must
address this question urgently. The report gives a
thorough account of the difficulties that have to be
faced in order to ensure gender equality in matters of
peace and security.

The report gives specific recommendations for
actions to take to promote a programme focused on
gender-specific approaches. Implementation of these
recommendations is essential in order to achieve
progress in this area. My delegation fully endorses the
conclusions and recommendations set forth in the
report.

Bulgaria is aware of the special value of
resolution 1325 (2000) and its special role in focusing
attention on the substantial contribution that women
can make in conflict settlement and in the maintenance
and building of peace. This resolution is a model for
the integration of appropriate steps, reflecting the
consent of the international community to promote
equality between the sexes in the area of peace and
security. This is why it would be desirable for the
Security Council to fully follow up resolution 1325
(2000) and its implementation, which so far has a long
way to go.

There has been some progress in the
implementation of this resolution in specific measures
in the peacekeeping area, in particular in Timor-Leste,
Kosovo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Sierra Leone and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. However, we must
acknowledge that the progress made in this area is
mostly due to the presence of advisers on gender issues
and the role of women.

The Secretary-General has announced his firm
intention to apply a zero-tolerance policy when it
comes to the involvement of "blue helmets" in acts of
sexual exploitation or other acts directed against
women and girls. Bulgaria welcomes this initiative.
However, the record of this resolution is not entirely
satisfactory. Women and children are still the majority
of civilian victims in armed conflict. The problem of
eliminating all kinds of violence inflicted on women,
combating the trafficking of women and children, the
establishment of parity between women and men in
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
activities, the return of refugees and displaced persons,
as well as the involvement of women in the
administration and in constitutional and electoral
reform, are objectives that require effective action.

We should also note that the knowledge acquired
and experience gained in this field have not been built
into the policies in the planning and execution
processes of all peacekeeping operations in terms of
humanitarian activities and reconstruction activities.

The meetings organized with the representatives
of non-governmental organizations according to the
Arria formula have also contributed to the Council's
debates on peace processes. I take this opportunity to
thank the delegation of Singapore, in particular
Minister Christine Lee, for having organized the most
recent debate according to the Arria formula.

Those discussions have confirmed the necessity
of increasing women's multifaceted participation in
peacekeeping operations, particularly at the highest
level. The gender-specific approach should be
incorporated into all mandates and peace plans in order
to enhance their possibilities for success. We need to
adopt appropriate mechanisms to ensure systematically
that women participate in all stages of peace
negotiations, particularly in planning, in decision-
making and in the effective implementation of
decisions at all levels. We look forward to the adoption
and the upcoming publication by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations of multidimensional manuals
on peacekeeping operations, which should include a
specific chapter on gender parity, on the specific
conduct of certain aspects of peacekeeping operations
designed to promote gender parity, and on the follow-
up and evolution of results.

I am convinced that the work of this meeting will
give additional impetus to the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and that the ideas formulated
during this debate on the report of the Secretary-
General will enable us to make future progress.

I cannot conclude my statement without
emphasizing the extremely important role of non-
governmental organizations in the intellectual and
political debate focused on the role of women in the
area of peace and security. I should like to thank the
Secretariat for cooperating with them in order to
promote that noble cause.

