Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): I wish to thank the
Government of Peru, in its capacity as President of the
Security Council for the month of April, for convening
this important open debate.

Ten years ago, the Council adopted resolution 1820
(2008), which recognized that sexual violence was
being used as a tactic of war and could therefore be
included in the category of war crimes. Today's open
debate provides an opportunity to reflect on the progress
made and evaluate the way forward in implementing
the Council's resolutions that aim at preventing sexual
violence in armed conflict and post-conflict situations.

The Maldives strongly condemns how sexual
violence is being weaponized by targeting victims
based on ethnic, religious or political affiliation, which
destroys social cohesion, leading to forced displacement
and the deprivation of economic resources. We
note with concern that the failure to address those
issues has led to desperate recourse to more harmful
practices, including child marriage, withdrawal from
educational and employment opportunities, and resort
to commercial sexual exploitation.

We are pleased to note that progress has been
made in a number of countries. We must ensure that
this progress is based on evidence about the reality of
the situation on the ground. Ensuring that all cases of
sexual violence are reported is crucial in strengthening
justice mechanisms and accountability. Unfortunately,
the majority of those cases remain unreported owing
to social stigma often attached to the victims of the
crime, fear of reprisals and the systematic barriers and
obstacles that the victims have to overcome. Increased
awareness about the nature of the crime, changes in
perceptions of social taboos and having an efficient
and reliable framework to identify sexual exploitation
are necessary to establish the first step towards ending
impunity and ensuring accountability.

We also note that there are commonalities in
the recommendations for those countries, including
strengthening legal frameworks, the provision of access
to justice, socioeconomic support for victims, strict
screening and training of armed and security forces,
and strengthening frameworks to enhance cooperation
with the United Nations to ensure prevention and
response measures.

Most of the victims are women and girls from
marginalized rural communities who do not always
benefit from full legal protections and often face cultural
taboos regarding sexual violence. Therefore, Member
States should not only strive to extend the reach of the
rule of law to all communities, but also ensure that the
law itself provides protection to the victims through
alignment with international human rights standards on
sexual violence and abuse. We believe that the greater
representation of women in governance, especially on
the part of women from rural communities, would raise
the profile ofthose issues and facilitate positive change.
In addition, we also support community mobilization
campaigns, led by community and religious leaders,
aimed at shifting the stigma of sexual violence from
the victims to the perpetrators.

We wish to underscore the responsibilities of armed
forces and peacekeeping operations in preventing sexual
violence in conflict. It is important not only to ensure
training in international humanitarian and human rights
law in the specific context of sexual exploitation, but
also to establish strict monitoring and accountability
within those systems in order to prevent abuse by those
actors themselves. In that regard, we are pleased to
note that United Nations peacekeeping operations with
mandates on the protection of civilians have established
monitoring arrangements and incorporated early
warning indicators of conflict-related sexual violence.

The Maldives supports the Secretary-General's
preventative approach and believes that early warning
indicators should help prevent sexual violence in
conflict-prone areas, in addition to post-conflict
situations, and that this should be factored in when
evaluating risks to peace and security in the Council.
In that regard, we wish to emphasize the importance
of ensuring adequate funding for sexual violence
programmes in conflict-affected situations.

It is clear that sexual exploitation and abuse are
not just a consequence of conflict, but can also be a
weapon that exacerbates conflicts. Addressing the root
causes and ending impunity is the key to ensuring that
this heinous crime is brought to an end. We all need to
work together to find shared solutions to ensure that
all women, men, girls and boys whose lives are already
tarnished with conflict are not permanently scarred by
the consequences of sexual violence.

