Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): South Africa wishes
to express its appreciation for the Secretary-General's
briefing and welcomes his report, contained in
document S/2009/362, on the implementation of
resolution 1820 (2008). Last year, we were a sponsor
of Security Council resolution 1820 (2008) because of
our principled resolve resolutely to address sexual
violence against women and girls in conflict-affected
situations and to ensure more effective protection and
assistance for survivors.

This first report of the Secretary-General, which
addresses widespread and systematic sexual violence in
armed conflicts, provides yet another opportunity for
us to assess the concrete and specific efforts made in
the implementation of both resolutions 1325 (2000)
and 1820 (2008) and the role of the United Nations in
such efforts.

We remain convinced that women are active
agents of change and play a meaningful role in the
recovery and reintegration of their families and
communities. Women are central in promoting
democracy, good governance and reconciliation and in
building peace and development after the guns fall
silent. Their participation should thus be promoted in
the whole continuum of the resolution of conflicts,
from early warning, mediation, peace talks and
peacekeeping to post-conflict recovery and
peacebuilding. The United Nations therefore should be
encouraged to promote the effective participation of
women in decision-making, peace talks and other
processes towards the resolution of conflicts.

The present reality, though, is that women and
girls are the first casualties of war. From the beginning
of a war, women and girls are besieged not only by
combatants and other armed elements, but also by new
societal pressures and expectations brought about by

the new conflict environments. Sexual violence in
conflict areas is inextricably linked to gender
inequality, and it is imperative that we strongly
advocate for the equal participation and full
involvement of women in all efforts for the
maintenance and promotion of peace and security.

In South Africa, August is Women's Month.
During this month, we celebrate and commemorate the
role of women in the struggle for a free, non-racial and
non-sexist South Africa. Specifically, on 9 August we
celebrate the heroic contribution of women in the
struggle against the oppressive laws of the apartheid
regime, marked by the march by women of all races to
the Union Buildings 53 years ago. Our democratic
Government has made big and serious strides in
advancing the cause of the development of women.
Furthermore, during this Women's Month, South Africa
will strengthen its partnership in the 365 Days of
Activism campaign for no violence against women and
children. South Africa's legislative framework gives
impetus to our international commitment to gender
equality and our commitment to conflict management
and resolution.

South Africa's ratification of Southern African
Development Community, African Union and
international gender mainstreaming instruments is a
strong indicator of our country's commitment to gender
equality in general and, in particular, to gender
mainstreaming in conflict prevention, resolution and
management and in post-conflict reconstruction and
development.

Consistent with those efforts and in order to
promote effective participation of women in
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and security, the African
Union has declared the period 2010 to 2020 as the
African Women's Decade. It further committed that the
organs of the African Union, the regional economic
communities and member States should use the
frameworks of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008) to integrate their gender policies, programmes
and activities on conflict resolution processes. It
further calls for the creation of regional consultative
platforms for information and knowledge exchange and
harmonization of strategies.

Consequently, it is our View that United Nations
Member States should develop enhanced policies and
strategies for local ownership and implementation of
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008), with the
objective of empowering women at various stages of
conflict and its aftermath, as recommended in the
Secretary-General's report. Related to that is the
importance of ensuring that the institutional structures
at the United Nations have the capacity to monitor
implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008). In that regard, South Africa would like to
commend the establishment of the coordination group,
which includes all relevant organizations and agencies,
to pay special attention to those issues so that
momentum is not lost. We also commend the Office of
the Secretary-General for its global campaign "Unite to
end violence against women".

Sexual violence is deeply dehumanizing and
inflicts intense mental and physical trauma; victims
always find it very difficult to easily disclose their
experiences. The impunity associated with sexual
violence is of great concern to my delegation. In that
regard, urgent intervention is required that will
prioritize the promotion of sound systems in the areas
of transitional justice, the rule of law and reform of the
judiciary so as to ensure that countries put an end to
impunity and prosecute those accused of all forms of
sexual violence and violence against women and
children in armed conflicts.

My delegation advocates the strengthening of
existing mechanisms in order to make them effective
and credible and the investigation of sexual violence
and crime in conflict situations, including reviewing
the effectiveness of programmes and prevention
30
strategies. South Africa supports the recommendations
by the Secretary-General on the need to establish more
and better data collection systems in order to enhance
the understanding of various forms of sexual violence
in conflict situations and their aftermath.

South Africa remains deeply concerned at the
plight of children caught in armed conflict. We
welcomed and associated ourselves with the adoption
of Security Council resolution 1882 (2009) on
4August 2009, which, in paragraph 3, requests the
Secretary-General to expand the criteria of the triggers
to "killing and maiming of children and/or rape and
other sexual violence against children".

In conclusion, South Africa remains committed to
the full implementation of Security Council resolutions
1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008). The international
community has an obligation to ensure that the rights
of women and children are protected, especially in
conflict-affected areas. The equal and effective
participation of women and their full involvement in
decision-making and peace processes will contribute to
the promotion and maintenance of peace and security.
Only through the concerted efforts of all stakeholders,
including the United Nations, can sexual violence
against vulnerable groups be stopped.

