Mr. Motoc (Romania): At the outset, I wish to
indicate that Romania fully associates itself with the
statement to be made shortly by the Permanent
Representative of the Netherlands on behalf of the
European Union. My remarks will therefore be specific
and brief.

Over the past four years, resolution 1325 (2000)
has been an effective tool in raising awareness on the
increased variety and intensity of sexual violence
directed against women and girls. One specific form of
such violence is trafficking in human beings, especially
women and girls, for the purpose of forcing them into
prostitution. One of my country's main concerns in this
context is the extent to which such an abhorrent
practice has developed in certain parts of the Balkans
that have been affected by the civil wars that followed
the break-up of Yugoslavia. According to information
gathered within the United Nations system, 200,000
women are trafficked throughout the Balkans each
year

As mentioned in the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2004/814), sexual exploitation and abuse
are forms of gender-based violence that can be
perpetrated by anyone in a position of power and trust.
That regrettably includes members of peacekeeping
missions deployed in the field, both military and
civilian, of whom we would rather expect complete
dedication and hard work to ensure the conditions for
pacification and the post-conflict rehabilitation of
societies shattered by war. The majority of women
trafficked in the Balkans end up as prostitutes in areas
where peacekeeping forces are deployed. That situation
causes enormous suffering for women in the region, as
they are the main target of traffickers. Governments of
troop-contributing countries and representatives of
civil society have a joint responsibility to help
eradicate this scourge.

We commend the efforts of the Secretary-General
to institute a number of measures to address sexual
exploitation and abuse by United Nations personnel
involved in peacekeeping operations. We note with
satisfaction the issuance of a special bulletin and the
subsequent development by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations of a number of tools for its
implementation, such as training materials, a
complaints mechanism and a compilation of
disciplinary directives for civilian, military and civilian
police personnel.

Concerning the specific situation in the Balkans,
we believe that there is even more room for safeguards.
As a country contributing troops to peacekeeping
efforts in the region, Romania welcomes the decision
of the Istanbul Summit of NATO to adopt a zero-
tolerance policy towards the sexual abuse by NATO
soldiers of victims of trafficking. Adopting and
implementing such policies is a fine way of doing
justice to the requirements set out in resolution 1325
(2000).

As indicated in the report of the Secretary-
General, coordination and partnership are critical to
ensuring complementarity among all actors and the
effective use of resources. With a view to responding
to the recommendations contained in that report,
peacekeeping forces in the Balkans will need to work
more with local and police authorities in Bosnia,
Kosovo and Macedonia to combat trafficking in
women. Training courses for deployed troops on
trafficking need to be elaborated and carried out. Local
and international organizations will have to be
mobilized to protect and house women victims of
trafficking, and peacekeepers will need to work to
maintain very close relations with such organizations.

Finally, it is essential to develop methods to
monitor progress in combating trafficking and to
establish a confidential internal system within the
military to report infringements of the zero-tolerance
policy. Such a system, we believe, could be related to
the comprehensive monitoring and reporting
mechanism that will be built into the system-wide
strategy and action plan to be elaborated by the
Secretary-General.

