Mr. Thorns (Germany): At the outset, I would
like to thank the delegation of Nigeria for having
organized today's open debate. My thanks also go to
the Secretary-General and his Special Representative,
Ms. Bangura, for their very insightful briefings. I also
thank Ms. Rhoda Misaka for the statement she made on
behalf of civil society.

Germany aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union.

We welcome the Secretary-General's comprehensive
report on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2014/181),
and we commend the United Nations staff in the various
agencies and in the field that have contributed to the
report in such detail.

Progress has been made in the fight against sexual
violence in conflict since the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions. However,
sexual Violence has not been eliminated. It is time to
take stock of what has been achieved. Implementation
and the consolidation of measures to prevent and end
conflict-related sexual violence have to be our main
objectives. Let me make a few suggestions on how to
further advance the women and peace and security
agenda:

First, we cannot emphasize enough the importance
of the effective and meaningful participation of
women, in the interest of promoting gender equality,
which is the essence of resolution 1325 (2000), and
of ending sexual violence. Women themselves know
best what they and their children need in order to feel
safe, to protect themselves and their families, and to
rebuild their lives and their communities after a crisis.
They need a seat at the table at all levels of conflict
prevention, peace negotiation, transitional justice
and reconstruction. It is not enough to just let them
be observers of decision-making processes. That is
especially important not only at the local level but also
in the national and international context. The United
Nations needs to ensure that women are involved in all
United Nations-led peace and reconciliation talks.

In efforts to achieve the active involvement of
women, civil society organizations can play an important
role. They can connect women's organizations and train
women representatives and thereby empower women
to take their rightful place in all decision-making
processes.

Secondly, it is well known that sexual violence
is a prevalent element in most armed conflicts and is
sometimes even used as a tactic of warfare. Recent
events in South Sudan, where radio broadcasts were
used to incite sexual violence, are a stark reminder
of that appalling reality. Most perpetrators still go
unpunished and are not held accountable for their
actions. Those actions destroy the lives of women,
children and whole communities. Accountability is
the promising way to promote lasting reconciliation. If
hatred and fear prevail in a society, peace will not be
possible.

Accountability is first and foremost the
responsibility of each State. Therefore, national
capacities need to be supported and built. Justice- and
security-sector reforms are essential. When effective
prosecution in the State concerned is not possible, the
only way to achieve justice for victims and survivors
is to have those cases transferred to an international
jurisdiction, including to the International Criminal
Court.

Thirdly, the prevention of sexual violence,
especially by preventing conflict in the first place,
has to be the goal of all our efforts. In order to prevent
sexual violence in ongoing conflicts, the elimination
of gender-based imbalances in a society is crucial. To
that end, coordination between all relevant sectors is
essential. That includes security, service provision,
justice, human rights, development and peacebuilding.
We thank United Nations Action against Sexual
Violence in Conflict for its work in ensuring such
coordination in order to achieve more efficient results
and a better use of resources, and we encourage all
United Nations agencies to continue their commitment
to that critical inter-agency initiative.

Fourthly, data collection is essential for our ability
to prevent, protect and respond and is the precondition
for any justice and accountability mechanism at the
national and international levels. Women protection
advisers therefore need to be deployed and monitoring
and reporting arrangements should be established
in all relevant peacekeeping and special political
missions. We welcome the mandating of women
protection advisers in the newly established Mission
in the Central African Republic, which will face the
challenges of integrating women protection issues into
all disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
and security sector reform processes, and of ensuring
that the survivors of sexual violence have access to all
psychosocial and medical services in order to protect
their sexual and reproductive rights.

Germany has recently ratified the Arms Trade
Treaty, which has clear provisions related to serious
acts of gender-based violence or serious acts of violence
against women and children. We would like to call on
all States to follow our example and sign and ratify the
Treaty in a timely manner.

Germany will continue its support to
UN-Women and all other relevant actors, including
civil society organizations, to ensure that women's
active participation and their important contribution to
conflict resolution and peacebuilding are adequately
taken into account.

