Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg congratulates the Nigerian presidency of
the Council for having organized this open debate on
women and peace and security, which gives us an
opportunity to take stock of the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions. We
commend you, Madam President, on your concept note
(S/2011/654, annex) focusing on the role of women in
conflict prevention and mediation.

Luxembourg fully aligns itself with the statement
to be made by the observer of the European Union.

We thank the Secretary-General and Under-
Secretary-General Michelle Bachelet for their briefings
on the efforts undertaken by the United Nations system
over the past year to implement the women and peace
and security agenda. We particularly welcome the
invitations extended to the President of the Economic
and Social Council and to the representative of the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security to
participate in this meeting. Their perspective and
expertise are particularly relevant to today's debate.

The awarding of the 2011 Nobel Peace Prize to
Liberian President Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf, to her
compatriot, Ms. Leymah Gbowee, and to Ms. Tawakkul
Karman of Yemen is highly symbolic recognition of
women's crucial role in the establishment and
preservation of peace. We pay tribute to all the
Tunisian, Egyptian and Libyan women who have so
decisively contributed to shaping the Arab Spring.

Although women's participation in Tunisia's
recent elections has not lived up to all expectations, we
are confident that Tunisian women will be able to
assume, at all levels and in all political and economic
institutions, their responsibilities in the work of
building their country, and that they will thereby set an
example for other countries in the region and around
the world. We urge Libyan leaders to grant women
their full and proper place in the construction of the
new Libya. We express our solidarity with the women
of Yemen and Syria, who continue to fight against
oppression and for their rights to freedom and
democracy.

We welcome the Secretary-General's conclusions
in his recent report (S/2011/598*) that the indicators
proposed last year (S/2010/498), which were endorsed
by the Council in its presidential statement of
26 October 2010 (S/PRST/2010/22), had made a major
contribution to consistency and coherence in
international efforts. We appreciate the Secretary-
General's candid assessment of the challenges that lie
ahead and support his observations and
recommendations.

We must focus our efforts even more on
implementing the normative framework created over
the past 11 years. The strategic results framework is the
right tool to accurately measure progress or the
absence of it. We encourage the Secretary-General to
continue to collect data based on the set of indicators
presented in his 2010 report. At the same time, we
encourage the entire United Nations system and all
Member States to help the Secretary-General to
implement his zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse perpetrated by the Blue
Helmets. Beyond the suffering of women and girls,
which we have a moral obligation to prevent, the
credibility of the Organization and of our efforts in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding in general is at stake.

Allow me, in my capacity as Chair of the Guinea
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, to
highlight the role that Guinean women must play in the
establishment of democracy in Guinea, and specifically
in national reconciliation efforts in their country, which
was wounded by decades of authoritarian rule and
military dictatorship. The Peacebuilding Commission
is striving to assist Guinea to fully integrate women
into all political processes and into economic and
social life.

In that context, I encourage the Secretary-General
to push the entire United Nations system to pursue,
with even stronger determination, the implementation
of his seven-point action plan on the role of women in
peacebuilding. In his report on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) under consideration, the
Secretary-General outlines a few areas of progress, but
he also acknowledges that progress is slow in an area
of particular interest for today's debate - the
participation of women in mediation efforts - and in
the area of women's economic integration. At this
stage, we do not have sufficient data to measure
progress towards the goal of allocating 15 per cent of
all United Nations-managed funds in support of
peacebuilding to gender equality and women's
empowerment.

Luxembourg continues to place great importance
on the plight of women in crisis situations and on
mainstreaming the gender dimension into the work of
international and regional organizations in that respect.
Last December, Luxembourg decided to fund a major
project of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
that is aimed at strengthening women's leadership and
participation in political life and in peacebuilding
activities in countries emerging from conflict. With our
support, concrete results are being achieved in three
countries - Timor-Leste, Haiti and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo - through partnerships forged
between national and local authorities and United
Nations missions and agencies. We are determined to
maintain and to reinforce that national commitment. By
strengthening the role of women in conflict prevention
and mediation, we will help to improve society as a
whole.

