Ms. Bachelet: It is an honour to address the
Security Council and present the report of the
Secretary-General on women and peace and security
(S/2011/598*). I thank the Secretary-General for his
leadership. While noting progress, the report stresses
that much more can and must be done to fully engage
women in conflict resolution and mediation. As the
Security Council has emphasized, women's full
participation in peacemaking is fundamental to
building peace and security.

This awareness was underlined by the award of
this year's Nobel Peace Prize to three women
champions of peace, justice and democracy: President
Ellen Johnson Sirleaf of Liberia, her compatriot
Leymah Gbowee, and Tawakkul Karman of Yemen.
This is the first time that the Nobel Committee's
citation included a direct reference to resolution 1325
(2000).

For each of the three Nobel Peace Prize winners
this year, there are thousands of women around the
world who persist in their pursuit of peace in spite of
massive obstacles. Their commitment to non-violence
and equality can stimulate breakthroughs where there
is resistance to change. It is our job - particularly in
view of the theme of this open debate today - to make
sure that doors are opened to women for conflict
prevention and mediation.

The report of the Secretary-General summarizes
progress in implementing resolution 1325 (2000) over
the past year in the four main areas of prevention,
participation, protection, and relief and recovery. A
strategic framework is included in this year's report to
guide the United Nations implementation of the
resolution up to 2020 and to strengthen United Nations
system accountability.

In the area of conflict prevention, improvements
have been registered in coordinated efforts to prevent
conflict-related human rights abuses of women, from
increased prosecutions and improved information about
security threats to community vigilance efforts. During
the past year, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict has
displayed determination to tackle impunity and prevent
future attacks on women. The rise in prosecutions for
conflict-related sexual violence is having a deterrent
effect. To make further progress, the report notes that
the fight against impunity must be paired with efforts
to empower women so they can sustain the demand for
accountability. There is also a need to strengthen the
involvement of women and the inclusion of gender
perspectives in early-warning and community conflict-
prevention systems to make them more effective.

In the area of women's participation in conflict
prevention, conflict resolution and recovery, the report
calls for further action to open doors and provide seats
to women in official and observer roles. As the topic of
this year's open debate addresses women's
participation in mediation, it is crucial that we consider
what can be done concretely about the low numbers of
women in mediation. The report calls for specific
measures and financial incentives by Member States to
include women in official delegations. Special envoys
and mediators are encouraged to meet with women
leaders and peace activists at the earliest possible
moment in mediation processes, to hold regular
consultations with women's civil society groups as
standard operating procedure and to share information
from those meetings with the Security Council and the
Secretary-General.

In the area of protection, the report shows a
mixed picture. Missions in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Haiti and Darfur show that protection
patrols and community policing within and around
camps, as well as escorts for women during livelihood
activities such as gathering water and firewood, have
helped deter sexual and gender-based violence. Against
examples of good practice, however, there are
continuing reports of human rights violations that
reinforce the need to ensure respect for international
legal obligations and provide protection to women
against atrocities.

Finally, in the area of relief and recovery, the
report notes improved awareness and responses to the
needs of women and girls in past conflict-needs
assessments, basic service design and delivery, the
provision of temporary employment, and transitional
justice programmes, including reparations
programmes. There are good examples to build on,

such as the cooperation between the United Nations
Development Programme and the World Food
Programme in Haiti, which created temporary
employment for 240,000 Haitians, 40 per cent of them
women.

Overall, the United Nations system is working to
increase post-conflict spending on women's
empowerment and gender equality to a minimum of
15 per cent of post-conflict financing within a few
years. The Peacebuilding Fund recently issued a
$5 million gender-promotion initiative and a call for
proposals to support women's participation in
peacebuilding, and has committed to doubling its
spending on women's empowerment by 2012.

The report points out that a total of 32 countries
have produced national action plans on resolution 1325
(2000), with another 12 anticipating the finalization of
their plans soon. Several regional organizations have
adopted policies on women, peace and security. At the
United Nations, a set of tools have been developed to
better equip the United Nations system to ensure that
women engage in conflict prevention, resolution and
recovery, and that stronger protection environments are
built for women. UN-Women coordinated the
production of the strategic framework, which was
requested by the Security Council last year to guide the
United Nations implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) in the next decade. It includes a monitoring
system and targets for effective coordination and more
concentrated impact.

During the past year, focus has been placed on
advancing coordination, accountability and coherence
in the implementation of women and peace and
security commitments through joint initiatives within
the United Nations system. I would like to
acknowledge and thank the Department of Political
Affairs for its collaboration on gender and mediation. I
also thank the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict for their
collaboration on early-warning and pre-deployment
troop training on the detection and prevention of sexual
violence in armed conflict.

Work is currently under way with the United
Nations Development Programme and the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights to improve
attention to crimes against women in transitional
justice systems, as well as with the Peacebuilding
Support Office to strengthen responses to women's
needs in post-conflict peacebuilding. In regions around
the world, recent "open day" country-level meetings
between women in civil society and senior United
Nations leaders have generated increased women's
participation and contribution to peace and security.

Looking forward, the report concludes with
recommendations for the Security Council's
consideration, addressing three broad areas. First, there
is a call for targeted actions in situations on the
Council's agenda to build women's engagement in
conflict resolution and recovery. Secondly, there is a
need to improve the information the Council receives
on women and peace and security. Thirdly, there is a
need for specific catalytic measures by Member States.

I would like to note the active role that the
Council has played in the last year. All three of the
Council's missions in 2010 included consultations with
women's groups. Recently, the Council produced new
or renewed mission mandates that call for specific
actions to ensure women's inclusion. The report
encourages more systematic actions of that type. It also
suggests that more such briefings as the one I provided
in April would be of value to the Council in furthering
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). Finally,
Member States are urged to develop national planning
instruments to advance women and peace and security
commitments, to devise practical measures to increase
the numbers of women in official and observer roles in
conflict resolution processes, to increase the number of
women in the security, governance and foreign service
sectors, and to invest in women's post-conflict
recovery and justice needs and reparations.

In conclusion, I would like to quote a
representative of Afghan civil society who spoke at the
London Conference on Afghanistan last year. She said:

"women's engagement is not an optional extra
component of stabilization and recovery; it is a
critical precursor to success. Women's
empowerment will enable you to deliver long-
term stability, democratization and development".

If women's participation is essential, not optional, why
is it often the missing ingredient in conflict prevention
and mediation? As we go forward, we need determined
leadership by all of us - the Security Council,
Member States, civil society and the United Nations -
to fully engage women in mediation and conflict
prevention. This will advance peace and security and
deepen democracy around the world.

