Ms. Ojiambo (Kenya): Kenya welcomes the
leadership shown by the United States in convening
this debate during its presidency of the Council. My
delegation also welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2010/604) on the implementation of
resolutions 1820 (2008) and 1888 (2009), and supports
the progress described therein while taking note of the
remaining challenges. Kenya further welcomes the
adoption of resolution 1960 (2010) yesterday to
strengthen responses to sexual violence through the
establishment of monitoring and reporting
arrangements on conflict-related sexual violence.

I wish to also thank the Secretary-General,
Special Representative Wallstrom, Under-Secretary-
General Alain Le Roy and Lieutenant General Gaye for
their insightful briefings yesterday.

In his report, the Secretary-General brings to light
how conflict-related sexual violence has become a
threat to human security, especially for women and
girls. The report also highlights how such violence is
an impediment to socio-economic development and
peacebuilding efforts in countries emerging from
conflict situations. The continued use of sexual
violence as a tactic of war serves as a wake-up call to
all of us that more needs to be done to protect women
and girls from sexual violence.

My delegation would also wish to underscore the
fact that peace, justice and security are interdependent.
There can be no peace without the peace of mind that
enables women to undertake their daily tasks, no
justice without a national capacity to deliver justice,
and no security without women's security. For this
reason, the issue that we are addressing today -
women and peace and security - is important and
deserves the absolute and unrelenting support of the
international community.

My delegation welcomes the appointment of
Margot Wallstrom as the first Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
to provide coherent and strategic leadership in the fight
against this vice. We wish her the very best in
executing her mandate. The international attention and
the priority that the diplomatic community ascribes to
her Office are already being demonstrated in the
countries where she has conducted field visits. Her
recent visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
following the mass rapes of over 300 women and girls
in Walikale contributed to the arrest of "Lieutenant
Colonel" Mayele, a suspect in the mass rapes. Kenya
believes that her leadership will further serve to bolster
efforts geared towards the fight against sexual violence
in armed conflict.

In armed conflicts, civilian casualties far
outnumber those of armed combatants. While women
and men alike suffer human rights violations in
conflicts, women and girls are more likely to be the
targets of sexual violence, especially rape. Women face
additional and sometimes insurmountable obstacles to
obtaining justice because of the stigma attached to
survivors of sexual violence, their disadvantaged
position in society and cultural challenges.

In this regard, Kenya welcomes the progress
made in establishing the Team of Experts on the Rule
of Law, whose mandate is to assist national authorities
in strengthening the rule of law and facilitating access
to justice for such victims. Kenya supports the
Secretary-General's call on countries affected by
conflict to draw from this important resource. Member
States are also urged to ensure that the Team has
sustainable funding to facilitate its work.

My delegation appreciates the very important role
that women's protection advisers will play in
protecting women and girls from sexual violence. Their
support for the monitoring, analysis and reporting
system on sexual violence and their facilitation of
dialogue with parties to conflict are welcome. The
development and implementation of strategies to
combat sexual violence and the mainstreaming of the
elimination of sexual violence into policies and
operations of peacekeeping and political missions are
also welcome.

While Kenya notes the proposal to determine the
need for the advisers on a case-by-case basis, caution
should be taken, however, to ensure that delays in
making such decisions do not lead to undue suffering
for women and girls in conflict situations.

The lifelong negative effects on victims and
perpetrators alike of the use of sexual violence as a
tactic of war, as highlighted in the Secretary-General's
report, buttress the call for prevention of conflict and,
where conflict exists, for expedient action in ending
the conflict. While recognizing that the primary
responsibility for protecting civilians lies with each
State, the implementation of (2008) and 1888 (2009)
would be better realized through genuine partnerships
between nation States and other international efforts.
Kenya condemns all forms of violence against
women, including sexual violence, and has always urged
compliance with humanitarian and human rights law
during times of conflict. The appalling situation
regarding the atrocities of sexual violence meted out
against women and girls in conflict situations, especially
in the Great Lakes region and the Horn of Africa, have
to be looked at seriously. As a community of States, we
must rigorously implement the United Nations zero-
tolerance policy against sexual abuse and exploitation.

We must also provide protection for women and
ensure that putting a stop to war-related sexual violence
is prioritized at the international level. We laud the
crucial work being carried out by agencies such as UN
Women, the United Nations Population Fund and
UNICEF to deal with such issues. Similarly, we need to
galvanize support to put in place the necessary
infrastructure to ensure that victims of sexual violence
receive quality legal and medical assistance.

More women should be involved in peace
mediation and peacebuilding processes. Decisions
should not be made for women. Women must be part
and parcel of a process that affects them. In that regard,
Kenya's new constitutional requirement that no more
than two-thirds of the members of elected or appointed
bodies shall be of the same gender is a principle that
can be emulated in order to mainstream women into
such processes.

I wish to conclude by reiterating my country's
commitment to the full and timely implementation of
all Security Council resolutions against sexual
violence, including resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888
(2009) and 1960 (2010). Beyond that, we call on all
parties to conflicts to make specific and time-bound
commitments to ceasing all acts of sexual violence.

