Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the presidency for convening this open
ministerial debate and for submitting a concept note on
the topic (S/2017/l98, annex).

We are also grateful to Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres and the other briefers for their statements.

The exploitation of people through trafficking,
including forced labour, slavery and recruitment by
armed groups, is a serious abuse ofhuman rights, while
certain acts associated with trafficking persons in the
context of armed conflict may amount to war crimes.
Azerbaijan strongly condemns all acts of trafficking in
persons and is combatting such acts and other similar
practices. We share the concern over the scale and
number of challenges, which have recently deteriorated
due to increased violence, terrorist activities and
humanitarian crises.

The international legal framework for combatting
human trafficking is based on the rules operating
within the relevant branches of international law that
ensure protection in all situations, including armed
conflict. Success in fighting criminal activities
during conflicts, including human trafficking and
similar practices, requires first and foremost a strong
commitment to binding obligations and standards. It
is critically important to ensure the full and effective
implementation of the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council, in particular those relating to conflict
prevention and resolution.

We note with concern the nexus between trafficking
in persons, terrorism and transnational organized
crime. Particular consideration must also be given to
armed conflicts that are aggravated by foreign military
occupation and external political, military, financial
and other support to separatist regimes established in
occupied territories and organized criminal networks
operating in such areas. Efforts to bring unlawful
situations to an end and to disrupt and dismantle the
networks involved must be a priority.

Among the issues requiring attention in the
context of human trafficking, forced labour, modern
slavery, organ removal and other similar practices
is that of civilians, including women and children,
taken hostage or reported missing in connection with
armed conflict. Azerbaijan continues its consistent
efforts in that regard, including through the relevant
biennial resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Commission on the Status of Women, of which my
country is a main sponsor.

The best deterrent is undoubtedly ensuring a
speedy end to impunity for conflict-related violations
and abuses of human rights through all available
means. When national authorities fail to investigate,
prosecute and convict the perpetrators, the international
community should play a more proactive role. It is
important that the Security Council, Member States,
regional organizations, mediators and envoys in
mediation, peace and preventive diplomacy processes
ensure that peace and justice work together effectively.

It is also essential to emphasize the role of the
relevant humanitarian mandates within the United
Nations system in addressing situations of armed
conflict and the important of international law-
enforcement cooperation, including with respect to the
investigation and prosecution of trafficking cases.

