Mr. Schaper (Netherlands): My delegation
welcomes today's debate. While we align ourselves
with the statement made earlier by the observer of the
European Union (EU), we would like to make some
remarks in our national capacity that complement those
made by the observer of the EU and other speakers
underlining the importance of the topic of women,
peace and security.

The Netherlands has for decades put gender equality
at the heart of all its policies. Internationally, we
support female leadership, the follow-up of resolution
1325 (2000), women's economic empowerment and
the elimination of sexual violence against women.
Equal rights and opportunities for women and their
full participation in society and decision-making are
important not just for the security of women; women
are powerful agents for peace, stability and prosperity
in any society.

Violence against women, especially sexual
violence, has an enormous impact on many aspects of
family and society. For example, it is used to this day as
a weapon of war to break down societies.

The Netherlands welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General entitled "Sexual violence in
conflict" (S/2013/149) and in particular supports its
recommendations in four areas.

First, we support enhancing monitoring, research
and reporting, as well as putting in place an appropriate
mechanism or procedure by the Security Council to
systematically monitor commitments by parties to
conflict so as to prevent and address conflict-related
sexual violence.

Secondly, we advocate involving civil society
organizations and effective cooperation with the
signatories of national action plans.

Thirdly, we support the recommendations on
increasing attention given to the role of small arms, as
was successfully done in the negotiations on the Arms
Trade Treaty.

Fourthly, we favour strengthening the role of the
International Criminal Court as the ultimate resort in
fighting impunity against the most serious crimes.

Because of the important role of women, since
2007 the Netherlands has invested in national action
plans, together with civil society organizations,
research institutions and other Government
institutions - altogether more than 40 partners.
The objective of those partnerships is to create an
enabling environment in which women are better able
to take a leading role and to participate in political
decision-making processes. Within the United Nations,
the Netherlands wants to continue its proactive role
within the United Nations Human Rights Council, the
General Assembly and the Commission on the Status
of Women. We are also committed, and a long-term
supporter of, the United Nations Trust Fund to End
Violence against Women.

