Mr. Vrailas: I am speaking on behalfofthe European
Union (EU) and its member States. The candidate
countries Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia
align themselves with this statement.

I thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon; Zainab
Bangura, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict; Maria Grazia
Giammarinaro, Special Rapporteur on trafficking
in persons, especially women and children; and Lisa
Davis, of the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace
and Security for their briefings.

We welcome the report submitted by the
Secretary-General in April on conflict-related sexual
violence (S/2016/361) and presidential statement
S/PRST/2015/25, adopted in December 2015. We look
forward to the Secretary-General's report on progress
to implement better existing mechanisms countering
trafficking in persons. We commend the work of
Special Representative Bangura and of the Team of
Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict, as well as of United Nations Action Against
Sexual Violence in Conflict.

As the Secretary-General's most recent report on
conflict-related sexual violence states, the scope of
sexual violence remains at alarming level, including
recent trends such as trafficking and its close
linkages to broader peace and security. Trafficking
is gender-specific. The most recent EU data show
that trafficking for the purpose of sexual exploitation
is still the most widespread form of trafficking and
targets predominantly women and girls. This type of
trafficking constitutes a structural form of violence
against women and girls and is both a demand- and
profit-driven crime. From the sexual exploitation of
women and girls to other forms of trafficking, such
as forced marriages and many other despicable forms
of exploitation, violence against women and gender
inequality remain at the core of the problem.

There has been a worryingly sharp increase
in the number of victims of trafficking. We as the
international community must spare no effort to combat
the heinous crimes that armed and terrorist groups
impose on populations, including women and girls. The
grim truth is that some individuals and groups choose
to treat women and girls as commodities to be owned,
traded, gifted and trafficked. Due to demand, human
beings become resources to be exploited and their
human rights denied. The cynical political economy
of war dictates that when human life is monetized,
significant resources can be raised to promote violent
and destructive causes. It is well known that the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) uses sexual violence
systematically to mobilize resources and fund its
operations, including the ransoming and sale of women
and girls through human trafficking and slave markets.
In that context it is particularly worrisome that ISIL is
expanding its presence in Libyan areas that in previous
years functioned as major human trafficking routes.

But unfortunately, in addition to ISIL there
are other terrorist groups, such as Boko Haram,
that practise human trafficking. As the Secretary-
General's report makes clear, it is a global threat that
can be found in many conflict areas, including Syria,
Somalia, Yemen, the Sahel, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, and as such needs to be responded to at
the international and national levels. The interlinkages
between trafficking in persons and conflict-related
sexual violence, including by Violent extremist groups,
need to be understood better and combatted with
improved understanding of the root causes, motivations
of perpetrators, and consequences of their actions on
civilian populations. In this regard, we emphasize the
following points:

First, we must strengthen the preventive dimension
at the global, regional and national levels. In the last
few years, the importance of mainstreaming the gender
dimension and of understanding the essential role
of women in the fight against terrorism and violent
extremism has become evident. We need to strengthen
our comprehensive policies and strategies empowering
the role of women in society as a whole and better
understand their specific needs and role in the fight
against terrorism and violent extremism. Government
policies need to be complemented by actions at the
community level, including through partnerships with
civil-society groups focused on women's empowerment
and raising awareness of their role in fighting terrorism
and violent extremism.

The Internet and new technologies enable
organized-crime groups to access a large pool of
potential victims, hide their activities and carry out a
wide range of criminal acts in a shorter period of time
and on a much larger scale than ever before. Measures
need to be taken in order to prevent and address the use
of new technologies as a tool for recruiting victims of
trafficking in human beings, including in conflict areas
and by terrorist groups. In this context, studies should
also be done on how social media are being used to
traffic women and girls into non-State armed groups
and to recruit male fighters by promising access to
trafficked women.

Secondly, we should strengthen the humanitarian
dimension. The protection of civilians, in particular
vulnerable groups, including pregnant women, children,
persons with disabilities and persons belonging to
minorities, is central to all of our policies. Women
and girls often suffer disproportionally in situations
of conflict and become deliberate targets for terrorist
groups. Women and girls belonging to minorities
are particularly at risk, and sexual violence is often
used strategically to instil fear into, destabilize and
displace entire communities. Greater attention must
be given to their specific situation, including through
humanitarian assistance.

There is an urgent need to adopt a survivor-
centred approach to sexual and gender-based violence
in humanitarian aid policies and practices. Assistance
should be comprehensive, including medical care,
psychological support and referral to legal services and
socioeconomic assistance. Moreover, awareness-raising
strategies must be pursued to fight stigmatization of
the survivors and of children born as a result of sexual
violence, so as to challenge negative perceptions and
misunderstandings that cause further suffering and
inhibit the ability of survivors to rebuild their lives.

Thirdly, we must strengthen the justice response.
First and foremost, we need to renew and invigorate
our collective effort to implement domestically the
existing legal architecture for combating trafficking in
persons, in particular the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocol
to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, and make use of the
expertise and practical tools of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime in this regard.

We also need to make full use of the mechanisms
and tools created by the Security Council to combat
and prevent conflict-related sexual violence, including
by strengthening the implementation of the sanctions
regimes, in particular by ensuring that involvement in
human trafficking is more widely used as a basis for
listing where appropriate. We therefore welcome the
fact that the Council, in particular in its resolution 2253
(2015), introduces terrorist listing criteria related to
sexual and gender-based Violence.

Deterring the financing of terrorism by all means
possible, in particular through revenue from trafficking
in persons, specifically in conflict, should remain a key
priority in our justice response. More than ever, there
is a need to end impunity for sexual and gender-based
crimes. The lack of accountability in conflict areas
contributes to an increase in such appalling crimes and
causes further distress to survivors.

We emphasize the significant advancement
in international justice made by the International
Criminal Court (ICC) as well as by the non-permanent
International Criminal Tribunals in combating sexual
violence in conflict. We underline the need for the rapid
and effective investigation and documentation of such
crimes. In this respect, we commend the Office of the
Prosecutor of the ICC for issuing a policy paper on
sexual and gender-based crimes in June 2014 and for
establishing a priority in investigating such crimes in
conflict areas. We also note the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia's work to capture lessons
learned on prosecuting sexual and gender-based
violence crimes. Nevertheless, we bear in mind that the
ICC jurisdiction is complementary to that of States and
that the primary responsibility for bringing perpetrators
to justice resides with States. At the national level,
accountability and transitional justice mechanisms are
also a key to this end.

In addition, as transnational illicit networks
trafficking in people, drugs and money have embedded
themselves in many conflicts, feeding on them and
fuelling them with funds and weapons, we find it
important that peacekeeping operations be enabled
to address these issues effectively. In this regard, the
United Nations police component is a critical tool in
assisting host-State police and other law-enforcement
agencies in addressing serious and organized crime and
protecting civilians.

The EU has built a gender-specific, comprehensive
legal and policy framework to combat trafficking
in human beings through the EU anti-trafficking
Directive and the EU Strategy towards the Eradication
of Trafficking in Human Beings. Anti-trafficking
actions also form a key part of our external policies.

The European Commission has recently published a
study on the gender dimension of trafficking in human
beings that identifies the harms of trafficking for the
purposes of sexual exploitation and the most effective
ways to reduce such harm after the fact.

The study concludes that trafficking for sexual
exploitation is a particularly gendered, severe and
sustained form of violence against women with
physical, reproductive and mental-health impacts and
secondary victimization harms. There is a need to
provide specialist services that are gender-specific and
access to mainstream services, such as health services,
in order to address the particular needs stemming from
these gendered forms of trafficking.

Reflecting the EU's comprehensive approach,
anti-trafficking projects are funded under a number
of EU financial instruments. These include projects
addressing gender exploitation and promoting the human
rights of all women and girls. The EU will continue to
develop partnerships to address trafficking in human
beings worldwide. Accountability and a collective
effort are needed to put an end to this heinous crime.

