Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): Allow me to first
express my thanks to you, Madame President, for
convening this debate on a topic that, as the Chair of
the Commission on the Status of Women, I am
particularly glad to see addressed.

All the United Nations world conferences on
women have recognized the interlinkage between
gender equality, development and peace. In 1995, at
the Fourth World Conference on Women, Member
States devoted a section of the Beijing Platform for
Action to women and armed conflict, noting that
women and girls were particularly affected by armed
conflict because of their status in society and their sex.
Member States also highlighted particular forms of
violence against women in situations of armed conflict.

Fifteen years later, it is heartening to observe how
much this issue has gained in visibility and traction. It
is now taken up in various intergovernmental bodies,
including the Security Council, the General Assembly
and the Peacebuilding Commission. Member States at
the national level and civil society organizations are
demonstrating their commitment to tackling this
challenge through concrete action.

I welcome the presence and contribution of Ms.
Margot Wallstrom, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and her focus on addressing sexual
violence in the context of the Secretary-General's
campaign "Unite to End Violence against Women".

The Commission on the Status of Women, too,
has contributed to advancing global policy on women,
peace and security. At its forty-eighth session in 2004,
the Commission considered women's equal
participation in conflict prevention, management and
resolution and in post-conflict peacebuilding. In its
agreed conclusions, the Commission recognized that
women and girls were often subject to particular forms
of violence and deprivation in armed conflict, and
called for measures to prevent gender-based violence
arising from armed conflict and in post-conflict
situations, including sexual violence against women
and girls. The agreed conclusions also urged
Governments to prosecute the perpetrators of such
crimes.

In 2008, the Commission evaluated progress in
the implementation of the 2004 agreed conclusions
through an interactive dialogue. Many participants
reported on initiatives to address sexual violence in
armed conflict and to increase the participation of
women in peacekeeping and security forces. They also
highlighted the need to strengthen efforts at the
national and international levels to address sexual
violence in armed conflict as a threat to peace and
security.
This year, the Commission also considered the
question of violence against women as part of its
follow-up to the Beijing Platform for Action, and held
an interactive dialogue on the subject. Expert
panellists, member States, United Nations system
entities and non-governmental organizations were able
to share their experiences and the results achieved.
Despite the measures that have been taken to prevent
and address violence against women, reports by the
participants made it clear that it persists.

Efforts to address violence against women are
often not comprehensive, consistent or sustained, and
there continues to be insufficient coordination among
relevant sectors. Knowledge regarding the scope,
prevalence, impact and cost of violence against women
remains inadequate, and capacities for collecting such
data are insufficient. Greater efforts are necessary to
collect more and better-quality information and data on
violence against women to support policymakers in
undertaking effective legislative and policy reforms,
ensure the adequate provision of targeted and effective
services, monitor trends and progress in addressing and
eliminating violence against women, and assess the
impact of measures taken.

In this context, the Council's effort to set up a
mechanism for monitoring and reporting sexual
violence against women may prove to be very useful,
not only to the Council's work but also to other
organizations working on issues pertaining to sexual
violence against women and gender issues in general.
Such a plan should incorporate measurable goals and
timetables, monitoring and accountability measures
and provisions for impact assessments.

The Commission on the Status of Women plays a
central role in monitoring the implementation of the
Platform for Action, including with respect to women
in armed conflict. I recognize and welcome the key
role and critical efforts of the Security Council in
preventing sexual violence and combating impunity in
conflict and post-conflict situations. I encourages
continuing action by the Council, including the
development of effective measures to put an end to
sexual violence in armed conflict.

