Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank the presidency of Spain for convening
today's important meeting. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, the Executive
Director of UN-Women, Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-
Ngcuka, the Director of Fonds pour les femmes
congolaises, Ms. Julienne Lusenge, the President of the
Organization of Women's Freedom in Iraq, Ms. Yanar
Mohammed, and the Founder and President of the Voice
of Libyan Women, Ms. Alaa Murabit.

The importance of today's meeting lies in the
fact that resolution 1325 (2000), which was adopted
15 years ago, is an important milestone in international
efforts aimed at protecting women from violence and
enhancing their role in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts, as well as in the establishment offair and stable
societies. In the years since its adoption, the resolution
has served to increased international awareness of the
importance of protecting women and girls, encouraging
the participation of women in national, regional and
international institutions, particularly in the areas of
peacekeeping, conflict management and resolution, and
containing risks to humankind. It has also enhanced
the legal and normative frameworks with regard to the
women and peace and security agenda.

Ninety per cent of the resolutions adopted by the
Security Council concerning the establishment or
extension of the mandates of peacekeeping operations
refer to this agenda. In addition, resolution 1325 (2000)
provides a normative framework for many regional
organizations and appears in many peace treaties signed
in recent years, which make clear references to gender.

However, despite the efforts to ensure the full
implementation of the resolution, and despite the time
that has gone by since its adoption, many challenges
remain. In fact, the concepts of peace and security
are now different from what they were 15 years ago.
Indeed, some of the threats against women and girls
are new. We are also now talking about climate change,
the upsurge of religious extremism throughout the
world and the unprecedented increase in the number
of refugees and internally displaced persons, including
women and girls, throughout the world, particularly
in the Middle East. The changing nature and form of
conflicts, including civil wars, has also become an
important element in the violation of human rights.

When we talk about the rights of women and girls
in the context of resolution 1325 (2000), it should
be realized that the resolution is not just a means to
guarantee the participation of women in negotiations
during conflicts but it is also necessary for the protection
of women during conflicts. In that regard, I would like
to pay tribute to the Arab women in Palestine, Syria
and Yemen who are still victims of armed conflicts and
related persecution. It is therefore necessary that more
effective measures be taken to implement resolution
1325 (2000).

Jordan welcomes the recommendations contained
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/716),
such as increasing the participation and representation
of women in decision-making posts in the area of peace
and security and enhancing gender equality at all
levels at the United Nations. We draw attention to the
importance of appropriately funding the women and
peace and security agenda so that its recommendations
can be implemented. That would represent the
qualitative and quantitative leap forward needed to
implement resolution 1325 (2000) and to meet the
changes and new challenges that the women and peace
and security agenda is facing.

I would like to highlight some of the measures that
we have taken nationally. Jordan signed the political
declaration entitled "Planet 50-50 by 2030: Step It Up
for Gender Equality" just last month, which includes
a commitment to adopt a national plan to implement
resolution 1325 (2000). For that reason, we are in the
process of modifying our plan of action in order to
harmonize it with the Sustainable Development Goals
(General Assembly resolution 70/1), keeping in mind the
current regional context, including the constant flow of
Syrian refugees into Jordan. We are doing everything
possible to provide protection and basic services for
Syrian women refugees in our country, pursuant to the
women and peace and security agenda.

The role that women can play in countering
extremist thought is also crucial. Women can have a
positive influence on their children, encouraging them
to preserve peace and security and keeping them from
being recruited by extremist groups.

Jordan continues to be committed to the promotion
of women in peacekeeping and in decision-making.
In conflict resolution, the Jordanian armed forces,
also known as the Arab Army, have supported the
enhancement of the role of women in the military, with
a view to making the forces more efficient. Jordanian
women have taken part in peacekeeping operations and
humanitarian missions since 2007.

Furthermore, women play an enhanced role in the
Kingdom's health services through their work in field
hospitals outside the country. Women also play an
important role in welcoming and providing protection
and services for Syrian refugees. In the context of
international cooperation, we are studying the gender
element in security programmes, with a view to creating
a strategy to increase the participation of Jordanian
women in our security forces in collaboration with
NATO.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that
Jordan will continue to enhance and guarantee the
protection of and respect for the rights of women
and girls in our legislation and to promote women's
empowerment so that they may increasingly participate
in decision-making. We will also continue to protect the
rights of women and girls from all forms of violence,
and we will enhance capacities with governmental and
non-governmental organizations for the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000).

