Ms. Krisnamurthi (Indonesia): Indonesia would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for sustaining this
important dialogue on women and peace and security.
Indonesia greatly appreciates all the briefers for
their remarks.

One of the persistent challenges that today's
debate is reminding us of is sexual violence in
conflict. Indonesia is deeply concerned about the use
of sexual violence as a war tactic. As the Secretary-
General's report (S/2018/250) emphasizes, anyone
becomes susceptible to sexual violence during conflict,
regardless of their sex. Women and girls in particular
have been exploited by the warring parties, yet women
have articulated their desire to move past victimization
and take the lead to improve their own situation and
in the broader scope, despite being victims of horrible
acts, having faced injustice or marginalized because
of gender.

Indonesia welcomes the response ofMember States,
the United Nations and civil society. The international
community's efforts have raised women's profiles as
assets to peace. Since the Security Council's adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), the international community
has built a robust framework in which women can
exercise their role in peace and security. It is worth
noting that the same resolution clearly mentions that
effective steps to prevent and respond to all forms
of sexual violence can significantly contribute to the
maintenance of international peace and security. Along
with constructive measures to increase women's roles
in peace, the international community can still do much
more. It must continue to condemn sexual violence in
conflict, which requires greater efforts not only to put
an end to it, but also to consider means to prevent such
atrocities from taking place in the first place.

I would like to take this opportunity to share
Indonesia's views regarding the prevention of sexual
violence before, during and after conflict. First, there
is no price that can be placed on human life. The
human toll of conflict is devastating. For that reason,
civil order must be preserved if conflict is imminent.
Peaceful solutions must be actively pursued. More
resources should be poured into prevention in order to
rebalance the approach to peace and security, which has
focused more on response actions.

Secondly, the value of the women and peace and
security agenda in preventive measures will emerge
through the empowerment of women to assume the
confidence and capacity to access the policy-making
process, which is a way for them to address their
grievances and to make their contributions towards the
betterment of their community and society. Action to
elevate women's empowerment should be integrated
into development planning, peacekeeping missions and
humanitarian assistance,

Thirdly, prevention should be prioritized
through better dissemination. Sharing knowledge
and experiences of women ex-combatants, women
peacekeepers, negotiators and the like to deter conflict
should be supported. That is why it is important for us
to have a system-wide United Nations approach or a
platform to disseminate, share and exchange success
stories in that regard.

Fourthly, women need to become self-sufficient.
Whether before, during or after conflict, strengthening
basic capacities of women, such as reading, writing and
economic skills, can go a long way. Training should
focus on developing skills that would help women
build a structured livelihood to obtain a steady income.
Indonesia has also been sharing our best practices
and experiences in empowering women in leadership
through South-South and triangular cooperation.

The many efforts the international community
has made give Indonesia hope that there is sufficient
momentum for women's participation in peace and
security. However, women and peace and security
should not be reduced to a women's issue. It takes both
men and women to achieve gender equality, foster
respectful relationships, support safer communities and
become true partners for peace. The hearty cooperation
of both women and men is essential to successfully
tackle the many challenges on the Council's agenda.
The frameworks and tools are there. We must now walk
the talk.

