The Deputy Secretary-General: I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to
brief the Council on my recent visit to Nigeria and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. This undertaking,
from 19 to 27 July, was the first of its kind - a high-
level mission focused entirely on women and peace
and security and development. I was pleased to be
joined by the Executive Director of UN-Women and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, both of whom are here
with me today, as well as Ms. Bineta Diop, the African
Union Commission's Special Envoy on Women, Peace
and Security. We were four African women from
two organizations, visiting two countries, with one
goal - advancing peace by advancing the equality,
empowerment and well-being of women. This reflects
both the Secretary-General's vision and the Security
Council's agenda, as embodied initially in resolution
1325 (2000) and reaffirmed most recently in resolution
2242 (2015).

The mission also deepened the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union
(AU), as we work together to implement the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and the African
Union's Agenda 2063, as well as the accompanying
Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, signed in
April on the initiative of the Secretary-General. I am
pleased that the Permanent Observer from the African
Union will be briefing the Council alongside me today,
reinforcing the joint nature of our mission. In that broad
context, I would like to share with the Council some of
what we saw and heard, as well as some thoughts on
what we must do now.

In both countries, we met with Heads of State,
ministers, donors, diplomats, faith leaders, Parliaments
and the United Nations mission and country teams. We
made a point of spending the lion's share of our time
with the women and girls most affected by conflicts,
including in visits to camps for internally displaced
persons. While each country is unique, the situations
share some commonalities. Both have dismally low
levels of women's participation in politics and are
experiencing conflicts marked by extremely high levels
of sexual- and gender-based violence. In the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo, sexual violence is widespread. In
northern Nigeria, abductions, forced marriage and the
use of women as suicide bombers have taken a terrible
toll, and in the camps, sexual exploitation, including in
the form of sex for food, is a new and alarming trend.
The international community must better understand
the role of women in development and peacebuilding,
together with the gender dimensions of conflict, if our
responses are to be effective.

Both countries are also in the grip of grave
humanitarian crises. In Nigeria, the eight-year conflict
in the North-East has generated a risk of famine,
displaced 1.9 million people and left 8.5 million in need
of assistance. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
7 million people need assistance and 3.8 million are
displaced, the largest internally displaced population in
Africa and one of the worst such situations in the world.
Those dire circumstances are being made worse by a
large gap in humanitarian funding, including the issue
of failures to meet the commitments made at the Oslo
Humanitarian Conference on Nigeria and the Lake
Chad Region. There is an acute need for sustained and
scaled-up funding to avert famine in Nigeria and address
the humanitarian crisis in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Beyond those immediate concerns, since
both crises are rooted in conflict, poverty and political
challenges, they will require regional political solutions
and integrated responses that cut across historically
siloed approaches.

Let me turn now to some of the specifics of each. In
Nigeria, we were moved by our meeting with the Chibok
girls - facilitated by the Honourable Minister of

Women Affairs. Their remarkable strength as survivors,
rather than victims, is inspiring. Many are receiving an
education and psychosocial support to prepare them for
reintegration. But thousands of other young women who
have been abducted and returned, subjected to sexual
violence and affected by conflict in other ways have yet
to receive adequate support. We also interacted with
displaced women and girls who are facing exploitation
and abuse in the camps. We held meetings with women's
leaders who underscored the need to address mental
health and women's empowerment.

I commend the Governments of the Niger, Chad,
Cameroon and Nigeria for their efforts to promote
stability, including through the Multinational Joint
Task Force within the Lake Chad Basin regional
cooperation. International support will continue to be
crucial in addressing the root causes of the crisis in
those very complex situations.

I am also pleased to note that since our visit, the
Acting President of Nigeria has established a judicial
commission to investigate alleged violations of human
rights by Nigerian security agencies, and to recommend
ways to prevent such violations. I commend that
initiative and encourage the relevant authorities to
include sexual- and gender-based violence within the
commission's work. The United Nations stands ready
to support that important effort and also to reinforce
protection measures for displaced women and girls.

The situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo remains complex and volatile, with State and
non-State armed actors alike perpetuating violence
and the illicit flows of natural resources and deepening
political tensions, including over the delayed elections.
There are real risks ofincreased political instability and
deepening crises if the 31 December 2016 agreement
becomes irrelevant.

We are all aware of those and other challenges, yet
we also see a real opportunity to get the country on track
towards stability. In all of our meetings, we emphasized
the need to respect and implement the 31 December
agreement and the willingness of the United Nations
to provide its support. That endeavour will require
further investment, not a scaling back of our capacities
and resources. While it is imperative to ensure the most
efficient use of available resources, particularly in a
fiscally constrained environment, it is equally critical
that mitigating measures are taken to avail vulnerable
populations of the level of protection they need. In that

respect, I commend the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) for the steps taken to mitigate
the possible impact of the closure of its bases in some
locations and for its efforts to develop and implement
a more holistic approach to the protection of civilians.

We commend the efforts of the Government,
including through the appointment of a personal
representative of the President on sexual violence and
child recruitment, to decrease incidents of conflict-
related sexual violence committed by the security
forces and to take real steps towards delisting from the
Secretary-General's reports on conflict-related sexual
violence. Those efforts must continue, along with our
pledged support, until we reach zero.

At the time of our visit, the electoral commission
had registered more than 80 per cent of voters. That
number now stands at more than 90 per cent, with
registration expected to be accelerated in the Kasais
following the calming of tensions. Of those registered,
48 per cent are women, placing the country in the same
bracket as more established democracies, such as the
Solomon Islands and Paraguay. The collection of sex-
disaggregated data is itself commendable, as is the
provision on gender parity in the constitution, which
should now be supported and translated into law.

In that regard, we had lengthy conversations with
President Kabila, who has committed to releasing
an elections calendar and to holding elections that
are violence-free and Congolese-led, but where
international observers will be welcome. We welcome
that commitment and look forward to the early release
of that electoral calendar.

The United Nations-AU delegation met with
women in Goma who were being moved as a result
of the closing of an internally displaced persons
camp where they had lived for years in barely life
sustaining conditions. Despite those hardships, some
women did not want to return to their communities
without assurances that a key means of support in
the camps - microcredit - would continue to be
available. While it was not possible to delay the closure
of any of the camps, I am encouraged to note that our
intervention made it possible for some of the women
to remain in local communities and to continue to be
supported through the micro-credit programmes that
have been facilitated by UN-Women. For these women,
security is a matter of financial empowerment. I thank
the donors that are generously supporting these efforts
and call on all to do even more.

We also met with women who have no choice but
to cook with coal in their tents, at great risk to their
health and that of their children. Those tents were their
only shelter and coal was their only accessible mode of
sustenance and heat.
We asked about the future of those women and
their families upon the closure of the camp and were
informed that the United Nations does not have
the funds or capacity to shift from humanitarian
assistance to support host communities or the
reintegrated individuals. While we may debate the
humanitarian-development nexus philosophically here
in New York, without resources flowing to both sectors
simultaneously and a real investment in early recovery,
we can neither sustain peace nor prevent future gender-
based violence. In that spirit, I encourage donors to
respond to the Democratic Republic of the Congo's
reintegration challenges at this time - based on need,
and need alone.

While in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, our
delegation was briefed on MONUSCO's investigation
into the murder of two experts working for the
United Nations. The report on that horrific incident,
which I strongly condemn, is to be published shortly,
and I would like to reiterate the need for thorough
investigations and justice for the perpetrators of that
crime. The United Nations will continue to support that
effort until justice is served.

I would like to thank the many dedicated men
and women with whom we met during our important
and productive journey, in particular my colleagues
in MONUSCO, especially the women, whose work
was greatly appreciated by all we met, as well as the
United Nations country team in both countries - and
within them UN-Women, whose efforts to support
the empowerment of women is so crucial. I am most
grateful for the invaluable contribution from to the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.

I would also like to express my gratitude and
thanks to the African Union as a partner in progress.
Its partnership is invaluable as we strive to continue
to work together to stabilize the region, to advance the
Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative, and to achieve
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
African Union's Agenda 2063.

One message resounds most - investing in women
and girls must be central to our efforts in Nigeria,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and beyond if
we are to have sustainable peace and development.
Giving special consideration to the context will be
key to the responses that deliver the right results. We
look forward to working with national Governments,
regional organizations, civil society, women and girls
themselves and international partners to deliver results
that will advance peace, development and dignity
for all.

