The President (spoke in Chinese): After
consultations among members of the Security Council,
I have been authorized to make the following statement
on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to the full and effective
implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000) and
1820 (2008) on women and peace and security,
and recalls the relevant statements of its President.

"The Security Council takes note of the
report of the Secretary-General on women and
peace and security (S/2008/622).

"The Security Council remains concerned
about the underrepresentation of women at all
stages of a peace process and in peacebuilding,
and recognizes the need to facilitate the full and
effective participation of women in these areas,
given the vital role of women in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts and in peacebuilding.
08-57549

"The Security Council urges Member States
and international, regional and subregional
organizations to take measures to increase the
participation of women in conflict prevention,
conflict resolution and peacebuilding and to
strengthen the role of women as decision-makers
in these areas. The Council calls upon the
Secretary-General to appoint more women to
pursue good offices on his behalf, particularly as
Special Representatives and Special Envoys.

"The Security Council strongly condemns
all violations of international law committed
against women and girls during and after armed
conflicts, urges the complete cessation by all
parties of such acts with immediate effect, and
also urges Member States to bring to justice those
responsible for crimes of this nature.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to provide a report on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) over
the coming year, including information on the
impact of armed conflict on women and girls in
situations of which the Council is seized, on the
obstacles and challenges to strengthening
women's participation in conflict prevention,
conflict resolution and peacebuilding, and
recommendations to address those issues, to be
submitted to the Security Council by October
2009."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol SfPRST/2008/39.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 6.45 pm.
39
