Ms. Yanez Loza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of Ecuador thanks the German presidency
for the timely convening of this open debate on the
devastating problem of sexual violence in armed
conflict. We are grateful to the Secretary-General
and the briefers for their statements this morning.
We would particularly like to recognize the work of
Dr. Denis Mukwege and Ms. Nadia Murad, who were
rightly awarded the Nobel Peace Prize last year for
their selflessness in supporting and caring for victims
of sexual violence and for bringing the world's attention
to the fact that such crimes must not go unpunished.

As the Secretary-General's annual report
(S/2019/280) outlines, sexual violence against women,
girls and young boys is an alarming trend that continues
to affect millions. It is used as a tactic of war and
terrorism and as an instrument of political repression.
We agree with the Secretary-General's statement in
paragraph 3 of the report that

"[p]reventing sexual violence requires the
advancement of substantive gender equality before,
during and after conflict, including by ensuring
women's full and effective participation in political,
economic and social life and ensuring accessible
and responsive justice and security institutions."

We also believe that in order to address sexual
violence in armed conflict, a comprehensive and
preventive vision is necessary. Member States need
to make a collective effort, including legislative and
judicial reform, so that those responsible for acts of
sexual violence are brought to justice and so that
survivors have access to justice, are treated with dignity,
benefit from protection and are duly compensated.
Of all those elements, the fight against impunity is
fundamental, as is the presence of women in mediation
processes and decision-making in conflict resolution
and peacebuilding.

To guarantee the effectiveness, practice and
enforceability of women's fundamental rights,
Ecuador's legal framework is based on two fundamental
pillars - the Constitution, which explicitly
acknowledges that Ecuador must consider the measures
necessary to prevent, eliminate and sanction all forms
of violence, including sexual violence; and the binding
international instruments ratified by the State.

The national plan for eliminating gender violence
became public policy in 2007 and constitutes one of the
pillars of the "Toda una vida" national development plan.
In 2018, Ecuador issued a comprehensive constitutional
law to prevent and eradicate violence against women,
which establishes a comprehensive national system that
is structured around and articulated through prevention,
care, protection and comprehensive reparation of the
rights of victims.

As was voiced by my delegation during the
interactive dialogue on commitments under resolution
1325 (2000), my country has continuously promoted
initiatives to mainstream gender, particularly through
the National Council for Gender Equality, based on its
specialized competencies, and through the Ministry
of Defence with regard to managing the School of
Peacekeeping Operations, which trains and educates
military personnel - men and women alike - for
deployment in United Nations peace missions.

Ecuador wishes to express its appreciation for
the Secretary-General's various initiatives in this
area - the strategy for improving the approach to
preventing sexual exploitation and abuse across the
system and his zero-tolerance policy in that regard;
the voluntary global compact on the commitment to
eliminate sexual exploitation and abuse, signed by my
country in February 2018; the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative; and the Circle of Leadership on the prevention
of and response to sexual exploitation and abuse. All of
those initiatives complement and reinforce resolution
1325 (2000).

To conclude, I wish to convey to the Office of the
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict
my country's appreciation for its work in recent years
and for Ms. Patten's selflessness in that regard.

