Ms. Bachelet: It is an honour for me to address
the Security Council for the first time since assuming
my position as Under-Secretary-General and Executive
Director of the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN Women). I would like to express deep gratitude to
you, Sir, for giving me this opportunity to address the
Council and to present the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2010/498). I commend your commitment
and leadership in the intense preparations and
deliberations leading up to this open debate.

I would also like to recognize the unprecedented
level of representation by ministers at this historic
tenth-anniversary meeting on resolution 1325 (2000). I
take inspiration from this presence, which clearly
shows that Member States are determined to see
accelerated implementation and concrete results in
women's protection and in their full engagement in
making, keeping and building peace.

The report before the Council presents a
comprehensive overview of progress made, as well as
the obstacles encountered in the first decade of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in response
to a number of mandates of the Security Council. It
responds to the Security Council's request to the
Secretary-General in paragraph 18 of resolution 1889
(2009) to present an overview of progress in
implementing resolution 1325 (2000). The report also
provides an assessment of the processes by which the
Security Council receives, analyses and takes action on
information pertinent to resolution 1325 (2000), and
recommendations on further measures to improve
coordination across the United Nations system and
with Member States and civil society to deliver
implementation.

Furthermore, it gives highlights of progress
achieved in implementing the 2008-2009 System-wide
Action Plan for implementing resolution 1325 (2000),
as well as an update on the further development of the
set of indicators contained in the April 2010 report of
the Secretary-General (S/2010/173), as requested in
operative paragraph 17 of resolution 1889 and in the
presidential statement contained in document
S/PRST/2010/8. The report ends with a number of
recommendations for consideration by the Security
Council. These recommendations, if accepted, will
provide the Council with tools to ensure accelerated
implementation. They offer a monitoring framework
for the Council's work on women, peace and security.

I am confident that with strong Council
leadership, Member State determination, civil society
engagement and United Nations commitment and
assistance, we will together ensure coherent
implementation of the important work on women,
peace and security.

The report before you presents a mixed picture. It
highlights areas in which progress has been made in
implementing resolution 1325 (2000) in the last
decade, outlining a great number of activities that have
been carried out by various stakeholders, including
Member States, entities of the United Nations system,
civil society and the Security Council itself.

United Nations system entities have invested in
training and the development of policies, action plans,
guidelines and programming to ensure women's access
to resources, justice and opportunities to participate in
decision-making. United Nations peacekeeping
missions have become more effective in engaging
women in peacebuilding. As a result, most reports of
the Secretary-General on peacekeeping missions now
include information on actions taken to ensure the
participation of women in conflict resolution, public
decision-making and recovery efforts. They also detail
the consequences for women and girls of armed
conflict and its aftermath. There has been an effort to
develop consistent standards and procedures to guide
various aspects of the work of the United Nations on
women, peace and security.

The need for coordination of the activities on
women, peace and security in the United Nations
system was recognized and led to a call by the Security

Council for the development of a United Nations
System-wide Action Plan on implementing Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000) across the United
Nations system (S/PRST/2004/40). The first evaluation
of the performance of this Plan led to its revision and
the definition of a new System-wide Action Plan as a
results-based programming, monitoring and reporting
tool.

Within a few years of the resolution's adoption, a
number of Member States were actively working on
their own initiatives at the national level, often
reaching out to women's organizations to create
partnerships to implement resolution 1325 (2000).
Spearheaded by Canada, an informal group of Member
States, the Friends of Women and Peace and Security
or the Friends of 1325, continues to advocate for and
support intergovernmental coordination, the allocation
of resources and the acceleration of implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) by United Nations entities.
Twenty-two countries have so far developed national
action plans on women, peace and security. In a
number of post-conflict countries there has been a
dramatic increase in the number of women in national
politics, in part because of the use of electoral quotas.
In Nepal, women hold one third of the seats in the
Constituent Assembly. More than half of Burundi's
Senate is female. The Sudan's general election this
year resulted in a National Assembly with women
winning over a quarter of the seats.

Just this month, 90 female police advisers from
Rwanda were deployed to the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) to
serve as gender-based violence and child protection
advisers. Sierra Leone, which only allowed women into
its armed forces in 2008, recently sent seven female
peacekeepers to the Sudan, including one female
Brigadier General, and will shortly send 20 more. In
addition to facilitating the gender-responsiveness of
UNAMID military and police components, these
examples show that post-conflict countries are
emerging as the standard bearers of the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). There are many other
examples of Member States' commitment to resolution
1325 (2000), which are highlighted in the report.

Civil society has played a key role in advocating
for accountability in the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). Within the United Nations, the NGO
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security
continues to emphasize accountability and the need to

establish a monitoring framework for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). In 2010, a
high-level civil society advisory group was established
and its chair has participated as an observer in a high-
level steering committee, chaired by the United
Nations Deputy Secretary-General, to guide
preparations for the commemoration of the tenth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000). The
involvement of civil society has provided essential
guidance and insights from women around the world
on their priorities and concerns.

On a country-specific level, we have seen
important examples of women's peace activism. This
year, women in Afghanistan lobbied consistently and
successfully to ensure that an unprecedented number of
women participated in the important June Peace Jirga.
In Kyrgyzstan, after the ethnic clashes of June 2010,
women peace activists struggled to have their voices
heard at the high-level donors forum, held on June 27.
A persistent campaign reiterating that "women count
for peace" and "nothing for us without us", resulted in
the allocation of five seats at the donor conference and
an invitation to participate in the peace negotiations
committee. Civil society has a crucial role to play in
promoting resolution 1325 (2000).

This Council itself has continued to play an
active role. The role of women in peace and security is
now more clearly integrated into the Council's
deliberations. The past year's heightened activities on
the part of the Security Council and the United Nations
to achieve coordination and bring sharper attention to
the issues of women and peace and security in general,
and sexual violence in conflict in particular, are worthy
of note. This Council's adoption of resolutions 1820
(2008), 1888 (2009) and 1889 (2009) illustrates the
increased commitment of the Council to the issue of
women and peace and security. In response to Security
Council resolution 1888 (2009), the Secretary-General
appointed a Special Representative on Sexual Violence
in Conflict to bring greater focus to this challenging
aspect of the area of women, peace and security.

The call of the Security Council in resolution
1889 (2009) for indicators to monitor the
implementation of the resolution was a bold and an
important step towards the development of a much
needed monitoring framework for resolution 1325
(2000). The Council's persistence in requesting the
development and operationalization of those indicators
has kept up the pressure needed to transform the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) from just a
focus on activities to an output and results-driven
endeavour.

Despite these activities and implementation
successes, there are a number of sobering messages in
the report before you that call for our concerted and
urgent action. Ten years after the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), significant achievements are difficult to
identify or quantify. Although activities to implement
resolution 1325 (2000) have been carried out with
increasing intensity over the years, those activities
have lacked a clear direction or time-bound goals and
targets that could accelerate implementation and ensure
accountability. While those discrete activities have
indeed contributed to improvements in efforts to
address the needs of women and girls in the context of
armed conflict, evidence of their cumulative impact is
inadequate. Because of design, implementation and
resource limitations, the System-wide Action Plan
devised to bring greater coherence to the United
Nations system implementation efforts has fallen short
of its goals.

Given the urgent need to accelerate
implementation of the resolution and the formidable
obstacles to be overcome, the Security Council may
wish to consider a range of initiatives and interventions
to ensure that the coming years see more determined
and effective implementation.

The report before you recommends the
development of a single comprehensive framework
consisting of an agreed set of goals, targets and
indicators to guide the implementation of the resolution
in the next decade. The Council, in that regard, could
convene a review or summit at the ministerial level
every five years to assess progress towards the goals
and targets and to address the obstacles in their
implementation. This framework should build on the
comprehensive set of indicators presented in the annex
to the report.

The comprehensive set of indicators in the
present report has been acknowledged as a
breakthrough in the architecture for monitoring the
implementation of 1325 (2000) and as a crucial
building block of stronger accountability. They
represent a highly practical new tool to support the
implementation of the women, peace and security
agenda.

I strongly urge the Council to endorse the
indicators contained in the annex as a preliminary set
and to begin to use them as a basis for the Council's
review, analysis and intervention on issues related to
women and peace and security at both the global and
the country levels. This would demonstrate a new level
of commitment of the Council to act on the information
that it receives. As section III of the report before you
notes, the effectiveness with which the Security
Council processes and takes action on information
pertinent to the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) will make the difference in achieving its
objectives.

Actions such as the horrific mass rapes in July
and August 2010 in the eastern provinces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo cannot be allowed
to continue with impunity. These events are an affront
to humankind and underline the desperate urgency of
accelerating the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) to strengthen the capacity of Member States to
resolve conflict and build security and justice systems
that protect the human rights of all. Therefore, as
indicated in the Secretary-General's report, the
Security Council may wish to instruct that those who
abuse women and girls and violate their human rights
in conflict and post-conflict situations, including those
who commission such abuses, must be brought to
justice in accordance with national laws, international
law and international humanitarian law. The Council
must remain vigilant and relentless in bringing pressure
on perpetrators and their supporters.

The creation of UN Women in July this year was
the result of an exceptional commitment by Member
States seeking greater leadership, coordination and
coherence from the United Nations on gender equality
and women's empowerment. For my part, I can assure
the Council of my determination to work to chart a
clear path to achieve that goal. Along with the
Secretary-General, I especially recognize the need to
identify better ways to achieve progress in addressing
the challenges in the area of women and peace and
security and in the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).

What is needed now is determined leadership by
all of us working together. UN Women will support
existing and new efforts to improve the protection
environment for women during and after conflict, to
engage women in conflict prevention, and to ensure

that peacebuilding processes are guided by women's
perspectives and address their needs.

UN Women will be an essential partner to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict in building the capacity of
the United Nations system to protect women in
conflict. UN Women will use the resources at its
disposal to work with the entire United Nations system
and other relevant stakeholders to enhance
coordination and coherence on women and peace and
security.

I mentioned earlier that the key ingredients are in
place for much more determined implementation. The
Security Council is better equipped than ever before to
ensure that women engage in peace talks and to build a
stronger protection environment for women.

We all know that women count for peace, but for
them to count for peace, they need us all. Let us make
this the beginning of a new decade in which women
can put their stamp on conflict resolution so that we
can have more effective peacemaking and more
sustainable peacebuilding throughout the world. I look
forward to the support of all here in the next decade of
the implementation of that landmark resolution.

