Mr. Naidu (Fiji): I have the honour to address the
Council on this very important topic on behalf of the
Pacific Islands Forum group: Australia, the Marshall
Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, Nauru,
New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, the Solomon
Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu and my own country,
Fiji, as well as Palau.

The study on Security Council resolution 1325
(2000) and the relevant reports of the Secretary-
General reinforce our experiences of the gender
dimensions of conflict. In particular, they confirm facts
about women and girls as the principal and most
vulnerable victims of conflict, most notably sexual
violence. They also make clear that we can no longer
ignore the contributions of women and girls to all
stages of conflict resolution, peacemaking,
peacekeeping and reconstruction processes.

As the landscape of conflict has shifted largely to
intra-State settings, the psychological impact of
conflict has been intensified by the perception of the
State as the perpetrator, which renders it unable to
defend or to protect its citizens. This new aspect of
multilateralism, which has emerged in recent decades,
demands appropriate interventions.

Women in our region have a long history of
active interest in sustainable peace, which continues
today, as shown by the study, which documents well
the successful intermediary role played by women
during the conflict in Bougainville, one of the United
Nations success stories in peace-building. In that
connection, the peace initiatives of the Leitana Nehan
Women's Development Agency were recognized by the
2000 United Nations Development Fund for Women's
Millennium Peace Prize for Women. Similarly, women
in Fiji and in the Solomon Islands have played their
traditional roles as peacemakers during times of crises
in their respective countries. Regionally, a growing
network of women's groups and of informal activities
is supporting peace efforts in our region.

Our group appreciates the current need to transfer
those informal activities to the formal arena of peace-
building, negotiation and decision-making in conflict
prevention, in early-warning mechanisms and in peace
processes. Only then can changes in gender roles at the
micro level be accompanied by corresponding changes

in political or organizational influence. The reported
success in East Timor's nascent political and peace-
building processes is encouraging, as is the political
commitment of the international community to
resolution 1325 (2000). With appropriate interventions,
equitable social relations in post-conflict societies that
are conducive to peace-building and to conflict
prevention may finally materialize.

We welcome the Secretary-General's
recommendations under this item, and we support his
annual review with regard to resolution 1325 (2000) as
an opportunity to profile and build on the positive
initiatives and results of women's involvement in peace
and security processes. Through that process, we hope
to see positive and constructive progress in
implementing the important recommendations in the
Secretary-General's current report (S/2002/ 1154).

For its part, the United Nations needs to realize
its own goals for the advancement of the status of
women in the United Nations system and thus to lead
by example. In that connection, we note with
satisfaction the Secretary-General's commitment to set
concrete targets for the appointment of women as
Special Representatives and Special Envoys in order to
promote peacekeeping, preventive diplomacy, peace-
building and peacemaking. The experience in the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations since July
2001 is that the full value of a database of gender
specialists database depends on the practical support of
Member States.

