Mr. Braun (Germany) (spoke in French): I offer
my respects to the French presidency.

(spoke in English)

Let me begin by thanking you, Sir, for convening
this timely debate, right at the beginning of France's
presidency of the Security Council. Today's meaningful
briefings have demonstrated yet again that the
elimination of conflict-related sexual violence needs to
be at the heart ofthe Council's work. Like others, I wish
to thank Ms. Lisa Davis in particular for her statement
and her excellent recommendations, grounded in the
work of the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace
and Security, which works tirelessly to achieve gender
equality and to combat sexual discrimination.

It is telling that crimes of sexual violence are
singular in their abhorrence, even in the context of
the brutal conflicts in Syria and Iraq. I am thinking
of the unspeakable plight experienced, among others,
by the Yazidi women and girls, many of whom have
found refuge in Germany. Those women and girls
have been subjected to a particularly perverse form of
human trafficking that requires our fullest attention.
The Council, with its unique mandate and power, has a
primary role to play in dealing with this subject.

First, we have seen that the United Nations sanctions
regimes can be an effective instrument in countering
sexual Violence. In 2015, 12 individuals across four
sanctions regimes were listed for sexual violence or
other human rights violations against women. Germany
welcomes those efforts, but we can do even more.
Gender considerations should be integrated into all
sanctions regimes, for example, through the inclusion
of sexual violence as a designation criterion. The
strengthening of the links between counter-terrorism
and women and peace and security was also one of
the key recommendations of a workshop recently
organized by Germany in Berlin. We will soon share
with the Council the full outcome of the workshop,
which was attended by key experts from Member States
and civil society.

Secondly, during the high-level review of women
and peace and security in October 2015, Ms. Yanar
Mohammed briefed the Council on the courageous
work done by women's civil society organizations in
Iraq (see S/PV.7533). She described how, under the most
difficult of circumstances, her organization operates
shelters that function as safe houses from trafficking
and sexual violence. That brings me to my point that
civil society organizations can play a leading role in
responding to conflict-related sexual violence, and
they deserve our full support. Briefings, such as those
by Ms. Mohammed or by Ms. Davis today, offer proof
that civil society can contribute a critical, independent
perspective to the deliberations of the Council.

Thirdly, Special Rapporteur Giammarinaro has
tirelessly reminded United Nations bodies and
Member States of the strong links between trafficking,
migration and conflicts. The call for the mainstreaming
of our response to trafficking must not go unheard. I
would like to reaffirm Germany's full support for
Ms. Giammarinaro's mandate and her work.

Germany also welcomes the broader efforts to
mainstream the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) throughout the United Nations system. But we
feel that those efforts could be better linked to other
processes, most notably the implementation of the
Sustainable Development Goals. We plan on hosting a
discussion soon that will explore ways to better connect
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) to the women and peace and
security agenda.

Fourthly and finally, we urgently need to redouble
our efforts against sexual violence, but we also need
to translate the participation aspects of the women and
peace and security agenda into reality. The language
produced by the Council only infrequently includes
such aspects, and where they do exist, references to
participation often lack detail. In an approach that
could be seen as complementary to today's discussion
and to the broader debate on resolution 1325 (2000)
each fall, Germany would also encourage the Security
Council and Member States not only to raise the issue
of women and peace and security in the dedicated open
debates, but also to include the active participation of
women in peace processes and in the prevention of
conflicts whenever addressing specific conflicts. That
participation could also be a focus in the annual debate
on women and peace and security this September.
Let me conclude by reaffirming Germany's
unfailing commitment to the protection of women
and girls from conflict-related sexual violence. The
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda is more urgent than ever and will remain one of
our highest priorities.

