Ms. Darisuren: I am honoured to be here today
representing the Secretary-General of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).

The women and peace and security agenda's
integrated approach resonates strongly with the
OSCE's concept of comprehensive security. The OSCE
recognizes that the politico-military, the economic and
environmental, and the human dimensions of security
are tightly intertwined. We particularly welcome that
this year's open debate puts strong emphasis on women's
political and economic empowerment and on women's
meaningful participation in all aspects of preventing
and resolving conflicts and building peaceful societies.

By now the evidence is indisputable that the
meaningful engagement of women in peace processes
leads to more effective and sustainable outcomes.
A failure to include them is a missed opportunity to
use every possible factor to achieve peace. However,
in the OSCE area, women's meaningful participation
in peace processes remains a problem. There is
underrepresentation of women within negotiating
parties, as well as in OSCE mediation teams.

To overcome that challenge, the OSCE Mediation
Support Team and the Gender Section are developing a
toolkit on the inclusion of women in peace processes.
The toolkit will identify how women are engaged in
peace work in the contexts where the Organization
supports formal negotiation or dialogue-facilitation
processes. It will outline practical steps and measures
to increase women's inclusion and to bridge the gap
between women's peacebuilding efforts and the official
negotiation formats.

The OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine
is present on the ground in eastern Ukraine with a
particular mandate to facilitate dialogue in order to
reduce tensions on the ground. That includes facilitating
so-called windows of silence for critical infrastructure
repairs to enable the flow of water and electricity to the
civilian population.

In the communities in eastern Ukraine that are
heavily impacted by violence, the OSCE monitors
observe the resilience and community spirit of the
many women active in village councils, in civil society,
as teachers, and in the distribution of humanitarian aid
on a daily basis. Women's involvement is crucial when
it comes to preventing further escalation of tensions,
bringing peace and keeping it. OSCE reports about
those activities support women's voices to be heard at
the higher levels of decision-making, where women
remain underrepresented.

The prevention of violent conflicts is far cheaper
than responding to conflicts after they have broken
out. Women's inclusion in political, economic and
social life is a key factor influencing society's
propensity for conflict. Yet women continue to
be underrepresented in governing structures, and
particularly in decision-making positions. At the
moment, approximately 28 per cent of members of the
national parliaments in the OSCE region are women. The
OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human
Rights facilitates and supports institutional change,
knowledge-sharing and capacity-building to advance
women's representation and influence in political and
public life. For example, the Office supported the Equal
Opportunities Caucus of the Ukrainian Parliament in
organizing the first-ever Ukrainian Women's Congress,
in 2017.
There are numerous examples of OSCE field
operations in supporting women's political participation
at the local and national levels in electoral and security
sector reforms. In the area of economic empowerment,
the OSCE is particularly engaged in the enhancement
of women's entrepreneurship and in creating equal
economic opportunities.

We in the OSCE have supported Governments
and civil society in 25 participating States to develop
results-oriented national action plans to implement
resolution 1325 (2000). Currently, almost 60 per
cent of the 57 States participating in the OSCE have
adopted a national action plan. The most recent country
to adopt such a plan was Albania, where the OSCE
was able to closely support its preparation process.
However, national action plans must also be effectively
implemented. In our future activities we will be paying
particular attention to the gaps in, and challenges
for, the implementation of the action plans. We will
continue our efforts to empower women to fully
participate in political and economic fields, as well as
in the security sector.

