Mr. Winid (Poland): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today's debate on the
important topic of trafficking in persons in conflict
situations, forced labour and slavery. We listened
carefully to the briefers' compelling presentations,
which were a reminder of the work we have ahead of us.

Poland aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier on behalf of the European Union (EU), but I
would like to add some remarks in my national capacity.

According to International Labour Organization
(ILO) data, today almost 21 million people are victims
of forced labour. Of those exploited by individuals or
enterprises, 4.5 million are victims of forced sexual
exploitation. And the most horrifying number is the
approximately 5.5 million children around the world
whose lives are damaged by trafficking and forced
labour under the threat of violence. This deplorable and
dangerous phenomenon, which exists on every continent,
is increasing in scale, and it calls for global attention
and action on the part of the international community.

Contemporary forms of slavery are linked to
discrimination, social exclusion, gender inequality and
poverty. Their implications for peace and security are
especially visible in countries affected by conflict, and
they can also undermine peacebuilding efforts in post-
conflict situations.

Poland remains determined to fight human
trafficking and forced labour and is involved in
combating the problem at national, regional and
international levels. The Polish criminal code defines
and criminalizes slavery and human trafficking. At
the regional level, Poland implements anti-trafficking
policies, a subject that I believe was largely covered
in the EU statement. In the framework of the United
Nations, Poland was one of the initiators of the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime. We have also ratified all the major ILO
conventions related to forced labour, including the
Forced Labour Convention of 1930. In December 2016
we contributed to the Security Council's open debate
on trafficking in persons (see S/PV.7848), held under
the Spanish presidency, and we co-sponsored resolution
2331 (2016), on the topic.

In Geneva last year, Poland supported the renewal
by the Human Rights Council of the mandate of the
Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of slavery.
We also support the work of the Special Rapporteur on
trafficking in persons, especially women and children.
In that regard, we urge the international community
to strengthen activities aimed at protecting children
in conflict, and we highlight the role that national
ombudspersons for children can play in that area.

Last but not least, we fully support target 8.7 of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, which
seeks to ensure that immediate and effective measures
are taken to eradicate forced labour and end modern
slavery and human trafficking, including by ending
child labour in all its forms by 2025.

In our view, when addressing modern forms of
slavery, three issues are of the utmost importance: first,
rising awareness and enhancing prevention; secondly,
proper identification, investigation and prosecution
of those crimes; and thirdly, protection and support
for the victims. Those goals all require the enhanced
attention and common efforts of the Government,
non-governmental organizations, the private sector,
survivors, community and religious leaders. With
better tailored strategies we will be able to reach at-risk
populations, weaken international criminal networks
and, ultimately, strengthen the rule of law and peace
and security.

In closing, I wish to underline that it is our common
responsibility to counter the dehumanizing effects of
modern slavery and to ensure that the voices of the
victims are heard. That is why I wish to once again
thank the United Kingdom for the opportunity to speak
on this particular and very important topic.

