Ms. Greie Polie (Croatia): It is my pleasure to
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this open
debate on women and peace and security. Indeed, Sir,
you should be commended for using your presidency to
bring to the spotlight the issue that often lies at the core
of the success or failure of domestic, regional and
international efforts directed at conflict prevention,
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peace-building,
including post-conflict reconciliation and
reconstruction. In View of its participation last May in
the adoption of the historic Windhoek Declaration and
the Namibia Plan of Action on Mainstreaming a
Gender Perspective in Multidimensional Peace Support
Operations, Namibia's leadership on this issue comes
as no surprise. Rather, I see it as a natural extension of
your country's well-deserved reputation for fostering
gender equality.

Also allow me to join others in welcoming this
morning's excellent presentations by Ms. King and Ms.
Heyzer. The enthusiastic response from the gallery is
proof that they do make a difference.

The principles of gender equality and
mainstreaming of gender perspective in all dimensions
of societal interaction lie at the core of democratic
societies. Without active support for these principles,
no society, no institution, including the United Nations,
can hope to master the policies of inclusion in general
and in the area of peace and security in particular. The
maintenance of peace and security requires a
contribution not by some or half of the world's
population, but by all. Equally important, if such a
contribution is skewed and reflects either only men's or
only women's masculine or feminine perspectives, it
remains seriously impaired. Likewise, if we were, for
example, to direct our attention predominantly or
exclusively to the impact of conflict and armed conflict
on women and girls alone, we would be doing a
disservice to the required comprehensive approach to
the overall impact of such conflicts. Although that
concern remains highly theoretical for the time being,
it is from this fundamental premise that the Croatian
delegation would like to share its views during today's
debate.

At the outset, we would like to recognize the
evolving body of policy statements and other
contributions made already to today's topic by the
Secretary-General, the Security Council, the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council, the
United Nations Development Fund for Women and
various other organizations and bodies within the
United Nations system. We would also like to
recognize a growing body of related actions taken by
the Security Council, such as on the protection of
civilians and children in armed conflicts, humanitarian
assistance to refugees and others in conflict situations,
post-conflict peace-building and the reintegration of
former combatants.

In the area of United Nations peace operations,
we would like to note the pioneering contributions
made by the Windhoek Declaration, the Namibia Plan
of Action and Ms. Graca Machel's review document on
the impact of armed conflict on children and women.
We also wish to highlight the final report of the
Beijing + 5 conference (A/S-23/10/Rev.l), the Brahimi
report of the Panel on United Nations Peace Operations
(S/2000/809) and the first follow-on implementation
report of the Secretary-General (A/55/502). We are
waiting to see the rest.

Nevertheless, so far precious little serious social
science research has focused on the issues addressed by
the documents I have mentioned, mainly for a lack of
recognition of their importance and, hence, of
institutional funding. In this regard, we hail the
accomplishments of such pioneers as Ms. Colleen
Lowe Morna of South Africa, Ms. Louise Olson of
Sweden, Professor Judith Hicks Stiehm of the United
States of America, Ms. Maggie Patterson of Canada
and Colonel Festus Aboagye of Ghana, to name just a
few. The staff members of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations Lessons Learned Unit have
also made a contribution to the field and will, it is
hoped, continue to do so.
So, what have we learned from their research? We

have learned that in recent conflicts - from El
Salvador to Bosnia and Herzegovina, and from East
Timor to Sierra Leone - women and girls are

overwhelmingly the principal victims of deliberate
rape, maiming, abduction and displacement. We are
told that women and children constitute an estimated
80 per cent of all internally displaced persons and
refugees. We have also learned that women and girls
are treated differently from men and boys as soldiers or
ex-soldiers, as prisoners or ex-prisoners, and as
survivors of rape and mutilation.

What can we do? The least we can do is impress
upon the Security Council to call upon parties to
conflicts to take special measures to protect this
vulnerable population. Of course, within its
prerogatives of determining mandates for peace
operations the Security Council can do much more. It
can request that special mechanisms be established for
reporting on all forms of sexual violence and
exploitation of women and can provide adequate
resources for the institutionalization of monitoring and
enforcement mechanisms for peacekeeping personnel.

Next, the Security Council can, and should,
require that all mission staff receive pre-deployment or
early post-deployment training in gender sensitivity
and mainstreaming. Also, it can ensure that planning
for disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
activities, all mine-related activities and public
information outreach campaigns takes into account the
different needs and different priorities of men and
women.

Last but not least, the Security Council must do
its utmost to ensure the implementation of existing
international humanitarian and human rights law. I
wish to recall that it was only after the diabolic record
in Bosnia and Herzegovina that rape was recognized as
a war crime, and in some instances as a crime against
humanity; and that only recently have such crimes as
forced pregnancy, detention with intent to impregnate,
and sterilization been sanctioned by article 16 of the
Statute of the International Criminal Court.

In the post-conflict period, there is also ample
space to support local women's peace-building
activities and to strengthen their precarious economic
situation - including their access to jobs in weak
economies with high unemployment rates - and their
access to counselling and human rights expertise, to
name a few concerns.
Most importantly, if the Security Council were to
require the mandatory participation of women in all the
implementation mechanisms of peace settlement with a
view to their sustained participation in the political,
economic and social life in the future, it would
drastically increase the prospects for sustainable peace.
Needless to say, the same approach applies to conflict
prevention, mediation and resolution, where women
must be adequately represented at all levels of the
policy-making and decision-making process.

Of special importance in this regard are the
contributions made in United Nations field operations.
The efforts and accomplishments of women staff
members of such multidimensional peace operations as
the United Nations Administration for Eastern
Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium (UNTAES),
the United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) and, especially, the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
are absolutely precious because they were instrumental
in both conceiving and implementing creative
approaches to gender inclusion policies within the host
environment, and in gender mainstreaming within the
peace operation. As always, the support of the
respective special representatives of the Secretary-
General and the United Nations Headquarters figured
prominently in their prospects for success or failure.

Although in some cases today, and certainly in a
perfect world of tomorrow, a special representative's
gender should not, and would not, matter, we must
recognize the fact that so far very few women have
served as personal envoys, representatives or special
representatives of the Secretary-General. In fact, unless
I am mistaken, today we have no Dame Margarets and
no Elizabeth Rehns; no woman is currently heading a
United Nations peace operation or serving as a special
envoy or special representative of the Secretary-
General. Some argue that perhaps no qualified women
exist for such posts or other senior posts; others point
to an informal roster that suggests otherwise. During
her United Nations press conference last June, Mrs.
Elizabeth Rehn advanced the following bold proposal:
when Member States are submitting candidatures for
senior United Nations posts they should always present
the Secretary-General with two equally qualified
candidates, a man and a woman.

The Security Council has in the past called for
women to play an equal part in the maintenance of
peace and security; so did the Secretary-General's
strategic plan of action. Arguably, more can be done at
the international level in concrete practical terms, but
the issue also clearly rests with the Member States and
their domestic policies. Hence, perhaps a comparative
survey of State practices on a set of issues and topics
addressed in today's debate would be a useful step
towards institutionalizing reporting mechanisms within
various areas of women's participation and gender
mainstreaming in peace and security matters.

