Mr. Mikec (Croatia): Let me begin by extending
our congratulations to you, Madam President, and to
your delegation on your presidency of the Security
Council for the month of October and by assuring you
of our full support, as the issue at hand is of vital
importance to the Republic of Croatia.

Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the delegation of the European Union. I would like
to make some additional remarks in my national
capacity.

The adoption by the Security Council of
resolution 1325 (2000) bears testimony to the progress
made during the past decade in the area of women and
peace and security. That landmark resolution has
brought much-needed attention to the question of
women's empowerment, which represents a priority for
my country. While all the resolutions on women and
peace and security are equally important, resolution
1325 (2000) serves as an umbrella resolution in
addressing women's empowerment, their task as
peacebuilders and their fragile position as victims of
war.

The Republic of Croatia welcomes the latest
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of that resolution (S/2011/598*), the recommendations
contained therein and the presidential statement
adopted by the Council today (S/PRST/2011/20).
Furthermore, Croatia commends the roles of and work
done by both the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Wallstrom, and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Coomaraswamy.

We call upon the Security Council to intensify its
efforts in the fight against impunity and to provide
strong and effective leadership in strengthening the
rule of law, with the ultimate aim of eradicating this
abhorrent behaviour. The Council should include
sexual violence as a priority element in resolutions
mandating its sanctions committees, and they should
explicitly include sexual violence as a criterion for the
designation of political and military leaders for
targeted measures. Perpetrators of sexual violence,
including commanders who commission or condone
the use of sexual violence, should be held accountable.
Furthermore, we encourage strengthening the
coordination among United Nations agencies both at
Headquarters and in the field, especially in monitoring
and reporting on situations where parties to armed
conflict engage in rape and other sexual violence as
means of war.

Although women are widely recognized as
effective agents of peace, they still have little access to
decision-making positions and peace negotiations.
Women in the aftermath of conflict have little or no
protection or access to services, justice and economic
security, and those are the areas in which women's
needs and gaps in response are most evident.
Furthermore, the inclusion of women and gender
expertise in peacebuilding activities is essential to
reconstituting political, legal, cultural and socio-
economic and social structures. Gender equality brings
new degrees of democratic inclusiveness to
peacebuilding, faster and more durable economic
growth, and human and social capital recovery.

Those opportunities, however, can be enhanced
significantly depending on how the international
community sets its priorities for recovery and uses its
strategies for peacebuilding. Those priorities should
consist of specific national and international policies
aimed at increasing women's participation in conflict
prevention and resolution, mediation, peace
negotiations and peacebuilding.

The integration of the resolution has to be
country-driven, and Member States need to take
responsibility for its success by ensuring that it is
integrated into national policies. We urge countries to
apply a broad gender-mainstreaming approach across
Government, for instance through a system-wide
approach that links development, humanitarian and
defence issues. All plans should include civil society
consultations, as well as monitoring and reporting
mechanisms.

I am very pleased to say that the Croatian
Government has recently adopted its national action
plan for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
and related resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and
1889 (2009). The basic objective is to support and
monitor their implementation at all levels. At the local
level, that can be done through the mitigation of the
effects of conflicts and crises and by mainstreaming
the gender awareness of our local population, while at
the national level it will be set as part of Government
programmes. Furthermore, Croatia will remain actively
involved in the work of international organizations
engaged in the areas covered by the resolutions in
question.

As a country with authentic experience in the
field of conflict prevention and resolution, as well as
mediation and peacebuilding, Croatia is actively
contributing to the realization of the objective of the
resolution during both times of conflict and times of
peace. As a way of contributing to international peace
and security, Croatia is increasingly taking part in
peacekeeping operations, thereby informing our
perception of the role of women in preserving peace as
special and unique. The lack of women's empowerment
poses a major setback to the full achievement of human
rights and overall economic and political development
and progress.
Croatia's policy in this regard is directed towards
the substantial deployment of women in peacekeeping
operations, in both the armed forces and police, as their
presence reinforces the importance of women's
perspective and represents added value for all
initiatives aimed at achieving peace. Our national
action plan will contribute to the implementation of
specific tasks in a more consistent and coordinated
manner, setting up measurable appropriate indicators
and raising interest in women's participation in issues
related to peace and security.

Following the completion of the four-year period
the plan has been set up for, it will be revised in the
light of its performance. Specific measures in the plan
are suitable for implementation in coordination with
efforts by civil society and religious organizations
engaged in providing humanitarian aid and
development assistance.

