Ms. Omatuku (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): First of all, on behalf of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, I would like to
thank the United States of America for having taken
the initiative to convene this important thematic
Security Council debate on women and peace and
security and for having prepared the concept paper
before us (S/2008/364, annex).

As a citizen of the country that is suffering under
the greatest humanitarian crisis since the Second World
War, I am particularly grateful to you, Mr. President.
This current meeting, indeed, once again places the
question of sexual violence against women at the heart
of the concerns of the Security Council. I am
convinced that it will show us the way forward to
eradicate this detestable phenomenon.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo expresses
its appreciation and thanks to the Secretary-General,
who has placed the suffering of Congolese women and
girls at the centre of his concerns. His presence here in
the Chamber today testifies to that.

My gratitude also goes to the members of the
Security Council. They recently visited my country,
showing once again the great importance that this
principal organ of the United Nations, charged with the
maintenance of international peace and security,
attaches to this thorny question.

I also welcome and am very thankful for the
invaluable help that the entire United Nations system
gives to my country as its searches for solutions on the
ground to the issue of violence against women and
girls in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Violence against women in situations of armed
conflict is an outrage that requires an appropriate and
substantial response from the international community.
That is why my country did not hesitate to sponsor the
resolution presented to the General Assembly by the
delegation of the United States on the elimination of
rape and other forms of sexual violence in all its
manifestations, particularly in armed conflicts and
similar situations (General Assembly resolution 62/134).

Thus, wars and armed conflicts in modern times
have made rape an unprecedentedly cruel weapon of
war, in order to obliterate the enemy and destroy the
family, whole communities and, above all, the dignity
of women.

Sexual violence weakens women and girls, as
much in terms of their moral, physical and
psychological health as in terms of their economic
health. Female victims of this type of violence are
stigmatized, repudiated as wives and excluded from
their community. This violence also promotes the
spread of HIV/AIDS. Moreover, 50 per cent of the
victims of sexual violence are less than 18 years old:
they are children. I am very happy to report that our
child protection code will be adopted in the Senate next
week after it has gone through the National Assembly,
with a view to providing security for girls.

Sexual violence is leading to a feminization of
poverty and is adding to the growing problem of food
insecurity in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Women victims are no longer able to work the land.
Women victims are simply no longer able to work.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo, under the
leadership of His Excellency President Joseph Kabila
Kabange, has been resolutely following a multisectoral
approach in fighting violence against women and girls,
concentrating on three priority areas: care,
compensation and prevention. Care involves
psychological and medical care in specialized units.
We have the option of renovating existing hospital
buildings rather than building new ones for that
purpose. Another element is socio-economic help for
reintegrating victims into society and providing
training on how to become independent. We wish also
to provide more legal aid, to encourage victims to
bring their cases to court by paying their legal fees, and
protecting them from their rapists, who are often
extremely threatening. Care also involves the return to
school of girls who have been victims of sexual
violence, and taking care of the orphans, unwanted
children and children who have been abandoned by
their parents.

Compensation involves the application of the law
and the effective implementation of judicial decisions
with a View to compensating victims and ensuring their
security. We plan to establish a compensation fund
managed in collaboration with public and civil society
partners.

Prevention - by no means the least important
issue - chiefly concerns the fight against impunity,
including the fight against ignorance by disseminating
the relevant international legal instruments available
and the laws on sexual violence, so that women victims
know their rights and so that the judges know what
their powers are.

The judicial and penal infrastructure, which have
been ravaged by years of war and pillaging, should be
improved and better equipped in order to prevent
breakouts of the rapists who have been sentenced or
are in detention. Another element is strengthening the
capacity of judges in this area and training women
judges in order to provide legal assistance to victims.
Prevention also involves increasing the number of
female military, police and civilian officers in order to
enhance the collection of information on violence
against women. This list is not exhaustive, but it also
includes a procedure to prevent rapists from being able
to hold positions of responsibility and, if necessary, to
relieve them of their functions.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo feels that
we must enhance the status of women, because if men
do not realize that women are their equals, they will
not think that rape is disgraceful. We have to continue
to implement the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women and the
Declaration on the Elimination of Violence Against
Women. Moreover, article 14 of the constitution of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo provides for the
implementation of gender equality in all institutions. I
am happy to report that a draft text from my ministry
relating to the implementation of parity has been
prepared and is following the necessary procedures.

In resolution 1325 (2000), the Security Council
called on all parties to armed conflict to take all
measures to protect women and girls against acts of
gender-based violence, in particular, rape and other
forms of sexual abuse, as well as all other forms of
violence in situations of armed conflict.

Thus, we would stress that the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) will lead to the recognition of
the role of women in peacebuilding and peacekeeping.
It is important to involve women in the mechanisms for
the prevention and resolution of conflicts so that they
can lend to humanity their capacity to create
consensus, to resolve conflicts and to build peace.

Internationally, the fight against sexual violence
can be supported by strengthening the mandates of
peacekeeping operations, with a view to protecting
women and children against violence.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo feels the
full force of this problem and will spare no effort to
fight against the scourge of sexual violence, with its
attendant suffering, including the use of women as
sexual slaves, held hostage by armed groups in forests.
My country makes an impassioned appeal to the
international community for a return of sustainable
peace. This is a sine qua non condition for the
complete eradication of sexual violence.

Indeed, a political consensus is emerging
following free, democratic and transparent elections.
Thus, the conflicts in eastern the Democratic Republic
of the Congo are lamentable. All power in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo must go through the
ballot box. What are these armed men - these armed
groups - the non-regular army - doing in eastern
Congo? What is the international community doing?

Congolese women, victims of sexual violence,
are also hostages to the natural resources of Congo,
which are being exploited illegally.

I remind the Council that women in general, and
the women of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
particular, have the right to peace without fear of
violence or oppression. They have the right to peace,
without which all hope for dignity, well-being and
development will be in vain and compromised. I
conclude by hoping that Congolese women's appeal for
peace - which I echo here - will be heard, because
trying to fight against sexual violence without seeking
peace is nothing more than a delusion.

I would like to thank all previous speakers who
mentioned the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In
particular, I reiterate my thanks to the United States of
America for having made it possible to have this
debate, enabling me to speak - a person from a
country that is very affected by this issue.

