Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): Let me join other
speakers in thanking Ms. Rachel Mayanja, Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women; Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations;
Ms. Ines Alberdi, Executive Director of the United
Nations Development Fund for Women; and Ms. Sarah
Taylor, Coordinator of the NGO Working Group on
Women, Peace and Security for their important
statements. Of course, we also wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this very important debate
on women and peace and security.
Armed conflict is the single most crucial factor
exacerbating the security of women. In an age in which
international cooperation is closely wedded to
international humanitarian law, it is unacceptable that
widespread grave violence against women in armed
conflicts continues to be perpetrated. That must be put
to an end. The international community has the
obligation to protect and assist women in armed
conflicts.

Not least, the international community has every
interest in ensuring the full involvement of women in
all stages of the peace process and peacebuilding:
women as peacemakers and women as peacebuilders.
In an era in which opportunities and knowledge are
abundant, we find that women's potential contributions
to conflict resolution processes have not been
adequately harnessed. Women's perspectives and
contributions have been grossly underutilized. That
produces an enormous deficit in our common efforts.

To exclude or omit women's participation in the
conflict resolution process undermines the
representativity of the efforts of major stakeholders as
well as the achievement of a sustainable peace based
on the inclusion of all perspectives. Thus, increasing
women's opportunities to participate in various stages
of the peace and conflict resolution process demands
our full support.

While providing such space for increased
opportunities is desirable and important, it is also vital
to provide beforehand an ample space in which women
can make their own choices; a space in which women
can feel secure and free from the harm of violence and
reprisal; a space in which women can enjoy the
freedom to make informed decisions for their own
lives; a space for each and every woman in armed
conflict situations, in which her basic need for personal
safety is met. In other words, our approach should be
to View women not only as a group, but also as
individuals with their own aspirations.

A woman can make a fundamental difference in
the peace process if she has the necessary negotiating
tools at her disposal, the necessary space to participate
and to use her tools, and the support of her own
constituents. It is from that perspective that Indonesia
views the strengthened participation of woman in
peace processes. Capacity-building is the core
component for ensuring that women's participation will
yield the fruit of success.
There are at least three aspects of the
strengthening of women's participation in the peace
process. First, it is imperative to promote gender
balance and equity in the process of assembling a
negotiating team and to highlight the concerns of
women in the negotiating agenda.

Secondly, while high-level negotiations are
central and indeed critical, attention must be paid to
the situation on the ground. Women's participation
needs to be structured at the grass-roots level in order
to promote sustainable peace. Women can advocate the
pursuit of formal peace processes and cultivate
community support for such efforts and their
implementation.

Thirdly, women's participation can also be
fostered by efforts that take the form of a campaign
model based on democratic political campaigning and
canvassing designed to increase participation by
willing parties.

Before concluding my remarks, let me stress that
enhancing women's participation in peace processes
requires sustained and long-term efforts. Indeed, eight
years after the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
there is certainly no shortage of action plans. We
believe that it is timely to proceed beyond plans to
actual actions. Indonesia, for its part, will redouble its
efforts at the national level and here at the United
Nations in pursuit of that important objective.

In conclusion, let me express our support for the
adoption of the draft presidential statement that is
before the Council, which we are hopeful can
contribute to the enhancement of women's
participation in peace and security on its own merits.

