Mr. Plasai (Thailand) (spoke in French): I thank the
French presidency for having organized this important
open debate.

Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000)
17 years ago, the women and peace and security
agenda has increasingly been recognized as a main
pillar of maintaining global peace and security.
However, in term of implementation, women's role and
participation in this area in all capacities remain low
and fragmented. On the positive side, we note that in
addition to resolution 1325 (2000) and the other seven
Security Council resolutions on the women and peace
and security agenda, there are a number of newly
established frameworks to push forward this agenda,
such as the informal expert group on women and peace
and security, and the Women, Peace and Security
National Focal Points Network.

The Kingdom of Thailand believes that it is
the responsibility of the international community
as a whole to strengthen the implementation of this
agenda. In so doing, we must find ways to further
promote gender equality and women's rights, while
increasing the number of women in peace and security
leadership positions.

On our part, in 2016 Thailand adopted national
measures and guidelines on women and peace and
security that encompass the aspects of prevention,
protection, capacity-building and empowerment.
This document emphasizes the significant role of
women in addressing political and social conflicts at
the domestic and international levels. The national
economic and social development plan of Thailand also
underlines the concept of women's rights, as enshrined
in the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women and the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action.

We strongly believe that women can play an
important role in and increase the efficiency of
peacekeeping operations, and has worked increase
their participation. Among the Thai military and
police personnel now serving in the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan, the United Nations Military
Observer Group in India and Pakistan, and the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur,
24 per cent are women. We also believe that Member
States can and must do more to improve the global level
of female participation in peacekeeping, which now
stands at fewer than 4 per cent of all Blue Helmets,
and in conflict prevention and resolution. According to
UN-Women, between 1992 and 2011 only 4 per cent of
signatories to peace agreements and fewer than 10 per
cent of peace negotiators were women.

To address that deficit, we must first ensure that the
women and and peace security agenda is mainstreamed
across the entire spectrum of the work of the United
Nations. Secondly, in our work we need to constantly
remind ourselves that women are not just victims
but rather effective agent of change. Mechanisms
and programmes should be created to increase their
meaningful participation in various sectors of the
United Nations. Thirdly, the rhetoric must go beyond
promoting the role of women in merely providing a
sense of security to other women and children, as we
need to stop perpetuating the stereotyped views of
women as gentle pacifiers. In addition, more efforts
must be made in all countries, including Thailand, with
regard to increasing the role and the number of women
engaged in national and local politics, particularly in
the political decision-making processes.

I concur with the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/861) that an inclusive process and women's
meaningful participation in peace and security must
be the norm, not the exception. Thailand is committed
to continuing to do our part at home and stands
ready to work with others to genuinely advance this
important agenda.
