Mr. Bekkers: I am very honoured to be here at
Security Council this afternoon.

One of the greatest challenges of modern times
is the normalization of violence at all levels - be it
local, regional, national or international - as it poses a
real threat to the lives of women and children. Indeed,
attacks on women and girls, as well as the horror of
sexual slavery, are sometimes part of the strategies used
by combatants and violent extremist groups to achieve
their ends. This morning we heard several dreadful
examples of this fact.

Like you, Mr. President, we believe that this must
stop, and resolution 1325 (2000) is part of the solution.
I therefore thank you, Sir, for bringing us together
today. I also thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/20l6/822) and the Executive Director of UN-Women
for her briefing.

The Secretary-General mentioned this morning
that progress has been made. That may be true, but
it is disappointing that implementation continues to
lag. The Secretary-General mentioned that there is
growing awareness, but that there is also a huge lack of
funding for initiatives relating to the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). Our support for implementation
must go beyond rhetoric. We need to walk the talk.

The women and peace and security agenda plays a
central role in the work of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), which is the
largest regional security organization under Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. Our efforts
to prevent conflicts and resolve disputes peacefully
are underpinned by our strong commitment to gender
equality. Gender equality is a fundamental principle
that cuts across the full gamut of security issues that
the OSCE addresses.

The OSCE acknowledges the clear evidence that
the participation of women in all phases of the conflict
cycle - from conflict prevention and crisis management
to conflict resolution and post-conflict rehabilitation
and reconciliation - is critical to the success and
sustainability of peace processes and peacebuilding.
Various speakers have shared much evidence on this
point with us today.

For us, the OSCE, there is still a long way to go,
but I would like to share a few of our achievements
thus far. At this point, I would like to acknowledge and
thank the representative of Germany for his comments
as Chairperson-in-Office of the OSCE.

First of all, the 63 existing national action plans, 28
are from the OSCE region alone, and several more are in
the making. We continue to work with our participating
States to improve their plans or develop new ones.

Secondly, we have established within the OSCE
a network of 60 gender focal points, covering our 17
field operations, three institutions and a secretariat to
support the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
by participating States and to develop our own internal
compliance, which is important to us.

Thirdly, reducing sexual and gender-based violence
in conflict also means addressing violence against
women and domestic violence in times of peace. That
is another focus of our work. For example, in July
we organized a conference on combating Violence
against women where we exchanged good practices
and promoted the ratification of the Convention on
Preventing and Combating Violence against Women
and Domestic Violence.

Fourthly, I would like to mention that the OSCE
also recognizes the important role women can play
in preventing radicalization and violent extremism.
Accordingly, next month we will convene a conference
on this topic that will bring together policymakers,
experts and activists from across the OSCE region.

I would like to stress that, in everything we do, we
strive to strengthen our cooperation and engagement
with other international organizations and civil-
society organizations. For example, we have developed
close cooperation with UN- Women in Ukraine on
the implementation of the new Ukrainian national
action plan.

I have just mentioned some of our achievements,
but we still have a long way to go. We are aware that
we need to look inward as well. We need to create a
better gender balance in our own OSCE structures, in
particular in the politico-military dimension.

Before I conclude, I would like to commend the
Spanish initiative to set up the women and peace and
security national focal point network. We look forward
to engaging with this forum.

You may rest assured, Mr. President, as may all
others present, that the OSCE remains committed to
the full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), with
a view to countering the normalization of violence,
promoting peace and security, eradicating gender-based
violence and improving the participation of women. We
rely on the support of the Security Council as we strive
to work in close cooperation with all stakeholders.

