Ms. Miloud: I am Inas Miloud. My people are
the Amazigh and they are the indigenous inhabitants
of Libya. I was born in 1990 and I grew up in Yafran,
a small Amazigh town in the Nafusa mountains about
100 miles from Tripoli.

Since the 2011 revolution, I have been working with
indigenous women and girls affected by sexual and
gender-based violence, as well as displaced and migrant
communities in Libya. Today I represent not only my
people, the Amazigh, but all women in Libya. I speak
in my capacity as the Chairperson of the Tamazight
Women's Movement, an organization that undertakes
research and advocacy on indigenous issues in Libya
from an intersectional feminist perspective. I also speak
today on behalf of the non-governmental organization
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security.

Last week, the United Nations-supported national
peace conference that was meant to put Libya on the
road to democracy and elections had to be postponed. As
noted by Mr. Ghassan Salame', Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Libya, people cannot
be asked to take part in a conference while they are
exposed to gunfire and air strikes.

Weeks into General Khalifa Haftar's military
assault on Tripoli, as the number of civilian deaths
mounts, thousands flee and the humanitarian crisis
deepens, I think about my family - not only the
grave threats they currently face but the reality that
they have had to live through for decades under the
Al-Qaddafi regime. In 2011, we took to the streets to
demand our freedom, an end to repression and our right
to democracy.

Yet eight years after the United Nations-brokered
political agreement, my country remains embroiled
in crisis and our hopes for change have been dashed.
The renewal of conflict in 2014 brought an increase
in sexual violence and threats to women's security,
including widespread sexual torture of women and men,
particularly internally displaced persons, indigenous
and other minority communities and women human
rights defenders.

In 2018, we collected hundreds of stories from
Libyans across the country about their experiences
of sexual and gender-based violence, which primarily
affects women and girls. The majority of testimonies
provided by both men and women outline a common
pattern of physical violence, rape, sexual harassment,
verbal abuse, abductions and domestic violence. Their
stories highlight two indisputable facts.

First, rigid patriarchal norms, amplified by
the presence of armed groups and the widespread
availability of weapons, are the central cause of gender-
based Violence and lack of security for women.

Secondly, gender-based violence exists in a
continuum that extends from times of peace to periods
of conflict and from public spaces to private lives.

Despite the United Nations arms embargo, weapons
continue to flow into the country unchecked. Due to the
widespread availability of weapons in every household,
Violence often escalates into a deadly outcome.
Patriarchal notions of family honour, coupled with
fear of retaliation, ensure that domestic violence and
sexual and gender-based violence are rarely reported.
Indigenous women are even further marginalized due to
the entrenched discrimination against our communities
that has existed for decades.

Hundreds of indigenous women are targets of
sexual and gender-based violence simply because they
belong to communities such as the Tebu, the Tuareg and
my own people, the Amazigh. In 2016, my friend was
gang-raped by an armed group on her way from Tripoli
to the Nafusa Mountains with her brother. Five armed
men stopped her, beat her brother and assaulted her.
They told her that Amazigh women deserve to be raped.

I have known many others, both in my personal
life and through my work, who have been the victims
of gender-based violence and their stories remain
shrouded in silence. Chronic underreporting due to
stigma, fear of retaliation and a lack of trust in the
judicial system fuels impunity for perpetrators on all
sides of the conflict.

For many in Libya, internal displacement has
become a permanent feature oflife. Forty per cent of the
1 million international migrants in Libya are women.
Denied basic human necessities such as safe shelter,
food and medicine, displaced women and young girls
and boys are especially vulnerable to violence. They
are abducted and even raped - often multiple times,
by different perpetrators, including by armed groups as
well as State actors. Sexual and gender-based violence
is perpetrated in ways that affect both women and men.

Men and boys are targeted, particularly in Libyan
detention centres and prisons. In Libyan detention
centres, a commonly reported torture technique involves
forcing men to stand in a circle to watch the rape and
sometimes murder of women. Anyone who moves or
speaks out is beaten or killed. In most cases, there are
no services to meet the needs of female survivors, let
alone male survivors.

A feature of the violence targeting men and
boys - and a reason for its stigmatization- is the deeply
entrenched assumptions about male invulnerability.
Challenging harmful gender norms and attitudes in
terms of both masculinity and femininity is therefore
essential for addressing the root causes of gender-based
Violence and militarization.

Like many Libyans, the revolution changed my life.
Through the revolution, I learned what it means to be
an activist and why that matters, not only for women or
my own people, the Tamazight, who have been denied
social, cultural and political rights for decades, but for
all Libyans.

The work of women human rights defenders
remains essential for both protecting basic human rights
and peace and security in Libya, on the one hand, and
providing such life-saving services as food, medical care
and free counselling to survivors of sexual and gender-
based violence, on the other hand. However, attacks
against them are still on the rise: more than 10 cases
have been documented since 2017. Sexual and gender-
based violence is systematically used to intimidate and
silence women activists and political figures. Reprisals
for our activism and the criminalization of our work has
led to severe restrictions on the freedom of movement,
assembly and speech. Numerous women's organizations
have simply stopped working due to such harassment
and threats.

Enabling women's full participation in public life as
activists, politicians or ordinary citizens is an essential
step forward, challenging deeply held beliefs about the
roles of men and women. Participation is therefore a
necessary condition for adequately addressing sexual
and gender-based violence.

Critically, the peace process led by the United

Nations Support Mission in Libya has largely excluded
Libyan women and indigenous groups. As a result,
the 2015 Libyan Political Agreement does not address
many crucial issues, such as gender equality, sexual
and gender-based violence, displacement, restrictions
on freedom of movement, particularly of young women,
and fear of reprisals for women's rights activism.

When Secretary-General Antonio Guterres visited
Libya earlier this month, many meetings took place
behind closed doors, so there was no clear signal that
civil society was invited to participate. This reflects
a broader pattern of disengagement between ordinary
Libyans and the United Nations-led peace process.
Peace cannot be built without building trust with our
communities and having meaningful consultation with
civil society.

Last week, my cousin's entire family was killed
when their house was destroyed during the recent
shelling in Tripoli. Theirs is just one example of the
toll this conflict has taken on civilian lives. As bombs
rain down on Tripoli and clashes continue in Alzizia
and Zuwaya, ordinary Libyans now look to the Security
Council to speak in a unified voice and take swift
action to end the current crisis and put Libya on the
path to peace.

We call on the Security Council to demand a
ceasefire and ensure that civilians are protected from
attacks. We welcome recent efforts to this end and
urge all Council members to ensure international
humanitarian law is upheld. The Council must stop the
sale of weapons that are being used to perpetuate the
violence, including sexual and gender-based violence.
All Member States must uphold international law,
including the Arms Trade Treaty and enforce the United
Nations embargo on all weapons sales to Libya.

The Council must recognize the gendered impact
of arms. Security sector reform and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration are urgently needed.
The Council must investigate all allegations of sexual
violence promptly, impartially and fully. It must
support survivors. A survivor-centred approach means
both ensuring survivors' rights and addressing their
needs, including, as a priority, access to life-saving
interventions and post-rape medical care, including
comprehensive sexual and reproductive health services,
emergency contraception, the option of safe abortion
services, and HIV prevention and treatment.

The Council must protect the human rights of
refugees and migrants in accordance with international
law. It must publicly condemn attacks and threats against
human rights defenders, including women human rights
defenders, and develop specific protection measures in
consultation with them in order to address the violence
they face due to their work.

The Council must ensure that any peace agreements
are gender-sensitive and protect and respect the human
rights of women and girls, particularly as they relate to
the Constitution, the electoral system, the police and
the judiciary. It must meaningfully include women,
indigenous peoples and youth and ensure that they
are able to substantively influence all phases of the
upcoming National Conference and elections. They
must be included as decision makers - not only
as observers.

In conclusion, as we approach the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
I urge the Security Council to see the current situation
in Libya as an important test of its credibility as the
international community and of what progress on the
women and peace and security agenda really means for
women, survivors and activists, and their communities,
all of whom are suffering through conflict.

Amina Megheirbi, a fellow Libyan woman human
rights defender from Benghazi, sat in this very chair
and delivered a statement at an open debate on this topic
in February 2012 (see S/PV.6722). The fact that today I
am delivering the same messages to the Council as she
did then should be a stark reminder that the Council's
efforts to bring peace to Libya have not been enough.

The Al-Qadhafi regime not only repressed my
people, the Amazigh, our culture and a way of life,
but criminalized speaking the Tamazight language in
public and forbade it being taught in schools. Growing
up speaking a banned language meant learning how to
fight for my own freedom of speech from a very young
age. It is therefore no small achievement that I address
the Security Council today. Let these efforts not be
in vain.

