Mr. Aisi (Papua New Guinea): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the Pacific small island
developing States (Pacific SIDS) represented at the
United Nations, namely, Fiji, whose representative has
just spoken, Nauru, Palau, the Republic of the Marshall
Islands, Micronesia, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga,
Tuvalu, Vanuatu and my own country, Papua New
Guinea.

I wish to thank you, Mr. President, and your
delegation for convening this important event. I would
also like to acknowledge Ms. Bachelet's presence
amongst us this evening.

The Pacific SIDS are committed to the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We
welcome the launch earlier this month of the Regional
10-60385
Advisory Group on Women, Peace and Security in
Asia-Pacific by the Economic and Social Commission
for Asia and the Pacific. The Advisory Group will
advise and support Governments, civil society and
other relevant players on the effective implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) in the Asia-Pacific region.
Our countries look forward to working with the
members of the Group.

In order to advance the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and its related resolutions -
and I would mention here, especially, resolution 1889
(2009) - in the Pacific region, it is important that we
focus our work on approaches that reflect the reality of
the situation on the ground in our island countries. We
ask the United Nations to support the convening of a
regional high-level meeting to develop and adopt a
regional action plan on women and peace and security
to support the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) at the country level. This proposal was
supported in the outcome statement of the eleventh
Triennial Conference of Pacific Women, convened by
the Secretariat of the Pacific Community in August of
this year.

We consider that the development of a Pacific
regional action plan to support the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) would bring women into
official processes and build on our efforts to integrate
resolution 1325 (2000) into the regional peace and
security agenda. Moreover, a Pacific regional action
plan also has the potential to bring together a series of
high-level regional commitments into viable national
action plans, which is essential to enhancing security
sector governance policies and programmes in our
region and will allow us to develop tailored solutions
to the challenges that our diverse nations face.
Inadequate funding remains a serious challenge to the
success of the national action plans.

We also recognize the work of Pacific
non-governmental and civil society organizations like
FemLINKpacific in advocacy and programme efforts
to implement resolution 1325 (2000) and request the
United Nations and other donor partners to continue to
provide resources for such efforts, particularly to
enhance women's participation in prevention and
broader peacebuilding. We also ask the United Nations
to support pre- and post-deployment training of
peacekeepers in our region, both police and military,
particularly to ensure the incorporation of human rights
compliance.
10-60385

Finally, the Pacific SIDS wish to highlight the
importance of conflict prevention as an essential
element of resolution 1325 (2000). Unabated climate
change risks increased violent conflict in many parts of
the world, and the consequent impacts on women and
girls are potentially beyond the capacity of the
international community to respond to adequately.
Adverse impacts of climate change alter the
distribution and quality of natural resources such as
freshwater, arable land, coastal territory and marine
resources. These changes can increase competition for
available resources, weaken Government institutions
and lead to internal and international migration.
Further, the adverse impacts can create obstacles that
substantially interfere with the ability of nations to
maintain territorial integrity, sovereignty and
independence. All these impacts of climate change
create severe risk of increased violent conflict in many
parts of the world, with ensuing impacts on women and
girls during and after conflict. We consider that climate
change severely jeopardizes the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).

So, we reiterate our call for climate change and
security to be an item on the agenda of the Security
Council. If the United Nations responds to the threat of
climate change, it has the potential to truly prevent
conflict and thereby reduce violence against women.

