Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I would first like to congratulate my colleague
Ambassador Eugene-Richard Gasana on his leadership
of the Security Council for this month. I also welcome
the presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Rwanda to preside over today's important meeting.
I also welcome Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflicts.

My country has examined the Secretary-General's
report on sexual violence in armed conflict (S/2013/149)
and the information it contains, submitted by the Special
Representative. We support all efforts aimed at putting
an end to all forms of the crime of sexual violence in
conflict, ending impunity and punishing perpetrators
and those who incite such violence. However, we also
call for extreme care and objectivity in addressing this
grave humanitarian issue, which has reached serious
levels in more than one place. Perpetrators must be held
accountable and brought to justice, whether for crimes
committed in the jails of Abu Ghraib in Iraq or in any
other place.

The report of the Secretary-General includes seven
paragraphs concerning my country. The allegations
contained in the report were based on reports by the
independent international commission of inquiry in
2012 and 2013. My country would like to stress that
the work of that commission since its inception was
not professional; rather, it was primarily politically
motivated. The commission rejected hundreds of
compelling documents and evidence submitted by the
Government of Syria regarding crimes committed
by armed terrorist groups. It conveniently selected
inaccurate claims, as the Special Representative
herself admitted, and chose to use inaccurate sources
implicated in terrorism and the bloodletting of Syrian
citizens. In its conclusions, the commission relied on
unofficial, inaccurate reports submitted by opposition
parties and sources hostile to the Syrian State and the
Syrian people. For the Council's information, I would
like to mention that the commission has to date not
visited Syria.

The Government of Syria has outlined those serious
lapses to the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, as well as to the commission of inquiry in an
official and documented manner. But the commission
has ignored all that, for unknown reasons. My
delegation addressed several official letters to Special
Representative Zainab Hawa Bangura that included
documented information on the responsibility of armed
terrorist groups for committing acts of rape, sexual
assault and killing of Syrian women and girls. Those
armed groups have become proficient at kidnapping
Syrian women and girls and exploiting them as sexual
handmaidens for the entertainment of terrorists.

At the same time, the advocates of those armed
terrorist groups, the jihadi thugs and perverts in
some Gulf sheikhdoms, issue open religious edicts on
satellite television channels sanctioning their crimes
under the guise of what they call sexual religious
warfare or sexual intercourse religious campaigns.
That morally and socially perverse behaviour has been
met by unwarranted responses by many United Nations
specialized agencies. It is no longer acceptable for this
suspicious silence to continue.
In that regard, I would like to raise some questions.
Why did the Special Representative choose to ignore the
statement she issued on 15 February under the headline
"Syria, release kidnapped women and children and
protect them from sexual violence". In the statement,
she documented an incident involving the kidnapping
of a bus carrying no fewer than 40 civilians, most of
them women and children, by armed groups in north-
western Syria. Why did the Special Representative
choose to ignore the hundreds of reports that have been
issued in the course of the two years of the crisis by
Western media sources that document violations by
terrorist groups of the rights of Syrian women and girls?
Why did the Special Representative choose to disregard
the admissions by armed groups themselves of having
committing sexual assaults and rapes f contained in
documented videos posted on the Internet - in which
those crimes were part of the Takfiri fundamentalist
ideology they seek to promote? Why did the Special
Representative avoid shining a light on the violations
committed by the countries hosting displaced Syrians
and Syrian refugees of their obligations under
international conventions related to the protection of
the rights of women, children and refugees?

We had sincerely hoped that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General would have
publicly presented the violations of the rights of Syrian
women and girls in refugee camps in neighbouring
countries. For example, there were more than 250
documented cases in which Syrian women in a Turkish
refugee camp had been impregnated by Turkish
supervisors and their terrorist associates. We had hoped
that there would have been references to violations
against Syrian girls in Jordanian refugee camps, of
the serious violations by means of systematic acts of
rape by false religious groups wearing religious garb,
and of Syrian women being forced to enter into forced
marriages, in some cases involving girls under the age of
14. That is in addition to the inappropriate exploitation
of the suffering of Syrian families in another Arab
State where documented reports have referred to the
marriage of more than 12,000 underage Syrian girls in
the course of one year - on the basis of false edicts
and pernicious calls by clerics in certain mosques who
are followers of Salafi and Wahhabi movements. It is
as if the only way to provide humanitarian assistance
by those demagogic religious idiots is through religious
sexual warfare.

In conclusion, my homeland, Syria, would like to
seriously deal with those horrendous and egregious
violations of human rights. Syria would like to
cooperate with the United Nations, especially with
Ms. Zainab Bangura, in order to expose the true events
unfolding in Syria in a manner free of sensationalism
and politicization and divorced from the agenda of
influential Powers in this international Organization.
We therefore look forward to her forthcoming visit to
Syria as the beginning of an optimal way of cooperating
and ascertaining correct information on the sexual
violence committed by armed terrorist groups against
the Syrian people.

