Mr. Bhattarai (Nepal): At the outset, I wish to
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this open
debate on women and peace and security. This topical
issue needs greater thrust in a conflict-ridden world.

We appreciate the opening statement of
Secretary-General Kofi Annan, as well as the
presentations by Assistant Secretary-General Angela
King and the Executive Director of the United Nations
Development Fund for Women, Ms. Noeleen Heyzer,
before the Council.

In our culture, women are the source of strength.
An old verse in Sanskrit maintains that God takes his
abode where women enjoy respect. Without casting any
aspersions on fellow men, let me say that women make
more compassionate and often more effective leaders.
They go to the root of the problem when they have to
address it.
Let me cite an example. A few years ago, in some
remote parts of Nepal women stood up to rectify a
social and economic malady. In those poverty-stricken
areas, men would squander their meagre incomes on
drinking. They would come home inebriated, touch off
a row and beat up their wives and children in drunken
stupor.

Tired of this, women pressed the Government to
declare those areas dry zones. Once there was no liquor
to drink, men shared chores more, household violence
declined, families had better food as their incomes
were properly used and children were spared gratuitous
exposure to alcohol and violence. Controlling the
booze was hard to sustain in a male-dominated world,
but it worked.

Many studies have established that women tend
to be more sincere, reliable and compassionate; they
also tend to make prudent use of their resources.
Nepal's microcredit programme reveals that women
default on their loans less, their earnings are used to
meet the family needs more and their repayment rate is
higher than that of their male counterparts.

In conflict situations women become the victims
of outrage and violence. They are harassed, abused,
maimed, mutilated, raped, compelled to bear the stigma
of outrage or even killed. They frequently witness
horrendous abuse meted out to their children. They
know the pain of losing their husbands and sons to war.
They know first-hand where the shoe pinches. Men
may even subconsciously wish for the excitement of
adventure that conflicts present. Women are more
likely to shun violence more consistently. For those
reasons, and more, women are likely to be more
committed to resolving disputes more peacefully than
men are.

Women constitute more than 50 per cent of the
global population. Conflicts make more women and
children victims than men. Women have been able to
do most of the things men have, from scaling Mount
Everest to running a country. Still women are seldom at
the forefront of resolving disputes, preventing conflicts
and keeping peace. They are yet to attain equality and
find their proper place in society. This has to change.

Change is something we have already agreed to
make. The United Nations Charter, the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women and a number of other conventions, including
those on humanitarian law, have already drawn up the
blueprint. All we need to do is to implement those
provisions in real life to let women enjoy equality in all
walks of life, and let them apply their ingenuity to
solve the world's problems.

We see three distinct roles for women in the area
of peace and security in the context of the United
Nations. First, the United Nations must work to
empower women around the world by encouraging
equality and the implementation of human rights
provisions already agreed upon. Secondly, more
women must be sent out to the field as peacekeepers
and peace-makers than has been the case so far. They
can then have a better feel for realities on the ground
and can bring that experience to formulating informed
strategies for a durable peace. Thirdly, we must have
more women in the United Nations system, especially
at the policy level. They will bring their compassion
and a fresh outlook to their work. They are likely to put
conflicts in proper perspective, try to look into
problems in their entirety, and fashion solutions in a
holistic manner.

A word of caution is in order here, though.
Women must work hard to bridge the gap and catch up.
They should do more to acquire skills and a
competitive edge. They ought to strive for their own
empowerment. Generous pledges of equality will not
bear fruit unless women take the initiative to excel and
lead the change. A gender-based quota as a quick fix
makes sense. But, at the end of the day, it is the quality
that sustains the gains of women, not the quota.

As women are superior in caring, providing,
loving and balancing in everyday life, let them also use
their skills, warmth, caution and compassion to
promote peace and security to this strife-stricken
world. If they can bring peace in their homes and
villages, they can do it in their countries and in the
world. Partnership between men and women is sure to
bring tremendous synergy.

To conclude, we believe that women can make a
difference if they have the opportunity to do so.
Therefore, let the mothers and sisters of the world be
authors of peace and security in the new century.

