Mr. Wolfe (Jamaica): I wish on behalf of the
Government of Jamaica to thank you, Sir, for
convening this open debate on women's equal
participation and full involvement in all efforts for the
maintenance and promotion of peace and security.

Resolution 1325 (2000), unanimously adopted by
the Security Council 10 years, ago brought to light one
of history's best-kept secrets: the disproportionate and
unique impact of armed conflict on women and girls.
Recognized as a historic and unprecedented document,
the impetus for its adoption was strong. That led to, for
the first time, the Security Council devoting an entire
meeting to a debate on women's experiences in conflict
and post-conflict situations and their contributions to
peace.

Ten years on, as we celebrate the anniversary of
that watershed event, significant achievements are
difficult to identify. It remains a matter of serious

concern that women have become caught in the centre
of violent conflicts and often become the direct and
deliberate victims of the most egregious abuses
committed by parties to armed conflicts. We must
therefore strengthen our resolve to eliminating the
disproportionate effects of war on civilians,
particularly women and children.

Over the years, the Council's presidential
statements have called on Member States, the United
Nations system and civil society to commit to the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), including
through the development of strategies and action plans,
the establishment of monitoring and accountability
mechanisms at the international and national levels,
and ensuring the full and equal participation of women
in all peace processes. But some of us have not yet
heeded this call.

My delegation recognizes the important work that
the United Nations has undertaken in increasing the
representation and participation of women at high
levels within the United Nations system. The most
recent instances of this were the appointments of the
Under-Secretary-General for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women and Executive Director of the
new gender entity, UN Women, and of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict. Let me once again reiterate
Jamaica's heartiest congratulations to both women and
assure them of our continued support in fulfilment of
their mandates.

Nevertheless, we believe that much more needs to
be done, and in this we call upon Member States to
play an integral role in ensuring the appointment of
qualified women at high levels.

My delegation is aware that resolution 1325
(2000) does not exist in a vacuum. Many resolutions,
including 1820 (2008) and 1888 (2009), which focus
on sexual violence in situations of armed conflict, were
created on the momentum generated by resolution 1325
(2000). Treaties, conventions, statements and reports
also preceded it, and thus formed its foundation and an
integral part of the women, peace and security policy
framework.

Although they have been late in coming, my
delegation is pleased to note that on this the tenth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), there are now
signs of increased commitment and action by the
Security Council to ensure that the goals of the
resolution are fully implemented. The Security
Council's expressed intention to take action on a
comprehensive set of indicators on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) is a very encouraging
development. These indicators would represent a clear
step forward for improving accountability and the
implementation of the groundbreaking resolution.

As we all know, resolution 1325 (2000) reaffirms
the important role of women in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts, and also in peacebuilding. We
acknowledge that, in some parts of the world, women
have become increasingly effective participants at the
peace table and have continued to assist in creating an
enabling environment for conflict prevention,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and post-conflict
reconstruction. However, progress in these areas has
not been consistent.

Jamaica has played its part in ensuring the
participation of women in peace and security over the
years through its increased presence in United Nations
peacekeeping operations. We have also been
encouraging the recruitment of women police officers
to peacekeeping missions, being keenly aware of the
impact that their experience and service have had on
the United Nations and host country's recognition of
the role of women in peace and security. Our women
peacekeepers, despite serving in some of the most
difficult, high-threat environments and inhospitable
places and faced with diseases and violence, have
nonetheless been having a positive impact on the lives
of women and girls in conflict situations.

Our women peacekeepers have increasingly acted
as role models in the various local environments,
inspiring by their very example women and girls in the
often male-dominated societies where they serve,
demonstrating to communities that peace is
inextricably linked to equality between men and
women, and persuading disadvantaged women and
girls that they can indeed achieve. Our women
peacekeepers continue to be dedicated to the tasks to
which they have been assigned. They have made
tangible differences in the lives of many, while
showing the world the caring and committed face of
the United Nations.

It is clear that peacekeeping long ago evolved
from its traditional role of silencing the guns, and has
been redefined increasingly as an avenue for fostering
a culture of sustainable peace in countries devastated
by conflicts.

Today, Jamaica recommits itself to ensuring that
this vital work will continue, through active
participation as long as it is needed. We reaffirm our
collective commitment to building a world free from
the scourge of war. The persistence of violence against
women in situations of armed conflict detracts from the
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals,
whose targets in many ways are intertwined with the
goals of resolution 1325 (2000).

Today's celebration is therefore a reminder that
the high cost of peacekeeping and of reconstruction in
post-conflict situations weighs heavily in favour of
prevention and peacebuilding measures to address the
root causes of deadly conflicts. Women have proven
instrumental in building bridges rather than walls.
Women are entitled to an active rote in rebuilding their
societies. Their ability to influence the direction of
change and to create a more just social, economic and
political order should not be overlooked. Gender
equality therefore is an essential precursor to
democratic governance and inclusive and sustainable
human development.

Finally, the United Nations Population Fund State
of World Population 2010 report - "From Conflict
and Crisis to Renewal: Generations of Change" -
speaks of the three Rs, resilience, renewal and
redefining roles between boys and girls and men and
women. It further shows how communities and civil
society are healing old wounds and moving forward.
We concur that more still needs to be done to ensure
that women have access to services and have a voice in
peace deals or reconstruction plans. But we believe that
recovery from conflict and disaster presents a unique
opportunity to rectify inequalities, ensure equal
protection under the law and create space for positive
change.

Thus, by ensuring that all aspects of resolution
1325 (2000) are implemented, we will give women the
chance to use their voice and their advocacy in
ensuring sustainable peace for all.

