Mr. Giacomelli da Silva (Brazil) (spoke in French): At the outset, I should like to thank France for
organizing this debate.

I also thank the Secretary-General for his recent
report (S/2017/861) on the subject, as well as his Chef
de Cabinet, the Executive Director of UN-Women, the
Secretary-General of the International Organization of
la Francophonie and Ms. Mina-Rojas for their briefings.

Many positive steps have been taken to implement
the eight resolutions on women and peace and security.
Despite these efforts, however, women remain a
minority in peace and security negotiations and in
peacekeeping operations. The challenge is to fully
implement the resolutions of the Council, including the
landmark resolution 1325 (2000).

Protection and independence are inextricable
dimensions of the women and peace and security
agenda. At the international level, this requires
women's participation and respect for their rights in
the formulation and implementation of the mandates of
peacekeeping operations and special political missions,
in peace negotiations, in peacekeeping initiatives and
in humanitarian interventions.
Complex humanitarian crises spawned by conflicts
shed light on the plight of women and girls who are
subject to various forms of sexual violence and forced
to flee their homes and communities. They become
refugees and displaced persons. In this context, we
must pay particular attention to women and girls within
the most vulnerable groups.

The importance of increasing the presence of
women in peacekeeping operations is indisputable.
It would be unthinkable to establish a peacekeeping
operation without deploying gender-equality advisers,
incorporating a protection of women mandate, or
training Blue Helmets in the prevention of and the
fight against sexual exploitation and sexual abuse.
We commend the Secretariat for the measures it has
proposed to reach the target of 15 per cent goal for
female officers among senior officers and military
observers within peacekeeping operations. Brazil
also wishes to thank the Secretary-General for his
initiatives to promote a new, victim-centred approach
to preventing and countering sexual exploitation and
abuse perpetrated by those serving under the United
Nations flag or a United Nations mandate.

Brazil had the honour of participating in the second
meeting of the National Focal Points Network that
addresses issues on women and peace and security,
in addition to the recent general debate of the General
Assembly. With its first national action plan, which has
been in place since March, Brazil now has an important
tool to measure its progress on the women and peace
and security agenda.

We have already made significant progress. For
instance, the Brazilian army has admitted women
to its military schools, the skills development
programme on women and peace and security has been
integrated in the establishment of the Sergio Vieira
de Mello Peacekeeping Operations Joint Center and
that programme has now been incorporated into the
curriculum of our School of Diplomacy. We are also
striving to increase the number of female candidates for
posts in Brazilian civilian and military peacekeeping
operations and special political missions. We sincerely
hope that the national action plan will continue to
produce encouraging results and that the women and
peace and security agenda will continue to flourish
within the United Nations system as a whole.

