Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): Let me join others in
thanking you, The Right Honourable William Hague,
United Kingdom Secretary of State for Foreign and
Commonwealth Affairs and President of the Security
Council, for convening this open debate. I would also
like to convey my sincere gratitude to Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon and his Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Bangura, for their
respective statements. In addition, please allow me to
acknowledge the presence here today of the Ministers
of Guatemala, France, Morocco, Sweden, Ecuador and
Lithuania, as well as that of our special guests, namely,
Ms. Jane Adong Anywar, from the non-governmental
organization Women's Initiatives for Gender Justice,
and Ms. Angelina Jolie, Special Envoy of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

In recent months, the Security Council has quite
rightly directed considerable energy to the fight against
sexual and gender-based violence. Today's open
debate on sexual violence in conflict follows a similar
open debate under Rwanda's presidency in April (see S/PV.6948), and one month after the Arria Formula
meeting on gender advisers in peacekeeping missions,
organized by Australia and Guatemala. Although we
can never do enough to protect women and girls - in
families, in Villages, across communities and at national
and international levels - we hope that debates such
as these, supported by the eager participation of many
States Members of the United Nations, will translate
into concrete action, and that by taking action to protect
women and girls from violence their key role in our
respective societies will be promoted.

The commitment of the United Kingdom to raise
awareness on war-zone rape and on the need to bring
perpetrators to justice is commendable. In London in
May 2012, you, Secretary Hague, launched a campaign
in London to prevent rape and sexual violence in conflict
zones. Last March, you visited our region: first Rwanda,
where you paid tribute to the victims of the genocide
perpetrated against Tutsis, and discussed lasting peace
in the region. Then you visited the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, where sexual and
gender-based violence, tragically, remain prevalent,
and reached out in order to hear from the victims of
such violence. Last April, with your leadership, the
Foreign Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Group of
Eight adopted a declaration on the prevention of sexual
violence in conflict, which urged every State to bring
the perpetrators to justice. Rwanda commends your
leadership on the issue, Sir, and stands firmly beside
you as we pursue a meaningful international response.

During the 1994 genocide perpetrated against
Tutsis, women and girls were forced to endure
inhuman and degrading atrocities. That memory and
history inspire Rwanda in our unyielding and heartfelt
commitment to eradicate sexual violence as a weapon
of war and genocide. Tens of thousands of Rwandan
women and young girls were raped and left for dead
during the months of April to July 1994. Among those
who survived, many were infected with incurable
diseases, some were made pregnant, and many suffered
the humiliation of having been abused in front of their
families. It is deeply regrettable that many of those who
committed those atrocities in Rwanda continue such
practices in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
today, with total impunity.

We take this opportunity to call upon all Member
States, particularly those within the region, to fully
implement resolution 1804 (2008) and to refrain from
providing any military, financial or political support to
the cynically called Forces democratiques de liberation
du Rwanda.

Rwanda has been able to achieve meaningful
reconciliation within our borders only by insisting on
justice and fighting impunity. Rwandans have come to
understand first-hand the importance of strengthening
internal justice mechanisms and building institutions
that enhance accessibility to justice. Fighting against
impunity must be the primary responsibility of States.
The international community, including the United
Nations, should support national jurisdictions, by
helping to build capacity where gaps exist and by
providing guidance and direction drawn from a rich
well of best practices in the field, including those
gleaned from post-conflict societies such as Rwanda's.

For Rwanda's part, we have adopted a range of
policies to prevent and respond to Violence against
women and girls. One of the foremost priorities is to
protect and rehabilitate the dignity of Victims. That
figures prominently in our national action plan on
the implementation of the resolution 1325 (2000). To
that end, sexual and gender-based violence centres
were established at the community level throughout
the country, and a 2009 law on the prevention and
punishment of gender-based violence includes penalties
and substantive mechanisms to empower police to deal
with such crimes.

In a recent trip to our region, the Secretary-
General was joined by the President of the World Bank
to launch a centre of excellence for the fight against
violence against women and children. This is a best-
practice one-stop centre and a place where all the
relevant Government and non-Government support
services - health, justice and police, counselling and
welfare - converge to provide support for victims of
sexual and gender-based violence. Such centres offer
a non-threatening environment that allows victims to
take full advantage of their legal rights, as well as to
begin the process of healing. As noted by the Secretary-
General during his visit, "Rwanda's strong political
commitment to prevent and combat violence against
women and children" is reflected in all spheres of the
Government.

The Rwanda Defence Forces (RDF) considers the
prevention and mitigation of sexual violence against
women and girls as a key imperative across all its
deployments. The RDF gender desk devises training
programmes to raise awareness of sexual and gender-
based violence. Those programmes have been fully
incorporated into the core curriculums of Rwanda's
military academics and training institutions. That
is considered integral to the preparation of all RDF
battalions bound for peacekeeping missions abroad.
Moreover, Rwanda is among the leading contributors
of female police and correctional officers to United
Nations peace-support and peacekeeping missions,
where they combat and raise awareness about violence
against women and serve as advisers on gender-based
violence, sharing best practices with officers and local
authorities.

For those reasons, we support the full implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) and resolution 1960 (2010),
which emphasize that all peacekeeping mandates
incorporate provisions that specifically identify steps
to address sexual violence, and that should include
the clear identification of women's protection advisers
alongside gender advisers and human rights protection
units.

The legal and institutional framework against sexual
and gender-based violence has been strengthened over
time. However, as the recent report of the Secretary-
General indicates (S/2013/335), sexual violence
remains prevalent in armed conflict, particularly on
the African continent. Ultimately, it is self-evident that
the most effective means to eradicate sexual violence
in conflict zones is to bring those conflicts to an end.
Any comprehensive global response to the problem
must acknowledge that sexual violence, while Vile
and unacceptable under any circumstances, is the by-
product of war. Therefore, any meaningful solution
must address the root causes of conflict. Furthermore,
any global approach must include more effective
monitoring of the commitments made by Member
States to prevent sexual Violence where possible and
address its consequences where necessary.

Let me conclude by once again thanking
non-governmental organizations, civil society and
other non-State actors for their support to the cause
of women and girls and for their contribution to
justice against perpetrators of sexual and gender-
based violence. We hope and trust that their actions,
combined with a genuine commitment by States as well
as by the international community, will hasten the day
when women, girls and children are no longer brutally
targeted in conflicts that they did not at all create.

