Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): Let me begin
by congratulating the President of the Government of
Spain, Mr. Rajoy Brey, and the Spanish delegation for
this most timely debate and for the successful adoption
of resolution 2331 (2016) today.

Trafficking in persons, like slavery, with which it
is closely associated, used to be regarded as a crime of
an earlier era. Sadly, that is not so any more. Indeed, it
can be found in many countries, including my own, as
I shall note more fully in a moment. It has reinforced to
my own country that all States Members of the United
Nations must be vigilant in addressing the issue. The
problems and effects of trafficking are exponentially
and despicably worse in conflict situations. That
reality has been brought home through today's
briefing - and, if I may say so quite graphically and
directly - to the Council in the testimony of Nadia
Murad, the young Yazidi woman who addressed us
last year (see S/PV.7585), as well as in the briefings
of Zainab Bangura, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and
Under-Secretary-General Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka,
on the use of sexual violence in the conflicts in Syria
and South Sudan, the Lake Chad region and elsewhere.

The callous barbarity of the treatment meted out
to innocent people, most often women, girls and young
men, is mind-numbing: being kidnapped, forced into
marriage, raped, sexually molested and abused; sold
into slavery, forced into prostitution; forced to be a
suicide bomber, a combatant, a labourer; and even sent
into battle with your baby strapped to your back. And,
if by some fortunate chance you are able to get free,
there is the risk of being rejected by your own family
and community for the crimes that were done to you.
Listening to those briefings last year were the most
harrowing days I have spent at this table.

The Secretary-General's annual report on conflict-
related sexual violence (S/2016/36l/Rev.l) and the
briefings on specific conflicts on the Council's agenda
illustrate the ways in which trafficking is both fuelled
by and exacerbates conflict situations. However, the
evidence presented today on how such phenomena
interplay and reinforce each other is deeply troubling.
Terrorist groups will, of course, use whatever means
they can to pursue their objectives. For some, their
motive is profit. In many cases, however, it is about
terrorizing and controlling communities to eliminate
resistance and, above all, to exercise power over people
with no defences. In that regard, those perpetrators are
in essence cowards.

In any event, we need a shared understanding of
that phenomenon and an agreement on collective action
to confront and defeat it. The fact that the issue is
difficult, deeply distasteful and has social and economic
dimensions should not deter the Council from taking it
up or be used as a pretext for leaving the issue for other
bodies to address. The Council has a responsibility to
engage in the full spectrum of international security
issues, in all their disturbing dimensions.New Zealand

would like to highlight five aspects that we consider
warrant particular attention.

First, the Council needs to integrate such issues
into our work, wherever relevant. That means ensuring
that the effects of trafficking and sexual violence
against women, men, and children are appropriately
reflected in our consideration of specific mandates and
country situations. That should not depend on mandate
prescriptiveness. Rather, when present, such aspects
need to be considered. To that end, the Secretariat needs
to ensure that such issues are adequately reflected in its
advice to the Council, including its formal reports and
the conflict assessments on which they are based.

Secondly, we need to make active and effective
use of the other international tools at our disposal.
As Ms. Bangura so clearly pointed out today, the
effective use of the Islamic State in the Levant/Da'esh
sanctions regime is an obvious point of engagement.
It was disappointing that we were unable to reach an
agreement for her to brief us and our Committee earlier
this year.

As resolution 2331 (2016) adopted today underlines,
the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking provides an essential framework for such
efforts, both in terms of international cooperation
and State-level implementation. Within the Plan of
Action, the terrorist financing framework has shown
its effectiveness in following the flow of money to
those responsible and cutting off sources of finance.
Organizations such as the International Organization
for Migration, INTERPOL, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the
Egmont Group of Financial Intelligence Units also
have significant expertise and networks that we can and
should be utilizing to their fullest extent.

As resolution 2223 (2016)adopted last week
underlines, challenging cross-border issues such as this
demand cohesion across lines of effort to be effective.
It is important, therefore, that such international efforts
are effectively coordinated. The United Nations system
is well placed to assist. The Inter-Agency Coordination
Group against Trafficking in Persons has a central role
to play, as does the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime. We look forward to engaging with Member
States on options for how such coordination can be
further strengthened.

Thirdly, regional cooperation has a vital role to play
in efforts to confront such issues, given their cross-
border nature and scope. New Zealand's experience
has demonstrated the effectiveness of such approaches.
In our own region, the Asia Pacific, the Bali Process
provides a valuable forum for addressing the complex
challenges of trafficking in persons and related
transnational crime.

Fourthly, States need to pursue those responsible
for such acts at the domestic level. Traffickers profit
from exploiting the weak and vulnerable. All States
need to ensure that they have appropriate criminal
offences that allow such individuals to be brought to
justice. Just last week, a New Zealand court handed
down the first conviction in New Zealand for people
trafficking, imposing a sentence of almost 10 years
in prison and ordering the payment of reparations to
the victims.

Finally, we must not lose sight of the needs of those
most affected by conflict-related trafficking and sexual
violence - the victims and the survivors. In that regard,
Nadia Murad laid down a very specific challenge to the
Council today. To establish an effective mechanism
to gather and protect evidence of the crimes that have
been committed in Iraq and Syria. That is a challenge
that New Zealand will not be able to take up as we leave
the Council in 11 days, at least not in this organ, but we
believe that it is a challenge that needs to be addressed.

In conclusion, we hope today's discussions will
galvanize our collective efforts to combat and defeat
those interrelated scourges by tackling them at their
source, while bringing those responsible to justice and
providing the necessary support to those affected.

