Mr. Thoresson (Sweden): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Nordic countries: Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden.

First, let me thank all the briefers. I would like
to thank in particular Ms. Suaad Allami for her
participation here today. The role and influence of civil
society in preventing conflict and building peace are
both essential and must be supported.

Realizing the women and peace and security agenda
is a top priority for the Nordic countries. Next year
will mark the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of
ground-breaking resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security. We need to grasp that opportunity
to accelerate our efforts. It is time to move from
normative commitments to full implementation. In
preparing for the high-level review on resolution 1325
(2000), we encourage all Member States to develop
national action plans on women and peace and security,
and to effectively implement already existing plans.

Gender inequalities lie at the heart of the issue.
Gender equality in political, economic and social life
is a goal in itself and also contributes to preventing
sexual violence and armed conflict. We must therefore
firmly address the root causes of gender inequality.
This includes changing the norms in society that are
denying women and girls their human rights. It also
means pursuing policies that ensures women's political
and economic empowerment, secures sexual and
reproductive health and rights, and improves women's
security. Not least, we must guarantee the right to
education of all women and girls.

The fight against impunity for sexual and gender-
based violence is also crucial, not least at the national
level. We welcome and support the undertakings of the
chief Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court in
this regard. We furthermore recall the unique capacity
of Justice Rapid Response, in close cooperation with
UN-Women, to address situations where expertise
is needed for investigating sexual and gender-based
violence crimes.

Women are not only Victims, but also actors and
agents of change. We therefore need the participation
of women and men alike in formal as well as informal
processes, in mediation, peace negotiations and
humanitarian and peacebuilding efforts. Sustainable
peace and security can never be achieved if half the
population is excluded.

The theme of today's debate is "Displaced women
and girls: leaders and survivors". Unfortunately, the
levels of forcibly displaced persons in the world today
are unprecedented. Patterns of violence against women
and girls are often amplified in conflict-affected
settings. As we see in many parts of the world today,
extremism and terrorism are a prominent part of
conflict situations and constitute a threat to women's
rights and lives.

All the relevant actors, States and the United
Nations and other international organizations must
ensure that displaced populations are protected from
violence, that humanitarian access is granted and that
gender-responsive services, including for sexual and
reproductive health, are delivered. Women and girls
who are forcibly displaced are at particular risk of
sexual and gender-based violence. Effective protection
strategies must include the empowerment of women
and girls, such as access to education and specific
efforts to increase the enrolment and retention of girls
in school, access to registration and documentation,
and livelihood opportunities.

Improving women's participation and leadership
in situations of displacement is also crucial. In that
regard, we welcome the good practices of the camp
management committees in eastern Nepal, which have
attained 48 per cent participation by women. However,
equal participation by men and women should be the
norm in every case, and we urge the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
others to step up their efforts in that regard.

It is a sad fact that many refugee and internally
displaced person settings are not temporary situations,
but often become semi-permanent or even permanent
arrangements. In all of these cases, we call on
Governments to find suitable solutions in consultation
with affected populations.

The United Nations system has a central role
to play in implementing the women and peace and
security agenda. Next year several critical reviews
will take place, including the Secretary-General's
review of peace operations, the review of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture, the review of the
Beijing Platform for Action and the high-level review
ofresolution 1325 (2000). In order to ensure coherence,
all these reviews should take into account the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) objectives in
a coordinated manner. The work to promote women and
peace and security should not take place in isolation.

Although there has been an increase in the number
of mandates of United Nations missions including
references to women and peace and security, this is
not enough: all mandates should be based on a gender-
sensitive conflict analysis so as to be tailored for the
needs of women and girls. Gender issues should be
part of reporting requirements and all United Nations
missions should have a gender advisor at the strategic
level.

Before I conclude, I would also like to underline the
importance of the new post-2015 development agenda.
The Nordic countries are actively promoting a separate
goal on freedom from violence and peaceful societies as
well as a stand-alone gender equality goal. The targets
should include the reduction of all kinds of violence,
especially against women and children. We believe that
the post-2015 agenda represents a unique opportunity
to address violence against women, including sexual
and gender-based violence, on a fundamental level.

As I said at the beginning of my intervention, next
year is an opportunity to accelerate our efforts. It is a
chance to make real progress. Let us embrace it.

