Ms. Ibrahim (Nigeria): I thank the delegation of
the Russian Federation for convening this open debate
and for the excellent concept paper (S/2016/871, annex)
provided to guide our discussions.

Our appreciation goes to the Secretary-General
for his abiding investment in the cause of women, to
the Executive Director of UN-Women for her lucid
presentation, and to the non-governmental organization
representative for sharing her perspective.

Nigeria welcomes the opportunity to reflect on the
progress made in the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda 16 years after the adoption
of the landmark resolution 1325 (2000). While we
acknowledge the substantial achievements made in this
endeavour, there are still challenges and significant gaps
yet to be addressed. They include the participation of
women in decision-making and leadership roles, more
involvement of women in the prevention of conflict and
peace efforts, insufficient funds, lack of disaggregated
data, forced displacement exacerbated by persistent
armed conflict, and continuing unprecedented levels of
sexual violence and assault. It is our expectation that
this debate could offer prospective solutions to address
the prevailing challenges and gaps, and suggestions
for acquiring the needed resources to advance the role
of women within the context of the global peace and
security architecture.

Meeting these challenges is critical to making
progress on the women and peace and security agenda.
This will require a multi-stakeholder approach involving
actors at the global, regional, subregional and national
levels. Communities, civil society and individuals also
have a crucial role to play.

At the global level, we acknowledge that the
Security Council has provided the leadership necessary
to give impetus to the women and peace and security
agenda, beginning with resolution 1325 (2000), which
set up the framework for subsequent Council resolutions
upon which the women and peace and security agenda
was built.

In Africa, the African Union has been a useful
platform for the advancement of the women and peace
and security agenda. It is to be noted that the African
Union Agenda 2063, which was adopted by African
Heads of State and Government in Addis Ababa in
January, places particular emphasis on the engagement
of women and youth in the continent's development.

At the subregional level in West Africa, the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) has been a major driver of the women and
peace and security agenda. In collaboration with the
United Nations Office for West Africa, in September
2010 ECOWAS developed an integrated plan of action
for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). The
plan of action emphasizes the importance of the role of
women in conflict prevention and resolution, mediation
and peacebuilding efforts, as well as the rebuilding of
post-conflict societies.

Consistent with the subregional efforts, in August
2013 Nigeria launched a national action plan to fully
implement the relevant provisions of resolution 1325
(2000). The plan reflects the Federal Government's
commitment to ensuring the security of women and
girls during armed conflict and enhancing their
active and direct participation in conflict prevention
and peacebuilding. Nigeria is also committed to the
provisions of resolution 1820 (2008), on ending acts of
sexual violence against women in conflict situations.

We are collaborating with our neighbours Chad,
Cameroon, the Niger and Benin, within the framework
of the Multinational Joint Task Force , to fight the Boko
Haram insurgency, which is targeting women and girls.
Our experience today is evidence that with determined
international collaboration, terrorism can be defeated.
The sustained efforts of Nigeria and its international
partners have culminated in the liberation of territories
previously occupied by Boko Haram.

It is to be noted that 80 per cent of the 2 million
internally displaced persons in the north-east ofNigeria
are women and girls. We have taken concrete steps to
address their humanitarian needs and to ensure that
the necessary conditions are established to enable the
voluntary return of the displaced persons to their places
of origin in safety and dignity. Indeed, as a sequel to the
aforementioned efforts, 21 of the captured Chibok girls
were released last week. The efforts will continue until
the remaining ones are eventually released.

We acknowledge the contributions of civil society
organizations as partners in the prevention, management
and resolution of disputes. The Nigerian Government
will continue to engage them as key stakeholders and
partners in the women and peace and security agenda.
Nigeria remains fully and firmly committed to the
promotion and protection of the rights of women and
girls in conflict and post-conflict situations. We shall
work assiduously to enhance the participation of women
in peace and security initiatives. We are determined to
reinforce and implement the principles of resolution
1325 (2000) and, within that context, to address the
factors that impact negatively on the lives of women
and girls.

