Mr. Samhan (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I wish to express our gratitude
to you, Sir, for your efforts to strengthen the role of
women in the sphere of international peace and
security. We support the statements made by Ms. King
and Ms. Heyzer, which reflect the international
community's concerns about the advancement of
women in the area of peace, security and sustainable
development.

In recent decades, women in many States
throughout the world, the United Nations, its
specialized agencies and regional and international
organizations have been assigned important posts.
They have played a leading role equal to that of men in
reconstruction and in economic, social, cultural and
human development. They have demonstrated
sufficient scientific and technical knowledge and
competence to allow them to adapt to events and
developments in their societies and the world at large.
However, despite all the regional and
international conferences that have been held on the
topic of women in the past two decades, which have
addressed all the problems and attempted to meet all
the challenges that have been encountered in seeking to
enhance women's participation at the national, regional
and international levels, the role of women in the
maintenance of international peace and security still
falls short of our aspirations for contemporary
international relations. These various developments
have highlighted the gravity of the situation of women,
who suffer from racial discrimination, ethnic cleansing,
rape, forced displacement and other phenomena,
particularly in countries where war, internal conflict
and occupation continue to rage. Furthermore, the
imbalances in economic and social relations between
the developed and the developing countries,
particularly the least developed countries, have their
own negative impact. These phenomena have
aggravated illiteracy and poverty, which in turn have
increased the suffering of women and children.

If this situation persists, particularly in regions of
Africa, Asia and the Middle East that still labour under
the yoke of occupation and war, it will present
enormous challenges to the international community.
This requires the Security Council to follow up the
implementation of its resolutions on these various
conflicts. The Council must coordinate its work with
international, national and regional organizations and
agencies in order to find peaceful solutions to these
conflicts as soon as possible. Without such a
commitment, the people of those States - especially
women and children - will continue to suffer the
effects of instability and insecurity, which in turn fuel
violence, extremism and frustration.

The United Arab Emirates has closely followed
the situation in the occupied Arab and Palestinian
territories, which has experienced a serious
exacerbation of violence and aggression, including the
Israeli blockade against the Palestinian people, in
which women and children suffer the most. My country
deplores this situation and calls on Israel to end its
massive violations of human rights in the Palestinian
territories. For the fourth week running, the
international press has been broadcasting images and
reports highlighting these criminal abuses and
violations. I refer in particular to the Palestinian
mother who was killed in the presence of her nine
children. Another woman, old and infirm, who was
merely trying to get to her workplace, was also gunned
down. Furthermore, an unprecedented number of
Palestinians have died or been wounded.

These examples speak volumes about the serious
human rights violations being committed by the Israeli
forces, particularly against women and children. The
persistence of this situation demonstrates that certain
States of the international community use double
standards in their approach to these events. The
international community has rejected such behaviour
through resolutions recently adopted by the Security
Council and the General Assembly. Israel's actions run
counter to the letter and spirit of the 1949 Fourth
Geneva Convention, to international humanitarian law
and norms, and to the primacy of respect for
international law.

We therefore demand that an independent, neutral
commission of inquiry be established and that an
international criminal tribunal be set up, on the model
of those already created by the Security Council, to
prosecute and try the perpetrators of the crimes
committed against the Palestinian people, in particular
Palestinian women and children. This international
mechanism of deterrence could help to limit the
growing violence and the serious violations of the
fundamental human rights of women and children.

In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates believes
that the acts of violence and massive violations of the
human rights of powerless innocent civilians,
particularly women and children, are creating abnormal
conditions of bloodshed, oppression, inequality and
racial and religious discrimination. We therefore stress
the importance of disseminating a culture of peace,
respect for the basic international norms and standards
for the treatment of women, and the legitimate rights
guaranteed by religions and national and international
laws and norms.

We also believe in the vanguard role that women
can play in international affairs, especially in the area
of economic, social and human development. The
participation of women should be guaranteed in
international decision-making and in peacekeeping
operations in order to ensure security, stability and
sustainable development at the regional, national and
international levels.

