Mr. Roux (spoke in French): I would like to start
by thanking the United Kingdom for organizing this
important meeting on such an essential, serious and
far-reaching subject.

INTERPOL, the world's only police cooperation
organization, is fully committed to assisting its 190
Member States in the fight against this widespread
form of crime. Our support is always consistent with
article 3 of our Constitution, which prohibits any action
in the political, racial, military or religious spheres.

The phenomenon of trafficking in human beings
always has two components: a humanitarian and a
criminal. That is the framework INTERPOL uses to
orient its work and play an essential role through its
partnership with United Nations bodies, such as the
International Organization for Migration or the United
NationsOfficeonDrugsandCrime(UNODC),torespond
to operational and enforcement challenges - with a
constant emphasis on its humanitarian aspect.

What services do we provide Member States?

First of all, there is our entire Vulnerable
Communities Unit, which focuses on the trafficking of
human beings, in all its forms, and forced labour. Our
cooperative efforts run the gamut from prevention to
protection, through a systematic partnership approach
that is placed at the service of our member countries.
Supporting that Lyon-based Unit in France are our
seven regional offices, each of which hosts an officer
specializing in the subject. In that way, INTERPOL can
assist State police, during its tactical deployment, to
dismantle criminal networks behind the trafficking of
human beings, which are particularly active in areas of
conflict, as we see today. By way ofillustration, in 2017
INTERPOL's dedicated team, in cooperation with the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
will lead a project in Ukraine centred on the smuggling
of migrants.

Secondly, the INTERPOL Group of Experts on
Action against Trafficking in Human Beings was further
expanded in January to include more than 50 Member
States. Its next meeting will be held on 14 and 16 March
in Lisbon, and will be funded by the United States State
Department. I invite all countries to regularly send
your current expert there to be a member, or designate
an expert, if they do not yet have one.

INTERPOL also deploys and implements a range
of products and services to assist its member States in
their fight against crime linked to trafficking in human
beings. Among these are the INTERPOL notices, a tool
for tracking criminals and suspects, locating missing
persons or gathering information for an investigation;
databases containing identifying information, or
information on lost, falsified or stolen travel documents,
fingerprints, DNA profiles or tools for analysing child
abuse images; or even technology solutions to connect
law enforcement agents to all these tools, including at
border crossings via our secure network, I-24/7.
Finally, coordination operations, such as the
recent border reinforcement operation launched by
INTERPOL, named Adwenpa 2, focused on West
Africa and set up in conjunction with UNODC, which
recently led to the arrest of human traffickers and the
seizure of drugs, stolen cars, cash in large quantities
and counterfeit goods - clearly indicative of organized
crime. Seven children between the ages of 11 and 16
were placed under protection, while those responsible
for the trafficking were arrested. As that example
shows, only an integrated approach can provide a
useful and effective response to trafficking in human
beings, trafficking in children and networks of slavery
and forced labour - not to mention an increase, as
was mentioned this morning, in the rate of arrests
and prosecution.

This crime knows no borders; when States do not
use all the tools at their disposal, such as those offered
by INTERPOL, organized and unscrupulous criminal
networks directly reap the benefits. Let us ensure that
that does not happen.

