Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like first of all to thank Uruguay for organizing today's
debate in the Security Council. This subject is of
central importance for countries in conflict, of course,
but also for all of us. I would like to also thank Deputy
Secretary-General Amina Mohammed and Under-
Secretary-General Adama Dieng for their briefings
and their exemplary commitment. Lastly, I wish to give
special thanks to Ms. Mina Jaf. Allow me to underscore
the importance of the presence and interventions of
civil society representatives in the Security Council,
particularly in the context of the women and peace
and security agenda. The voice of stakeholders on the
ground is indeed irreplaceable.
Today's debate affords me the opportunity to convey
France's sincere thanks to Ms. Zainab Bangura, who
discharged her duties as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict with
energy, passion and determination over the past few
years. We also welcome the nomination of Ms. Pramila
Patten for that position, and we count on her to carry
on that essential mandate. The mandate of the Special
Representative is one of the priorities of France's
diplomacy. We reaffirm our support of the Office of
the Special Representative, particularly of its Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict. The work of that Team to strengthen national
capabilities in combatting sexual violence is essential
both with regard to preventing and combating impunity
and supporting the victims of such violence.

Since the seminal adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), this Council has placed the participation of
women in crisis management and recovery at the
centre of its concerns, with the full support of France.
Beyond the agenda on women and peace and security,
the question of sexual violence in conflict is taking a
growing place in our work. At Spain's initiative, last
December we also adopted resolution 2331 (2016),
which, taking full account of the link between human
trafficking, sexual violence and terrorism, is a great
step forward for the Council.

Despite our efforts, in many theatres of conflict
women continue to be the primary victims of
large-scale, often systematic, sexual violence. Actions
committed by Da'esh or Boko Haram show the most
extreme forms of such violence, which particularly
targets women and children. For those terrorist groups,
sexual violence is a weapon of war, but also a source of
financing and a recruitment tool. In Syria, rape, forced
marriage, sexual slavery and prostitution particularly
threaten women and adolescents, especially in regions
controlled by Da'esh. In Iraq, Da'esh has set up a
marketplace where women and girls from minority
groups, including Yezidis and Christians, are sold into
sexual slavery.

The large-scale abductions of girls and women by
Boko Haram in West Africa, particularly in Nigeria,
go hand in hand with the systematic practice of
sexual violence, the most common being rape. The
abduction of the Chibok schoolgirls in the spring of
2014 - 82 of whom were freed a week ago - brought
into broad daylight a common practice of that terrorist
group and others, used for intimidation and propaganda
and as recruitment strategy, but also as favoured
instrument of their ideology.
Boko Haram, Da'esh and other groups like
Al-Shabaab in Somalia have integrated those practices
into their doctrine and strategy. Those acts, which are
morally revolting to the human conscience, can legally
be classified as war crimes, crimes against humanity
and even genocide. The members of terrorist groups
who organize and commit such acts should be held
to account in due course. We cannot accept that such
crimes remain unpunished.

Beyond terrorist groups, sexual violence is used on a
large scale as a weapon ofwar by armed groups or forces,
for example in South Sudan and in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, but also in northwestern Central
African Republic. Far from being a matter of individual
cases or the acts of lost soldiers, in many regions sexual
violence is a means to terrorize populations or as an
instrument of collective punishment against ethnic or
religious groups. Its primary target is women, but is
also used against children and men.

In the face of those odious acts, indignation is not
enough - we must act. The international community
is not condemned to impotence. National authorities,
which have the lion's share of the responsibility to
stamp out sexual violence, can and must make a
difference. Therefore I commend the decisive action
of the Government of C6te d'Ivoire that enabled the
country to be removed from the list annexed to the
Secretary-General's report on sexual violence in
conflict (S/2017/249). This first delisting must open
the way to others. I know that the teams of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General are continuing
their efforts in that respect.

The prosecution of perpetrators of sexual violence
in their corresponding national jurisdictions, as in
the case of Guinea, is also an encouraging sign. So
is the growing mobilization of international criminal
jurisdictions, including the first decision by the
International Criminal Court, on 21 June last year,
that recognized the use of rape and sexual violence as
war crimes in a Central African Republic case, for acts
committed in 2002 and 2003. But those successes in
the fight against sexual violence in conflict are still too
infrequent. We must strengthen our efforts and take
more systematic action by mobilizing around several
specific priorities.
The first priority is the fight against impunity.
Everything must be done so that those responsible
for sexual violence be prosecuted by the competent
national jurisdiction and, failing that, by international
criminal jurisdictions. In that regard, when prosecution
is impossible in the short term, we must ensure that a
mechanism is set in place for documenting such crimes.
In Syria, the International Independent Investigation
Commission and the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 can
play that indispensable role, as the latter also seeks
to facilitate investigation and prosecution of alleged
perpetrators of such crimes.

Similarly, as underlined in resolution 2331
(2016), the sanctions regimes in question could more
effectively target groups and individuals responsible
for sexual violence, especially when those acts are
used by terrorist groups as a source of financing or
a means of recruitment. Other initiatives are also to
be commended, for example the partnership between
UN-Women and the Justice Rapid Response initiative,
which seeks to train sexual violence experts to serve as
a pool of personnel that could be immediately deployed
in the framework of investigation mechanisms.

The second priority is prevention. The risk of sexual
violence must be fully incorporated into any crisis-
prevention mechanism. Such violence is often a sign of
the deterioration of the political and security situation
in a given zone or country. As such, it calls for a rapid
reaction, which means that we must have appropriate
detection means, including in peacekeeping operations.

The third priority is support for national authorities
in their efforts to prevent, combat and persecute sexual
violence, as well as to provide medical and social support
to its victims. Strengthening the capacities of countries
concerned means pursuing bilateral cooperation and
enhancing support for the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General. Taking that dimension into
account in the framework of peacekeeping operations
should also help. We must be mindful of this matter
when mandates are renewed, but also ensure that posts
for counsellors on gender-based and sexual violence are
provided and adequately funded.

I also note that supporting national authorities must
go hand in hand with the more support for those within
civil society who combat sexual violence and help its
victims. Last month's assassination in South Kivu ofDr.
Gildo Byamungu Magaju is a tragic reminder of that. In
that connection, we urgently call on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to continue to effectively ensure
the safety of Dr. Denis Mukwege.

The fourth priority is to ensure that both
peacekeeping operations and national operations under
a Security Council mandate are exemplary. France,
for whom that is the intangible policy, unreservedly
supports the Secretary-General's zero-tolerance policy
regarding sexual exploitation and abuse. We welcome
his renewed ambition in that regard, as evidenced by
his proposals to enhance the response of the United
Nations, as stated in his March report.

At the national level, we have established an active
prevention policy, particularly through training our
deployed staff and effective investigation mechanisms.
The competent nationaljurisdictions are systematically
and immediately seized in the event of an allegation.
Furthermore, we actively support the work of the
International Criminal Court in that regard.

The final priority is the determination to include the
fight against sexual violence within a comprehensive
approach to the issue of gender equality in conflicts.
We cannot isolate sexual violence from the situation
of women in the societies concerned or from their
presence in crisis-management processes. We must
therefore include our efforts to prevent and combat
sexual violence within the broader framework set out
in the Council's women and peace and security agenda.
That requires the strengthening of the role of women
in crisis prevention and peacekeeping-operations
mechanisms and in the political processes of mediation
and crisis resolution.

Faced with the use of sexual violence as a tactic of
war and terrorism, the international community must
demonstrate its absolute determination. Rest assured
that France will do the same.

