The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Nigeria.

I would like to convey the appreciation of my
delegation to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for
taking time out of his busy schedule to attend this
meeting to brief the Council on the important issue of
women and peace and security. His report
(S/2011/598*) and his comments here today provide
the appropriate foundation on which to anchor our
debate. I would also like to thank Ambassador Lazarus
Kapambwe, President of the Economic and Social
Council, Ms. Michelle Bachelet, Executive-Director of
UN-Women, and Ms. Orzala Ashraf Nemat, of the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security,
for their very instructive briefings.

Although Ms. Bachelet aptly highlighted the
modest progress made by Member States and the
United Nations in advancing the agenda of resolution
1325 (2000), we must heed her warning that we are
very far from sufficiently and systematically
integrating women into the process of conflict
prevention and peacebuilding. We believe that this is
an auspicious moment in the history of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). The draft
presidential statement that is to be adopted today could
not have come at a better time, coming as it does in the
aftermath of the recognition by the Nobel Committee
of the role and participation of the three eminent
women in conflict resolution and peace processes in
their respective communities. While congratulating
President Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf, Ms. Leymah Gbowee
and Ms. Tawakkul Karman for their groundbreaking
achievement, we share the hope of the Nobel
Committee that this recognition of the important place
of women in the peace process, which the draft
presidential statement echoes loudly, is a watershed
moment and paradigm shift in the global effort to
implement resolution 1325 (2000).

We note with satisfaction that the draft
presidential statement accords with the theme of this
open debate, namely, "The role and participation of
women in conflict prevention and mediation". Through
the draft presidential statement, the Council recognizes
that women can, and do, play crucial roles in the
prevention of conflict. Nevertheless, it also notes that
more needs to be done to create the enabling conditions
for the participation of women in all stages of the
peace process.

Such efforts at creating the right conditions for
ensuring women's full participation should include
increasing the participation and representation of
women in preventive diplomacy initiatives. It should
also include strengthening the capacities of the relevant
Government institutions and women's organizations
involved with conflict and post-conflict issues, the
adequate representation of women in the negotiation
and implementation of peace agreements, support for
local women's peace initiatives, the promotion and
protection of the human rights of women, higher levels
of representation in decision-making roles, and
ensuring proper coherence and coordination among the
United Nations entities responsible for implementing
the women, peace and security agenda in the entire
United Nations system.

On the subject of United Nations coherence and
effectiveness in particular, we recognize the important
and central role of the United Nations Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women), working in close partnership and
collaboration with the Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and
for Children and Armed Conflict, respectively.
The gaps and challenges hindering the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) are indeed
substantial. National, regional and international actors
must rededicate themselves to addressing them. We
believe that developing and implementing national
action plans constitutes a viable strategy for fulfilling
the obligations under resolution 1325 (2000).

As a signatory to the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) Dakar Declaration,
Nigeria has committed itself to accelerating the
national and regional implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). The Declaration calls for a regional
action plan within ECOWAS to support national action
plans. ECOWAS will coordinate and collaborate with
the United Nations Office in West Africa and with
UN-Women in this process.

Nigeria is also committed to fulfilling its
obligations under the African Charter of Human and
Peoples' Rights on the rights of women in Africa. As
Ms. Bachelet has often said, the obstacles to women's
political participation, which I believe have a direct
bearing on their capacity to play an active role in
preventive diplomacy and conflict prevention, are
indeed enormous. Violence, poverty, lack of access to
education and health care, and limited economic
opportunities all combine to undermine the role of
women and girls in conflict prevention, peace
negotiations and peacebuilding. It is therefore
necessary that we develop and take measures to
address these inherent obstacles.

Promoting women's equality and empowerment
is, in our view, one of the best ways to address the root
causes of conflict and therefore prevent such conflict. I
envisage a presidential statement along those lines in
the near future.

We recognize the relevance and relationship
between the Council's preventive diplomacy initiatives
and its women, peace and security agenda. As women
are usually some of the first and worst hit in any
conflict, preventing conflicts from breaking out serves
to ensure the peace and security of women and girls.
Even as we all remain true to the provisions of
resolution 1325 (2000), which focuses on armed
conflict and post-conflict situations, it has become
imperative to devote equal attention to conflict-
prevention strategies, including the use of preventive
diplomacy.
It is gratifying to know that the Council has the
opportunity every year to review the progress made in
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We look
forward to the inclusion in next year's report of the
Secretary-General of, among other things, specific
actions and achievements as well as the challenges
faced in the implementation of the presidential
statement that we will be adopting later today.

We also look forward to the high-level review to
be held in 2015 on the progress made in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), confident
that this and future presidential statements and
initiatives of the Council will play pivotal roles in
national, regional and global strategies on the women,
peace and security agenda.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The Council has before it the text of a draft
statement by the President on behalf of the Council on
the subject of today's meeting. I wish to thank Council
members for their valuable contributions to this
statement. In accordance with the understanding
reached among the members of the Council, I shall
take it that the members of the Security Council agree
to the statement, which will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2011/20.

It is so decided.

I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes, in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.

I give the floor to the representative of Finland.

